UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

.....................................

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/2162)
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418) . . .

SA’V.2162

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OficiaI Record of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2162nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 24 AugW
President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG
(United States of America).

People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Fmando (Sri Sanka),
Mr. El-C%ouf (Sjvian Arab Rep&c), Mr. Mestiri (Tunisia)
and Mr. Komatti (Y.ugosIavia) took the pIaces reservedfor
them at the si& of the CounciI chamber: Mr. Fall (Chairman
of the Con&tee on the Exercise of the InaIienabIe Rights of
the Palestinian People) took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Terti (Palestine Liberation Organizution) took a pIace at
the CounciI table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, -France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, ‘Zambia.

2 The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Morocco, Senegal and Turkey in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2162)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letters &ted 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979
from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13164 and S/13418)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. FdaIi (Morocco) and
Mr. Era@ (Tivkey) took the phzcesreservedfor them at the
St.&?of the CounciI chamber.

171emeeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Ad&on

1979, at 11 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/13514, which contains the text of a draft resolution sponsored by Senegal.

of the agenda

?he agenda was adopted.

4. The first speaker is the Chairman of the Comettee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and representative of Senegal. I now call on him.

Tbe question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights:
Letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979
horn the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palesthian People
addressed to the President of tbe Security Council
(S/l3164 and Wl3418)

5. ‘Mr. FALL (Senegal) (Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights Of the Palestinian
People) (interpretationfiom French): I have been invited to
participate in the Council’s discussion in my dual capacity
as Chairman of .the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and as representative of Senegal to introduce a draft resolution on the
question now being considered by the Council [S/23514.
This draft, which is sober in form and prudent in content
contains no provisions that are contrary to the Charter or to
United Nations resolutions. It recalls principles on which
there alnady exists an international consensus. Further, it
accords with General Assembly resolution 32/40 A which
urged the Council to take a decision on the recommendations endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 31120.

j. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meeting [2155th, 2260th and 2261st
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba,
Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber;
I, invite the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to take a
place at the Council table; 1 invite the representative of the
Pafestine Liberation Organization to take a place at the
Council table.

6. In preparing the draft resolution, our Committee even
agreed that the wording used by the General Assembly with
regard to the representation of the Palestinian people and
their right to an independent State should be somewhat
amended so as to win the support of those who said they,

At the invitation of the president, Mr. Tabibi (Afghanistan),
Mr. Roa Koun’ (Cuba), Mr. Ab&I Meguid(Egypr). Mr. Hoti
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. AI-A# (Iraq), Mr. BIum
(Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Southichak (Lao
1

had difficulty with some of the terms. The Committee had
to make major sacrifices in order to accept those concessions. The Committee did so in the desire to work for peace.
However, for the members of the Committee the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people are not negotiable and, if we
have to seek reconciliation with other delegations, that must
in no way affect the fundamental questions.

concern of our Committee at the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the Middle East and deeply deplore
Israel’s persistence in its occupation of the Arab territories
and refusal to implement the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. We have also expressed our belief that the
city of Jerusalem forms an integral part of those occupied
Arab territories. Finally, the third section recalls two fun&mental elements: the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territories by the threat or use of force, and
the resolutions which have been adopted on the Middle East
and on the question of Palestine by the General Assembly
and, particularly, the Security Council. We mention resolution 237 (1967) on the refugees-the right of return of the
refugees-resolution 242 (1967), that well-known resolution which has been spoken about so much and which is
understood as reaflirming the right of Israel to exist. We
have no fear of reaffirming that right and that is why we
have mentioned the resolution. We also mention resolution
338 (1973), which is so often spoken about and nobody
states why that resolution was adopted. Resolution 338
(1973) was adopted precisely because Israel has never
agreed to implement resolution 242 (1967). So far Israel has
still not implemented it, although it quotes it as its authority. Then we have mentioned a fourth resolution, resolution 252 (1968). which concerns the city of Jerusalem and
on which everyone is in agreement.

7. The Committee will not push its concern ror concilia-.
tion to the extent of going counter to its mandate. In the
past, we showed our goodwill by agreeing, in October 1977,
that the debate on the question of Palestine should be
postponed. We also agreed, on 30 July 1979, to a further
postponement of the debate. But that attitude has not
always been reciprocated. Certain members of the Security
Council have refused and continue to refuse any cooperation with the Committee on the pretext that they did
not vote in favour of the resolution which set up that body.
We have always denounced that attitude of boycott, which
is not only contrary to the principles of the Charter but
which cannot be regarded as showing a real desire to work
constructively for peace
8. How can it be ihought for a moment that someone is
working positively for peace when he refusesto hold discussions with a Committee set up by the General Assembly and
whose recommendations were adopted by that same Assembly? I know .full well that there is a trend to consider that
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly do not
form, a binding source of law for Member States. But here
people forget that the legal basis for the binding character of
Assembly resolutions is the fact that the Charter is a multilateral treaty which all the parties have solemnly committed
themselves to respect and that the compulsory nature of the
resolutions and decisions of the Assembly is conferred on
them by the provisions of the Charter on which they are
founded.

11. I come now to the operative part of the draft, which
contains two paragraphs. Paragraph 1, which is the essential. paragraph, is divided into two subparagraphs and
recalls the principles which have been adopted by the
United Nations regarding the question of Palestine. Paragraph 1 (a) affirms that the Palestinian people should be
enabled to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination, including the right to establish, if they so wish, an
independent State in Palestine, in accordance with the United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council; paragraph 1 (6) atErms the right of the
Palestinian refugees wishing to return to their home to do so
and the right of those choosing not to return to receive
compensation for their property.

9. That idea, in the present case, is clearly evident if we
consider that the decision which was at the core of the
Middle East crisis is precisely a resolution of the General
Assembly, resolution 181 (XI) of 29 November 1947, on the
partition of Palestine under British Mandate into two distinct territorial entities, one Arab and the other Jewish. To
say that Assembly resolutions lack any obligatory character
is to deny the very legal foundation of the existence of the
State of Israel.

12. I have read in the press that, in a desire for compromise and to ease the way for certain States to vote for the
draft, we omitted any mention of a “Palestinian State”.
That is true. We used anotherformula: the phrase “national
independence and sovereignty in Palestine”. If that formula
is’ acceptable to others, we would agree that it is theformula
that should be adopted.

10. The draft resolution which I have the honour to submit is, as I have already said, a very simple draft. There is
nothing new in it. The preamble consists of seven paragraphs which I could subdivide into three sections. The first
two paragraphs state‘what is happening in the Security
Council: the Council has been convened at the request of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and it has heard the parties concerned, including the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). The second section, containing
three paragraphs, recalls ourconcern which is also that of
the Council: being convinced that the question of Palestine
is the core of the Middle East con&t, we reaffirm the
urgent need to establish a just and lasting peace through a
comprehensive settlement based on full respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter and we express the

13. Finally, operative paragraph 2, which is also the last
paragraph of our draft resolution, decides that the provisions contained in paragraph 1, that is to say, the paragraph
which speaks of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people and their right to return should be taken fully into
account in all international efforts and conferences organized within the framework of the United Nations for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
We are not, then, reopening any issue. We are speaking
about negotiations undertaken within the framework of the
United Nations, and since the Committee is a creation of the
United Nations, I do not believe we can be reproached for
doing so.
2

‘.

14. Such is the draft resolution. The Security Cormcil is
master of its decisions. It can take whatever decision it
pleases. I know that it will be very difficult for the Council to
take an immediate decision. Certain delegations will require
a %-hour delay to consult their Governments. I am also
aware that many members of the Council will have to leave
New York by the weekend to go to Havana for the nonaligned conference. I therefore understand the problems
with which the Council must deal in reaching an immediate
decision. I leave it to the Council to decide and I shall not
dwell on the question. The Council is sovereign; it can thus
act as it chooses.

logue, we are comforted by the thought that your impact on
national and international affairs will be far more potent
and effective in the decades to come. We extend to you all
our best wishes.

15. Before concluding my statement, I should like, on
behalf of the Committee and on my own personal behalf,
to pay a genuine tribute to the current President of the
Council, Ambassador Young, for his courage, his honesty,
and the sense of realism with which he fulfils his functions;
for it is obvious that the President of the Council has the
duty to consult all the parties concerned, and particularly
those participating in the debate on the issues before it. That
is the Council’s practice, and it is the Committee’s wish that
it be complied with in a non-selective manner. The Committee would like to assure you, Mr. President, that whatever
decision your Government may take with regard to the vote
on our draft resolution, you will always retain the esteem,
admiration and respect of all its members.

20. The Palestinian people realize more than ever before
that they have been the systematic victims of broken
promises, unfulfilled resolutions and of hopes have been
blasted. A dark shadow of deep frustration has settled upon
them, and they have increasingly been left with no altemative but to take direct action, in which they are daily bending
body and soul, against all conceivable odds, in order to lay
their just cause before the conscience of humanity. Some
people look superficially at the effects, without analysing the
underlying cause, which is no less than the human struggle
for sheer survival. Their struggle goes beyond a restoration
of human rights and dignity; it goes beyond a striving for
equality. It is a costly struggle for sheer survival and for the
elementary and inalienable right to return to their ancestral
homeland in conditions of human dignity, equal justice and
self-determination.

19. We are meeting today to resume our deliberations on
one of the greatest tragedies and injustices that has befallen ’
any people in the contemporary world. We have bee# seeking redress for the dispersed and oppressed Palestinian people and the redemption of their inalienable rights for three”
successive decades, but-tragically-to
no avail. “Justice
too long delayed is justice denied.*’

16. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan and I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

21. I do not believe I need elaborate on these self-evident
truths, for they concern the common heritage of mankind.
From the Palestinian people’s point of view and, I have no
doubt, from the point of view of all decent, peace-loving
people everywhere, the real issue is this:

17. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): As this is my first appearance before the Security Council under your wise and dedicated stewardship, may I express, Mr. President, on behalf
of my Government and myself, the profound respect in
which we hold you and the appreciation and fraternal feelings we have for you, feelings that are, I am sure, shared in
equal measure by virtually all of the permanent representatives of the 150 States Members of the community of
nations. As I extend the most sincere congratulations to you
as our singularly distinguished President for the month of
August, I am confident that the work of the Council will be
.carried out with distinction.

-First, is Israel interested in and ready for a just and
lasting peace? Or is its ultimate goal and penchant openended territorial acquisition and expansion?
-Secondly, is Israel ready and willing to live and let live,
in which case the indigenous Palestinian people, who have
uninterruptedly inhabited the land from time immemorial,
would have restored to them that most elemental right
to live in dignity and freedom alongside their Israeli
neighbours?

18. It is with a senseof deep disappointment that we learn
that you have chosen to relinquish your post as Ambassador
of the United States of America to the United Nations in
circumstances that have surprised all of us acutely. You can,
however, be assured that during your relatively short time at
the United Nations, you have left a profound imprint upon
this universal community of nations that will remain far
beyond your 3O-month tour of duty. Your dedication to the
moral and eternal laws that your high office demands; your
sincerity, candidness and the human feeling which you have
never forsaken in grappling with some of the most intricate
international issues, have all been an exhilarating breath of
fresh air, galvanizing an increasingly choked, conniving and
unhealthy conventional diplomacy which had been creeping
in and corroding whatever effectiveness the world body may
have had and which is rightly its due. You have conveyed an
image of your great country befitting the great values upon
which it was originally founded. Although we deeply regret
your impending departure and regard it as a grievous loss to
the United Nations system of dialogue rather than mono-

-Thirdly,
the Palestinian people, represented by the
Palestine Liberation Organimtion, have categorically expressed their option for peace, and on terms which are truly
rock-bottom, as judged in the light of their natural and
historical entitlement, as well as of the valid United Nations
resolutions, in accordance with which Israel wasadmitted to
membership in the United Nations after pledging solemnly
to implement those resolutions in good faith.
22. Every time the Palestinian question comes to the fore, .
the Israeli occupiers, like the expert jugglers they are, produce from their rich Pandora’s box a multitude of side
issues, so as to avoid confronting the moment of truth and
of decision-making. Is that the,result of a guilty conscience
or of unbridled greed? It is both, notwithstanding their
claim and the undiscerning claim of their supporters that it
is Israel’s survival which they are concerned about.
3

people of ill will. Lukewarm acceptance is much more
bewildering than outright rejection.
30. A good deal of what I have just said has been outright
plagiarism for which I need make no apology. Fpr I have
been quoting, with minor modifications, from one of the
great masters of human$tic thought and action, the inspiring Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. whose A Letterjkom
Bhingham City Jail’ is one of the great humanistic classics
of our time. If anybody wished to address himself to the
pliit of the Palestinian people, he could not find a more
logical or profound champion.

23. Can anyone in this hall tell me what all those shrill
* voices of anti-peace mean by “Israel”? What are its bound. aries? What are its limits? Or is it, to repeat the words of
General Dayan, the farthest point to which Israeli militarism reaches?
24. And supposing, for argument’s sake, that they strive
to occupy half or all of the Middle East, would those blind
supporters of Israel continue to base their argument on the
absurd thesis of concern for the survival of Israel? Would
those committed to Israel’s survival connive at such expansionism in the name of Israel’s survival?

31. The representative of Israel, Mr. Blum, has, as the
Council will have observed, pioneered a new technique in
dealing with the Security Council. Whenever a question
pertaining to the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories is discussed and, God forbid, the Council ventures
into the forbidden field of discussing the inalienabIe rights
of a dispossessedand oppressed people, the Israeli representative at the instructions of his Government, makes two
exalted appearances: the fast foi an oration at the outset to
inform the Council of hi displeasure of its being misguided
enough-misguided
from vile and intrigue-laden quarters-to assent to a debate; the second for an&her oration-or is it a soliloquy?duly
performed at the conclusion of the debate, admonishing the Council and those
beyond for their hostility to Israel, as exemplified by a vote
against it.

25. That is colonialism, imperialism, fascism and racism,
as glaring as sunshine at midday in summer, and I hope the
Council will understand me when I state that I a? not just
namecalling or using epithets, I am telling the brutal truth.
26. The only legal and valid framework for a just and
legitimate settlement are General Assembly resolutions 18 1
(II), on the establishment of a Palestinian State and of an
Israeli State within secure, defined and recognized boundaries, and 194 (III), on the right of the Palest&an refugees
to return to their homeland and live in peace with their
neighbours, and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which are general formulations complementary to the other valid resolutions. If the parties directly
concerned in the conflict agree or disagree about altering or
amending the existing legal framework through negotiation
and mutual agreement, it is their right and prerogative to do
so. The United Nations can subsequently take cognizance
of any mutually agreed upon legal framework and, in its
discretion, decide what course of action to take.

32. What happens in the interim, as the Council listens for
hours and days on end to arguments as to the merits of the
case, is a travesty deriving from Israel’s self-appointed righteousness, a travesty from which the Council must refrain..
For after 12 years of unmitigated and unrestrained military
governance, any opposition, even by the highest executive
organ in the world, is sinful and intolerable: that is the vain
arrogance of lawless power when it peaks--or, more aptly,
when it sinks to rock-bottom.

27. After the decades in exile and more than 12 years of
occupation and colonization, there tire people who want the
Palestinian people to wait, td give more time for the powers
that be to act.

33. But that is only a partial explanation of a psychological aberration and it explains only in part Israel’s attitude
towards the Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole. For Israel must surely be fully aware that even if’ the
world were to revert to a jungle environment, as Israel
wants it to do, Israel is not the strongest of beasts. We must
therefore look for a more calculated explanation; such an
explanation would certainly explain a great deal-indeed, it
would explain all. The Council must take full, timely and
official cognizance of that explanation.

“History is the long and tragic story of the fact that
privileged groups seldom give up their privileges voluntarily. Individuals may see the moral light and voluntarily give up their unjust posture. But groups are more
immoral than individuals.*’
28. We know through painful experience that freedom is
never voluntarily given by the oppressor. It must be
demanded by the oppressed< “Wait.” This “wait” has
always meant “never*‘. I guess it is easy for those who have
never felt the stinging darts of life under oppressive occupation and exile to say “wait”. When you are forever fighting a
degrading sense of being “nobody”, then you understand
why we find it dillicult to wait.

34. The stark truth is that many years ago Israel took an e
irrevocable decision to colonize and annex the occupied
territories,’ particularly the Palestinian territories, even
though the nearly total colonization of the Syrian,Golan
Heights is to be regarded as a windfall profit.

29. There are people who prefer a negative peace, which is
the absence of tension and conflict, to a positive peace,
which is the presence of justice. There are those who constantly say “I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I
cannot agree with your methods of direct action”. ThM are
those who can paternalistically feel that they can set the
time-table for other people’s freedom, who live by the myth
of time and constantly advise waiting until a “more bnvenient season-. The shallow understanding of peopA of
goodwill is more frustrating than no understanding from

35. Israel decided irrevocably not to restore any of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people but, on the contrary, to pursue a policy of systematic despoliation and
cblonization of the lands conquered in 1967 and to strangulate the remaining inhabitants to the point where the Palestinians’ only option is to fade away-or to be banished.
‘A Letter From Birmingham City Jail, Philadelphia,
Friends Service Committee, 1963.

4

American

36. During the extended rule of the Labour coalition, the
guideline-the golden rule-was to carry out that systematic colonization but to talk very little about it. Discretion
was reckoned to be the better part of valour. They were even
repeatedly advised by outside friends that if they must commit that illegitimate act, they should do it but not be vociferous and cotispicuous about it. For why shock the Security
Council and the world at large all at.once when construction
and colon&ion
anywhere takes years to complete7 If the
Government of Jordan, other Arab Governments, the
Palestine Liberation Organization or, for that matter, an
inquisitive reporter, were then to divulge the facts, it would
be after and not before the mission had been accomplished.
The facts would be doled out to the world piecemeal, and an
astute and evasive United Nations ambassador could either
deny them .or minimize them-or, if the truth became
unanswerable, simply concede that what had been done had
had to be done on impelling and almost inescapable grounds
of security. ,me worst that could happen would be a United
Nations admonition, which Israel could ignore with impunity. They could even issue a counter-admonition to the
United Nations for being so lopsidedly biased on the side of
the victimized Palestinians, with their magical power to
secure such mild condemnation or requests for redemption.
As Israel is superior to everybody else, the worst scenario
would amount to no more than a nuisance and an irritant.
37. When Begin’s Liid Party took power, a new strategy
was adopted. Rationally, it must have been sparked by the
devastating evidence on the ground which was impossible
to hide or refute. That evidence was subsequently verified
by a Security Council commission which established that
approximately 27 per cent of the West Bank, Jerusalem and
Gaxa had been effectively devoured, that the major water
resources had been placed under Israeli usage and control,
and that substantial numbers of Israeli settlers had already
sunk roots. Further, Begin and his Party make no secret of
the fact that their official policy is one of total annexation of
the whole of Palestine, with a temporary period of transition
to allow the remaining Palestinian inhabitants to consider
their options within a framework of eventual and assured
exodus or natural attrition.
38. The representative of Israel is perforce constrained in’
what he can or cannot say, hi only option being to enter a
plea of not guilty, on the totally false and unacceptable &ii
of heavenly dispensation through Abraham; even though
genetically the Palestinian Arabs and many oriental Jewsbut not the eastern or western European Jews-are the
genuine descendants of Abraham through Ishmael.
‘.
39. The Security Council, confronted with the ugly reality
of Israel’s self-indictment, has reached a decisive tumingpoint at which it must take a categorical stand. Will the
Council acquiesce by inaction in the national obliteration of
the Palestinian people by means of open aggression and
unbridled force? Or will it at long last recognixethe inalienable right of the Palestinian people to the restorationof their
homeland, which is the birthright of every people?
40. Words and resolutions do not change the situation one
iota. Imploring and deploring, even by the Secmity Council,
have disastrously lost their efficacy. Any resolution must
henceforth be action-oriented. Israel must be told in no

unmistakable terms that continued and blatant deface of
United Nations resolutions and the eternal moral laws of
mankind will unavoidably invite the invocation of the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter. If there is
any feasible alternative, I should like to know about it.
41. If the will and responsibilities which devolve upon the
Security Council were to be thwarted by timidity in the face
of an unconscionable war to eradicate the Palestinian people, then the only alternative course of action open to the
United Nations would be to convene a “uniting for peace”
special session of the General Assembly to deal with Israel’s
ruthless determination to perpetuate the dispersion and
fragmentation of the Palestinian people. It is our earnest
hope that the Council will take positive action which would
render. unnecessary action through the concerted will of the
overwhelming majority of mankind as represented in the
General Assembly.
42. Mr. Blum chose yesterday, during hii’condescending
presence, to malign Jordan for having, in his words, fired
the first shot. Which first shot he meant, I do not know. If he
meant that Jordan was in the forefront in irrevocably rejecting the Camp David accords pertaining to the enslavement
of the Palestinian people, then he was right. It is a fact that
we accept with pride and humility, because it was inspired
by our manifest destiny to ward off thedemise of our closest
kin and Pal&tinian brethren. Besides, there are 1.25 million
Palestinian refugees, those displaced and others residing in
Jordan, who are deeply knowledgeable as to exactly what is
happening, as to what is right and wrong, as to what is just
and unjust and as to whether it .is a solution or means their
liquidation and their non-redemption. They need no prodding from anyone. For it is the disposition of their lands and
properties and their future that is being ordained. They look
across the River Jordan with an ever-deepening sense of
desperation, and they know all too well that the accords
‘have sealed their fate and have ordained their continued
and excruciating exile and dispossession everlastingly-if
the accords have their ‘way-but only over their dead
bodies. They cannot be fooled for they know what they do
and say, while others either do not know or do not wish to
know or care about the devastating impact upon the victims
of their manipulations.
43. If Mr. Blum was registering his discomfort at the
devastating revelations that had been made as a result of a
Jordanian complaint before the Council, then I can very
well understand why in his unhappiness he singled out
Jordan for being instrumental in a process, which had been
established by a Security Council commission, and which
shows that Israel has so far devoured 27 per cent of tiny
Arab Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well
as almost the whole of the Golan Heights-and that process
is”continuing.
44. The complaint-I. solemnly assure the Council-has
absolutely nothing to do with what was going on elsewhere
as far as the timing was concerned. It was prompted by an
alarming acceleration of the Israeli colonization of the occupied territories which the people of Jordan were reading
about with consternation in their daily papers or, for that
matter, in Israeli daily papers and challenging reports, day
in and day out, let alone in our own open official reports.

.&sides, Jordan has been raising the issue of this blatant
aggression and violation of The Hague Convention and the
Geneva Convention of 1949 ever since the occupation in
1967, and the United Nations has condemned it on every
occasion. So what is so surprising or new about the recent
Jordanian complaint?

to the United Nations the more we were convinced that the
usual standards traditionally applied to a diplomat did not
apply to you. You did so much more than the average
diplomat. I should also like to say that, irrespective of the
position in life in which you may find yourself, you will be
able to use your potential for the good of the people and
for mutual understanding between peoples in order to
strengthen peace and to reaffirm truth throughout the
world.

45. I suppose the major embarrassment to Israel was that
on this occasion, instead of information being doled out
piecemeal it had been crystallixed into a frightening conflguration of facts, figures, maps and other data that arc
unanswerable.

50. An analysis of the activities of the Security Council
shows that various aspects of the Middle East situation are
increasingly being brought before it. This shows the acuteness of the Middle East problem; it also shows that the basic
issues remain unresolved.
:,.
51. Only a month ago, the Council took a decision regarding the illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab
lands. We are now meeting again to continue our discussion
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian question is at the core of the entire Middle
East settlement. Nobody can deny that irrefutable fact. The
solution of the question will first and foremost determine
the future of the Palestinian people. Thus far, for various
well-known reasons, the Palestinians have been unable
to exercise their right to selfdetermination, national independence and the creation of their own State. On the just
solution of the Palestinian question, and specifically its just
solution, will depend the return of peace to that, important
.region of the world. That also is an irrefutable fact.
‘.
52.‘. In ‘the present dangerous situation, the Soviet delegation considers it quite right that the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
should request the Security Council to discuss again the
recommendations regarding a solution to the Palestinian
question; The timeliness of this discussion in the Council is
borne out first and foremost by the fact that, notwithstanding the many decisions that have been adopted on the
subject, Israel continues to flout the basic inalienable rights
of the Arab people of Palestine.

46. As for Mr. Blum’s distorted allegation that the’palestinian people would, for the first time in their history, enjoy
the blessings of freedom under the socalled autonomy
plan, may I suggest, so as to save the Council’s time, that the
representative of Israel spare some time to read some history about the Palestinian people, who not only have governed themselves throughout history and from time immemorial but who were also at the heart of empires in which
they occupied pride of place. He may not know it, but the
fact is that the Ummayad Caliphs, whose backbone was the
Palestinian people, had their winter residence at Ramleh
near Lydda airport-now called Ben Gurion Airport-and
at Jericho, where a magnificent Ummayad palace wasexcavated in the early 1940s. I know it all only too well, better
perhaps than people who are better versed in history and
who should give him a briefing. Within the ancient Syrian
civiliition,
one of the great cradles of civiliition,
the
Palestinians were at the core. Within the Ottoman Empire
they held the highest posts at the seat of power. In their
unity with Jordan, sovereignty and power were shared and
not an inch wasforfeited. Indeed, the Palestinians of Galilee
alone had the power and audacity in the eighteenth century
10 defeat Napoleon’s attempted invasion of their territory.
And now it is being proposed that they be placed under a
strait-jacket of subjugation and municipal autonomy called
“self-rule”. Mr. Blum must know that for the first time in
7,000 to 8,000 years, the Palestinians have suffered the
catastrophe of exile and, at the present time, more than 12
years of oppressive occupation and dispersion.

53. We would recall that for more than 30 years now the
rulers of Israel have tried to reduce the status ‘of the Palestinian people to that of dispossessed refugees deprived of
their basic rights, rights recognized by the United Nations
Charter and contemporary international law. Those are
rights rccognized as belonging to all peoples. By forcibly
depriving the long-suffering Palestinians of their homeland
and subjecting them to dispersion and repression, the Israeli
authorities hope to create suitable circumstances for the
implementation of their far-reaching expansionistic designs
aimed at fully obliterating the Palestinian people as a
nation.

47. Even though I spoke earlier in the debate, I wish to
reiterate my delegation’s highest esteem and appreciation of
Mr. Fall, the representative of Senegal and Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Pale&ii
People for his selfless dedication and commitment to the cause of the oppressed Palestinian people. His
able leadership and the devotion of his assistants give us
every assurance that the salvation of the Palestinian people
is in good and determined hands.
48. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretationf?om Russian): Mr. President, first of
all, I should like sincerely to congratulate you on your
fulfilment of the exalted functions of the post of President of
the Security Council for the month of August and to express
the hope that under your guidance the Council will make,a
constructive contribution towards resolving the questions
before us.

54. In order to attain these misguided goals, the leading
circles of Israel obstinately pursue their policies of colonization and Israelization of the Arab lands they have seized.
The materials available to the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) provide convincing proof of this. It is borne out also by the statements
we have heard in the Council’s discussion of thesituation in
the Israeli+ccupied Arab territories.

49. I should also like to say that the more we got to know
you as ambassador and representative of the United States
6

55. Israel’s colonixation of the occupied Arab territories,
the mass expulsion of the indigenous Arab population from
its ancestral lands, the methodical destruction of Arab villages, the creation in those lands of Israeli settlements-all
are flagrant violations of generally recognised norms of
international law. The Israeli authorities no longer conceal
their intentions and cynically talk about new plans to create
further settlements in the occupied territories.

the Exercise d the Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian
People states than

56. In its treatment of the Arabs in the occupied territoms, Israel stops at nothing; police terror, intimidation,
economic pressure, the elimination of Arab culture, the
desecration of the Holy Places-all means are being used to
make the Arabs forget that they are Arabs and Palestinians.

The facts prove that a comprehensive and final settlement
of the Middle East crisis can be reached only with the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organixation, the
representative of the Palestinian people on an equal footing
with other parties in all efforts, discussions and conferences
on the Middle East conducted under the auspices of the
‘United Nations.

“The question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle
East problem, and, consequently,. . . no solution in the
Middle East can be envisaged which does not fully take
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people.“2,

57. The events of recent days in Southern Lebanon once
more unmask the cruel inhumane nature of Israel’s policies
towards the Palestinian people. In turning the Palestinians
into homeless people, the Israeli authorities are at the same
time preventing them from leading a normal lie in the
countries bordering on Israel, where they have found a
temporary haven. The bombing, the artillery bombardments, the armed raids by the Israeli forces against civilians
in neighbouring Lebanon have attained really ghastly
proportions.

62. In its recommendations regarding ways and means of
securing the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, the Committee suggestsa phased programme
of implementation of the exerciseof the right of Palestinians
to return to their homes, based on the implementation by
the Security Council of its unanimously adopted resolution
237 (1967). The Committee quite rightly considers that,
after returning to their homes, .the Palestinian people
‘will be able to exercise its rights to self-determination
and to decide its form of government without external
interference”.’

58. As the Council is aware, at its twenty-ninth session,
the General Assembly adopted its resolution 3237 (XXIX),
which granted the Palestine Liberation Organixation observer status at the United Nations with the right to participate in the sessions and in the work of the General
Assembly and of all international conferences convened
under the auspices of the Assembly and other United
Nations bodies. That resolution firmly enshrines official
recognition under international law of the Palestine Liberation Organixation as the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. In its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3375
(XXX), the General Assembly also decided that participation by the Palestine Liberation Organimtion as the sole
representative of the Palestinian people on an equal footing
with all other parties wasa prerequisite for the convening of
any conference on Middle East matters under the auspices
of the United Nations.

63. The Soviet delegation endorses the Committee’s recommendations, which provide, inter diu, that the Security
Council should take concrete action to secure the complete
withdrawal by the Israeli occupation forces from all those
areas occupied in 1967 and the cessation of the settlement
policies in those territories, Israel’s compliance with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention of 1949, and the
provision of all-round assistance and support to the
Palestinian people so that they may fully exercise their
inalienable rights on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
64. We are nrenared to sm~ort
the draft resolution
[S/Z3514J, whiih &es that thypalestinian people should
be .enabled to exercise their inalienable rights of selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty in
Palestine, in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
General Assembly. I repeat that this is only a minimum
which can help towards the restoration of justice for the
Palestinian people.

59. The United Nations should not forget those resolutions. It seems that certain persons find it convenient to
conduct negotiations and to conclude separate agreements
and accords that run counter to the fundamental rights of
the Palestinians. But such practices will not make the Palestine question disappear and the problem of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East remains in our agenda.

65. The position of the Soviet Union with respect to the
solution of the Palestinian question is well known. We are
firmly convinced that a decisive end must be put to the role
of overlord played by the Israeli authorities in the Arab
territories which they have occupied since 1967. The Arab
people of Palestine must be given an opportunity to exercise
their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination and .the establishment of its own sovereign, inde-

60. All the references that have been made by the participants in the recent tripartite deal on the granting of a certain
“‘autonomy” to the Palestinians have a cynical ring to them.
Does it not appear paradoxical to them that the future of
the Palestinian people is being decided upon behind their
backs without the involvement of their legitimate representatives and against their fundamental interests?
61. There are those here who have cast doubts upon the
objectiveness of the report which is now before us. Our
delegation does not take that view. We thinkthat the report
is as objective as possible. In its report, the Committee on

‘*Oflcial
Records of the General
plement No. 35. para. 59.
jIbid.,

7

para. 70.

Assembly.

Thirty-third

Session, Sup-

pendent State. The path to that solution can be traced by the
collective efforts of all the parties concerned, including, of
course, the representatives of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The method of employing separate deals, as
practice has shown, far from lessening tensions only
increases them in the Middle East region and makes even
more remote a solution to the cardinal problems of a Middle East settlement. Peace in the region which will be peace
for all the peoples of the region, depends on a just and
comprehensive settlement.
66. Mr. LUSAKA’ (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf of
the Zambian delegation, and indeed on my own behalf, I
wish to congratulate you upon your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council during the month
of August. The basis of my commendation far exceeds the
usual dictates of diplomatic practice in the Council. For us,
this is a special occasion on which we wish to register our
appreciation of the co-operation and brotherhood that we
have shared during your tenure of otIice here at the United
Nations. Your impending departure will be greatly regretted by those of us who fully understood and appreciated
your unique contribution as Permanent Representative of
the United States. Your country has had in you a truly
internationally recognized person at the United Nations. I
have no doubt that since you are so well equipped and
versed in more than the art of diplomacy, you will undoubtedly make a successof whatever you choose or are asked to
do in the service of mankind. Please keep on in your struggle
to help the needy and to inject into it that conscience in
world affairs which is wanting today. We wish you success
as we always have done.
67. The consideration of the Palestinian issue and the
rights of the Palestinian people is a serious matter for the
Council. It is a matter of serious concern above all because
the Council in particular and the United Nations in general
have been seized of the problem since it came to the fore.
‘The United Nations has a duty to correct the injustices of
the past which continue to be perpetuated against the Palestinian people.
68. The Palestinians have been victims of aggression, dispossession, greed, power politics and more. Essentially,
they have been refugees even in the land of their birth for
decades. To&y, the problem of the denial of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people is at the core of the current
crisis in the Middle Fast. This assertion or proposition is no
mere cliche. It has become quite clear over the years that
there can be no solution of the Middle East crisis so long as
the Palestinian issue is unresolved.
69. Successivereports of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People have been
vivid reminders of the suffering of the Palestinians. What is
at issue is that the Palestinian people are being denied their
inalienable rights to self-determination and statehood.
Every national group on the earth is entitled to a homeland.
The Palestinian people .should not be the exception. They
have a God-given right to return to their homeland and to
live there freely without any restrictions. This is so because
freedom is not negotiable. What can be negotiated are the
modalities
, of attaining that noble goal of freedom.

70. The representatives of Israel must face realities and
begin to treat Palestinians as felIow human beings. The
Israelis must know that the era of oppressing other people is
over; that the era of expansionism and forcible conquest of
foreign lands is long gone. If the Israelis want to live in
peace, they must learn, to conform to the norms of intemational law and civilized conduct. They stand to lose by being
intransigent, arrogant and contemptuous. That is our message to the rulers in Israel.
71. The Security Council has an international responsibility to assist the Palestinian people to retrieve their inalienable rights. In that regard, the recommendations of the
General Assembly and the Committee on Palestinian rights
provide useful guidelines on how to deal with the Palestinian question. Of course, they are in addition to the previous Council resolutions on the issue. In dealing with the
Palestinian question, the Councilmust always bear in mind
that the realisation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination,
independence and
national sovereignty, would not only give birth to the Palestinian State but also contribute positively to the solution of
the Middle East crisis. Furthermore, it is vital to observe
.&at the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organixation, which is the sole representative of the Palestinian
people, is indispensable in all efforts and deliberations on
the Palestinian question. No attempt to discredit the Palestine Liberation Organization will impress men of justice.
What is required in dealing with the problem is objectivity.
‘72. The Palestinian people are looking to the Security
Council for assistance in regaining their inalienable rights.
Ahmembers of the Council collectively have a duty to help
to resolve the problem of Palestine, for without such a
solution there could be a catastrophe in the Middle East in
particular, and in the world as a whole.
73. ‘Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): Mr. President, the delegation of
Jamaica extends to you its warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of August. Your outstanding qualities as a statesman and your sincere commitment to peace and the ideals
of the Charter fully assure us of effective leadership for the
remainder of the month. We very much regret your impending departure from the United Nations, but you wil1 be
leaving us with an impressive record of accomplishment,
and we take this opportunity to wish you every successin
your future endeavours.
74. I also wish to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Richard of the United Kingdom for his able presidency in
July and ‘we fully endorse the tribute you paid to him
yesterday at the reopening of the debate.
75. The current matter before the Council, namely the
question of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
is a crucial element in the over-all problem of the Middle
Fast. For more than three decades, the United Nations has
been seized of the question of Palestine, which lies at the
very heart of the conflict in that region. The question has
been-the subject of extensive debate, discussions and resolutions, but without concrete results.. With the passageof time
and the evolution of events, the whole question has
increased in complexity. At the same time, the plight ofthe

Palestinian people and the denial of their inalienable rights
remains a prominent and painful reality in the Middle East.
We cannot afford to ignore that reality, nor is it possible to
ignore it. The denial of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is a persistent source of conflict threatening
the peace and stability of the area. It requires our closest
attention and constructive action to achieve a solution.
Jamaica believes that such a solution should be based on
justice, for there can be no durable peace in the Middle Past
without justice and there can be no justice without the full
recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people.

into account in an over-all settlement. But additional elements need to be incorporated to remedy the deficiencies of
the Council’s previous resolutions and to take into account
the reality of the importance of the Palestinian question. It
is only fair that the Council should recognize the legitimate
rights of all the parties. Jamaica believes that a recog
nition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians would
strengthen the foundations for a peaceful settlement of the
Middle Past conflict. It would broaden the international
consensus on the requirements for such a peace and it would
stimulate all efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive
solution.

76. We have studied the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
We view the report as a positive contribution to the search
for a peaceful solution of the question within the framework
of the United Nations. We support the right of the Palestinian refugees to return to their homes and to live in peace
with their neighbours, a right which is widely acknowledged
by the United Nations and should hardly give rise to any
controversy.

80. Jamaica considers that the essential foundation for
such a solution should involve: .first, the withdrawal by
Israel from the Arab territories occupied since 1967, in
accordance with the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by force; secondly, the recognition
and implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, for we believe that no solution to the Middle
East problem can be effective or permanent unless they are
given the opportunity to exercise their inalienable rights and
allowed to live in dignity and to shape their own future;
thirdly, the establishment of appropriate arrangements to
guarantee the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States in the area and the recognition of .
their right to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries. Further, the Palestine Liberation Organimtion, as the representative of the Palestinian people, should
be invited to participate on an equal footing with all other
parties in all efforts of the United Nations towards a just and
lasting solution of the Middle Past problem.

77. We also support the right of the Palestinians as a
people to selfdetermination, national independence and
sovereignty. It is a right to which all peoples are entitled and
which should not be denied to the Palestinian people. The
concrete recommendations in the Committee’s report on
the territorial basis for nationhood we consider to be both
constructive and realistic, and they neither violate nor conflict with the rights of other parties in the region.
‘78. There are some elements in the Committee’s recommendations on the modalities and procedures for implementation on which we have some doubts, based on
practical considerations. There may be need for further
refinement of those procedures, bearing in mind that the
various aspects of the Middle East question are closely
linked and that it would be most desirable for all of them to
be settled within the framework of a comprehensive settlement which would lead to a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

8 1. Jamaica’s position on the problem is not based on any
partisan commitments. It is based on a realisticassessment
of the question and it is guided by a desire to promote, in a
:onstructive way, the cause of peace and justice. We recogsize the inalienable rights of all the parties involved. We
recognize the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
and we also recognize the right of Israel to exist in peace and
security within recognized boundaries. We urge the parties
directly involved towards mutual accommodation and
peaceful coexistence and we urge them to seek through
practical ways the means by which the legitimate rights of
all the parties can be real&d and safeguarded.

79. We think it is the duty of the Security Council to
promote the achievement of that objective by identifying
the basic ingredients of such a settlement. Its resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) already contain elements to be taken

i?e meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

I

PUBLICATIONS
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United,Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprAs de votre libraire
ou adresses-vous
A : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenAve.
KAK

IIOJIYYHTb

NIAAHEIII

OPI’AHH3A4HH

OIi-bEAHHEHHhIX

HAUHZ?

R3aaHm
OuraBBBaunB
OCl~enaBeBBbrx
HauBR ~doauro BynB~b a BBHB~BLIX uara3HHax B areBTCrBaX
a0 BceB paBOHaX
raepa. HaBOAHTe
CnpasKB 06 B3BaBHaX
B
aameu BBBmBord r.faraaBBe
riBa nimble
no anpecy:
OpraBBBauBa
OCi~enBBeBBbrx
HauwR, CeasBa no npoBame aBBaBBR. Hbto-HopB
mm Xeaesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estsn en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 1.50

79-70002-March

19824250
