S/PV.9029

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9029th meeting

Wednesday, 11 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/374)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-34572 (E)
*2234572*

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/374)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

11/05/2022

Implementation Council does not stand up to criticism,
as we have repeatedly stated.
We believe that the post of the High Representative
remains vacant. In that connection, we do not see
any basis for inviting Mr. Schmidt to meetings of the
Security Council as High Representative. His presence
in the Chamber in that capacity undermines the
authority of the Council and of the United Nations in
general. At the same time, the Security Council has a
practice that allows individuals to brief the Council in
their personal capacity in order to determine whether
their further participation is required. That is how we
view his presence here today.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Schmidt, United Nations High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): According
to Dayton Peace Agreement, the Security Council’s role
in appointing a High Representative is indispensable
and has been established practice. In the light of the
fact that the appointment of Mr. Schmidt has not been
endorsed by the Security Council, we believe that it is
inappropriate for him to brief the Council in the capacity
as High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor

The President: It is decided to invite High
Representative Schmidt to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to express our reservations
about the fact that we do not consider German
citizen Christian Schmidt to be the legitimate High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Security Council did not approve his appointment to
that position. We would like to highlight the fact that the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is on the Security
Council’s agenda under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

There is a quarter of a century of practice of
appointing High Representatives. Moreover, attempts
to circumvent established practice can be viewed as
cynical, in particular when such a destructive initiative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina originates from States that
claim to be guardians of jurisprudence and precedentlaw best practice. We would like to underscore that
Mr. Schmidt does not have the right to speak on
behalf of the international community or to submit
documents to the Security Council. The argument that
his appointment allegedly took place in accordance
with the decision of the Steering Board of the Peace
2/25

The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/374, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 May 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Schmidt.
Mr. Schmidt: It is an honour to address this organ
for the first time in my capacity as High Representative
and to present the sixty-first report (S/2022/374, annex)
of the High Representative on the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it is a good exercise and
important to keep the United Nations informed about
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Nine months
after assuming the role, I can attest that it is not an easy
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

job by any means, but it is a worthwhile endeavour, and
I am honoured to take it on.
I would like to underline that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina deserve the understanding and
commitment of the international community. These
are hard-working peace-loving people of all ethnic
denominations, and they are on a good path to European
integration. Nevertheless, there are some political
obstacles that must first be addressed and monitored.
At the outset, let me be clear that, while there
are threats to the constitutional order of Bosnia
Herzegovina — emanating above all from one part of
the country — severe challenges to its functionality
exist throughout the country, and I shall address the
most serious of them.
This April marked 30 years since the start of
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Since last year,
citizens of the country, and even international media,
have speculated about the possibility of another
war. In Sarajevo, protesters gathered in front of my
Office, appealing for my intervention to prevent that
from happening.
More than 26 years since the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the country continues to be traumatized
by war. Every single person who lived through it
is still — in one way or another — wounded. And I
see that the desire to keep peace is present among
Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and others. In addition, this
collective memory casts long shadows over the younger
generations born during wartime or the aftermath. In
the face of continued instability, they are, unfortunately,
leaving the country in record numbers.
The conflict in Ukraine, not so far away, is a
sobering reminder that even, in the twenty-first century,
another war on European soil is not an impossibility. In
that context, upon his recent visit to Sarajevo, a United
States senator said:
“This is a very worrying time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.”
As there is no concrete danger of war, the possibility of
heating up tensions or creating inflammatory incidents
remains high.
In that context, I am grateful for the continued
presence of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the military counterpart

S/PV.9029

to the Office of the High Representative, as a
confidence-building measure and a necessary tool to
safeguard peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But why is the Dayton-created international presence
still required in 2022?
In my report to the Secretary-General, I note that,
as in the previous period, authorities of the Republika
Srpska continue to embrace rhetoric and actions,
including the adoption of legislation, that could
undermine the constitutional framework of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In December, the Republika Srpska legislature
adopted conclusions instructing the entity Government
to withdraw from several previous agreements on
the transfer of competencies from the entity to the
State, including defence, indirect taxation and the
judiciary. The conclusions oblige the Republika
Srpska Government to introduce entity laws in those
areas within six months, with provisions to render the
State-level laws non-applicable in the entity.
If followed through, that would mean, at a
minimum, the withdrawal of the Republika Srpska from
the unified Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is the result of one of the most significant
reforms of the Dayton era and one of the most positive
developments we have seen in recent years. It could
also mean the formation of its own military. So far,
that attempt has been stopped with the help of the
international community.
The leading ruling political party in the
Republika Srpska Government repeatedly advocates
for the “peaceful dissolution” of the country and
has subsequently identified the goal of its legislative
undertakings as an “independent Republika Srpska
within the Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina.” I had an
exchange with the Head of State of the region of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who said to me that I should not forget
that there is no peaceful dissolution in this region. I do
not wish to comment on that statement, but merely to
share that observation with members.
The phrase “original Dayton”, often employed
by the Republika Srpska authorities, in fact reveals
disrespect for the Constitution. Changes to the
constitutional order cannot be made unilaterally, only
by joint parliamentary decisions, and must respect the
decisions of the Constitutional Court and the Dayton
principles. I have repeatedly extended an invitation
to talk about the need for structural improvements to

22-345723/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the Constitution, but have received no response. As
the responsible interpreter of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, as set forth in article V of annex
10, the High Representative will ensure respect for those
fundamental commitments. What conclusions could
citizens in any society reach, especially a society still
recovering from the trauma of hearing such rhetoric?
What the Republika Srpska authorities are pursuing
through the unilateral withdrawal from agreements
on the transfer of competencies to the State would, if
followed through, achieve a de facto secession of the
entity by opting out of the constitutional framework
and assuming the competencies of a State.
I underline that the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina exist by virtue of the Constitution. They
are a constitutional part of the State, but they have no
right to secede. Announced moves by the Republika
Srpska authorities undermine the sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As a representative of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council, I am
committed to preserving the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The duty of the international community regarding
the General Framework Agreement for Peace is to
safeguard the rights of all three constituent peoples and
others, so that all citizens can express their identity,
with none dominating the other.
Late last year, I met with representatives of the
associations Movement of Mothers of the Srebrenica
and Žepa Enclaves, Women of Srebrenica and Mothers
of Srebrenica, who are living reminders of the price
of war. This July, they will again commemorate the
Srebrenica genocide. The international community
must consider all measures at its disposal to ensure that
peace prevails in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
And we must continue the unfulfilled endeavour
to entrench reconciliation and social cohesion. In
that regard, I must note that the school curricula that
radically differ along ethnic lines are not the way to
overcome the shadows of the past. The diversity of
Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and others must be respected,
but there must be as well a commitment to contribute
to the whole.
I can report that there is a lot of work within civil
society dealing with that issue. We have a successful
development in Brčko, the condominium of Republika
Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
4/25

11/05/2022

where there is now a planned joint memorial for the
victims of war in past times, which does not distinguish
among the different ethnic origins of the victims. I
think that is a significant positive step.
Not only since last year, but for many years,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been mired in a cycle
of crises generated by political leaders. For as many
years, the international community has advocated
local ownership.
Having in mind the persistent challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past decade, the Ambassadors of
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
and I agreed on the need for a different response.
Supported by the Steering Board, I used my executive
authority as High Representative to issue decisions as a
countermeasure to the illegal and destabilizing actions
taken by the Republika Srpska authorities. Those
decisions relate to the Law on Immovable Property
Used for the Functioning of Public Authority, adopted
by Republika Srpska in February. That law disregards
several final and binding decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. But after 27 years
we could not manage to get State legislation about
the transfer of State property to the different levels of
public service and public needs, which is disappointing.
I am happy that now, after my decision, there seem to
be some attempts to come together and work on that,
which is very necessary.
Rather than substitute my authority for the entity’s
legislature by repealing the law, I ordered the suspension
of its application pending review by the Constitutional
Court. Therefore, I gave it back to the institutions of the
State. Those decisions were not taken lightly, and only
as a last resort after exhausting every alternate avenue,
including dialogue and appeals to the highest levels of
Republika Srpska leadership.
Nonetheless, I took the opportunity to make it
very clear that, unless the Republika Srpska legislature
amends its conclusions from December — on about 130
laws — every piece of legislation that would violate
the structure of the Constitution could not be accepted,
and better legislation that respects the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be developed, together
with the European Union (EU) and other facilitators.
In supporting the application of my authority as
High Representative and through targeted sanctions
and the withdrawal of funding by individual
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

nations, the international community has shown it
is prepared to take a different approach in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We will always pursue dialogue
as the first option. I have strenuously advocated,
and continue to advocate, reaching solutions in the
competent institutions — whether on State property,
genocide denial, reconciliation or another issue facing
the country. If constitutional order is to be amended or
improved, that must be done by elected representatives
working to find a legal solution. Unilaterally usurping
competences without establishing common legal ground
goes against Dayton. We will not sit still as parties seek
to dismantle 26 years of peace, stability and progress.
Although the activities of the Republika authorities
have justifiably been cause for concern, that does not
diminish the international community’s dismay with
the dysfunction in the Federation, the other entity.
Three and a half years since the 2018 general elections,
with the 2022 general elections only five months away,
parties in the Federation have failed to agree and
appoint a new government. That is also the case in the
Herzegovina-Neretva canton. Therefore, in that canton
and at the Federation level, governments from the 2014
to 2018 mandate still sit. That is an affront to basic
democratic principles, particularly the expressed will
of the voters.
Other crucial appointments in the Federation
remain pending, not least the appointment of judges
to the Federation Constitutional Court. Regrettably,
those issues are tied to the negotiations on electoral
reforms between the two main Federation parties, the
Bosnian Party of Democratic Action and the Croatian
Democratic Union, in which the latter has used the issue
of appointments as a bargaining chip. Nonetheless, an
agreement remains elusive.
In the context of State property, while the
Federation authorities have not attempted to introduce
legislation to undermine the pre-eminence of the
State, neither have they updated its existing laws to be
consistent with rulings of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court in that regard. I have invited the
competent Federation and canton authorities to correct
that situation.
Moreover, there are reports of outright violations
of the State Property Disposal Ban, and I encourage
the competent judicial authorities to investigate and
prosecute such cases, wherever they may be.

S/PV.9029

As I mentioned, an agreement on electoral
reforms was not reached, despite two years of tireless
engagement in negotiations facilitated by the United
States and European Union. Despite broad agreement
among parties on a package of amendments to improve
transparency and restore voter confidence to respect
the decisions of international and national courts in the
electoral process, such a package has unfortunately not
been adopted. While there is still time for an eleventhhour agreement, the elections can and will be held on
schedule in October, just as general elections were
conducted on schedule in 2018.
The holding of regular, fair and free elections is a
requirement under the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and citizens must be allowed to voice their
will through the democratic process. With the campaign
season upon us, I urge all political parties to conduct
themselves with grace and dignity.
As High Representative, I continue to meet
political leaders and other interlocutors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as leaders in the region, including
those of neighbouring Serbia and Croatia and nearby
Hungary. While we may not always see eye to eye,
I am grateful for their perspectives. Everyone has
important and influential roles to play in fostering
constructive dialogue, and I have received some
encouraging commitments.
I have also met with those responsible for Western
Balkans policy in several capitals, especially those of
the assembled members of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, not only because of the
urgency of the current situation, but also because of
the necessity of re-engaging the capitals in completing
the tasks at hand once we are finally back on track.
Meanwhile, the Russian Federation, as a member of
the Peace Implementation Council, has suspended
its participation.
The fulfilment of the 5+2 agenda and the EU
recommendations would not only resolve certain
grievances, but also contribute to lasting peace and
stability, thereby fundamentally improving the lives
of every citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That in
turn would stem the persistent and ever-increasing
flow of young people out of the country seeking better
opportunities — not to mention respect for the rule of
law and political stability — unfortunately, abroad.
In my address last fall to the State-level House
of Representatives, I underlined the importance of

22-345725/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

engaging in reforms in the country, which is irreversibly
on course for the European Union, and the commitment
that involves. The EU remains an indispensable partner
for the future of the country. There is broad acceptance
for proceeding along the path of European integration.
In that regard, it is crucial that Europe’s door remain
open to Bosnia and Herzegovina and the rest of the
Western Balkans.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international
community, in my understanding, are at a crossroads.
What happens going forward and the way in which the
international community chooses to act will resonate
throughout the Western Balkans.
We remain committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We
have shown that we are prepared to be decisive, but we
also value dialogue and openness. It is my hope that
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
also value those things and ensure that the citizens
they represent no longer have to worry about another
conflict, which would give the international community
the opportunity to reduce its practical commitment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for as long as that remains
the case.
From my experience, I consider it vitally important
that the Dayton institutions stay and continue working
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to assist its people
in achieving sustainable development for the country.
The President: I thank Mr. Schmidt for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Christian Schmidt, for his presentation on the latest
developments in the country.
Brazil acknowledges the great commitment of the
international community in supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards a path of political stability. In the
more than 25 years since the Dayton Accords put an
end to the atrocities in the former Yugoslav Republic,
6/25

11/05/2022

all efforts have been made to promote reconciliation,
to strengthen social cohesion and to foster economic
development in the country. The United Nations and
the European Union have been particularly committed
to providing assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its recovery.
However, there are duties and responsibilities
that only the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
accomplish. Ultimately, the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina can exist as a fully functional State only
if its people are committed to its laws and institutions.
It is disturbing to hear that, as the High Representative
has informed us, some Bosnian politicians are taking
steps to create parallel legislative and institutional
frameworks to undermine the current State institutions
and, by doing so, are putting into question the very
existence of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The current (see S/2022/374) and previous reports
of the High Representative have consistently informed
us that much remains to be done by Bosnians themselves
in order to achieve full statehood. We note the regretful
lack of progress regarding the 5+2 agenda established
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council. We call upon all Bosnian authorities to
recommit and work together towards its fulfilment.
Free and fair elections are essential to democracy.
It is therefore disturbing to witness the lack of progress
by Bosnians to reform their electoral legislation due to
political divergences. It is even worse to be informed that
no government could be established in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina after the 2018 elections. The
political process in general and elections in particular
should not be regarded as a zero-sum game, but as an
opportunity to allow all voices in society to be heard
and their differences to be bridged. We hope that, in a
near future, all Bosnians will share common values and
a common view of their future.
The legislative paralysis identified by the High
Representative prevents the much-needed State
reforms, which is cause for great concern. The
different parties of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
engage in open dialogue and political negotiation with
real flexibility in order to adopt necessary laws. Also
highlighted by the reports of the High Representative is
the failure — at many levels of Government — to put
legislation in full conformity with judicial rulings. We
cannot overemphasize the importance of strengthening
the rule of law for a functioning State.
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We also call upon all parties to the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council to take into
consideration the views of all its participants and to
improve transparency in its decision-making processes.
Brazil supports the Bosnian people in their
endeavours to live in peace and security and prosperity.
We do not underestimate the challenges involved.
Their cause has generated extraordinary support from
the international community. Bosnians must make the
best use of that assistance while being mindful that the
ultimate success of their efforts is in their own hands.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
start by welcoming the participation in this meeting
of the High Representative. It remains vital for the
Security Council to have a full, open and informed
dialogue with Mr. Schmidt on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also welcome the Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Šefik Džaferović, and thank him for travelling to
New York to take part in this meeting.
Unfortunately, Mr Schmidt’s briefing and report
(see S/2022/374) yet again paint a worrisome picture
of the situation in the country. Political gridlock and
instability continue at many levels. We are concerned
by the actions of some members of the Republika
Srpska leadership, particularly Mr. Milorad Dodik,
whose threats to re-establish a Republika Srpska army
and to pull out of other State-level institutions — which
constitute attempts to engineer de facto secession — are
dangerous and risk conflict. That could lead to the
undoing of 26 years of hard-won peace and progress.
It is therefore more important than ever that
the Security Council maintain its support for the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement, including
the role of the High Representative and the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR). The Council should refrain from undermining
or destabilizing the situation. We should promote
collaborative and constructive politics in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom welcomes the
increased presence of the EUFOR mission to reassure
the population during this challenging time.
The United Kingdom takes its role under the
Dayton Agreement extremely seriously. We commit to
remaining an active member of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council and fully support
the territorial integrity and fundamental structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, sovereign State

S/PV.9029

comprising two entities. We have recently used our
own sanctions regime to send a clear message to those
threatening the country’s future.
We firmly support the work and role of the
High Representative, including the judicious use of
his executive powers, as he did recently to suspend
unconstitutional and divisive legislation. We condemn
attempts to undermine the High Representative and
close his Office prematurely. Those attempts are not
motivated by the interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina but by a desire to undermine regional
security for geopolitical objectives.
Politics of division and hatred are dangerous
distractions from the issues of importance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge all parties to focus on working
together to improve the quality of life for all citizens and
to make progress on the agreed aim of Euro-Atlantic
integration. October’s elections, which can and must
go ahead as scheduled, offer an opportunity to rebuild
citizens’ confidence in a brighter future for all.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Christian Schmidt, for his report (see S/2022/374),
and I welcome the presence of the Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Šefik Džaferović, at today’s meeting.
The threat by the Serbian entity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to withdraw from the national institutions
last December is an indication of the extent of the
political crisis. The fact that this withdrawal is aimed
at the areas of defence, justice and taxation is likely
to undermine the stability of the country. These
developments are also likely to call into question the
State structure put in place by the Dayton Agreement,
one of the fundamental pillars of which is a Republic
with two entities and three peoples.
The persistent and repeated challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are indeed a source of political
instability at a time when the country is in great need
of the important reforms necessary to consolidate
the rule of law. The tensions and multiple upheavals
facing the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina threaten
its viability as a State and its territorial integrity. The
central State is regularly hampered in its ability to make
decisions. Legislative work is severely compromised,
and international agreements are on hold. The fact that
for the second year in a row the State budget could not

22-345727/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

be approved and that three years after the last general
election the country still does not have an executive is
a matter of concern.
It is essential for the survival of the State that
community tensions be resolved within existing
institutional frameworks and through frank, open
and constructive dialogue. In a particularly tense
regional context, where nationalism continues to grow,
promoting and maintaining such a dialogue is to give
this country every chance to settle into a lasting peace
and to keep the spectre of the dark years of its recent
history as far away as possible.
My country calls on the parties to show compromise
and refrain from any divisive and non-constructive
actions or rhetoric that could fuel antagonism and harm
the peace and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Dayton Agreement must continue to be the
foundation and the road map to peaceful coexistence.
In this regard, I would like to emphasize the important
stabilizing role that European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to play in the
implementation of the provisions of annexes 1 (a) and
2 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With the general elections in Bosnia scheduled for
early October, it is essential that agreement be reached
on the electoral reforms necessary to hold elections
in a peaceful environment and in a climate of mutual
trust. We are concerned about the increase in reported
inter-ethnic incidents, which are fuelled in particular by
hate speech and stigmatization of certain communities,
and which have led to numerous demonstrations in
Sarajevo as well as in many cities around the world.
Everything must be done to prevent the political crisis
from degenerating into a security crisis.
With regard to the institutional order in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the central State must guarantee the
equality of all citizens of the country and allow them
to exercise their civic rights without discrimination,
including taking part in the various elections and
participating on an equal footing in public life. Electoral
reform is therefore a major objective to be achieved.
Women, whose role as agents of peace has been
established, must be associated and empowered to
ensure their full and equitable participation in the
peace process.
8/25

11/05/2022

In conclusion, we call on all political actors to
show flexibility, put the interests of the country first
and commit themselves constructively to peace. Any
obstruction to the proper functioning of the national
institutions will only delay the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and jeopardize the gains made in
recent decades.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
warmly welcome High Representative Schmidt to
the Security Council table for the first time and to
also welcome the Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Šefik Džaferović. I wanted to
thank High Representative Schmidt for his briefing
just now and to emphasize Ireland’s strong support
for a single, sovereign, united and multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the Office of the
High Representative.
The High Representative has just provided a clear
and detailed assessment of the deeply concerning
continuing political deadlock and blockages in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Ireland remains fully supportive of
the Office of the High Representative, and we encourage
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to both fully
respect and engage with the High Representative and
his Office. We would particularly encourage greater
progress in fulfilling the 5+2 agenda. Delivery on this
agenda remains the agreed prerequisite for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative.
We remain greatly concerned by the deeply divisive
negative rhetoric from political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which only serves to diminish the
prospects for reconciliation. We call on all parties to
renounce such rhetoric and to refrain from unilateral
actions that seek to undermine Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are convinced that the deadlock can be overcome
through dialogue. Genuine dialogue in the country has
been missing for a long time.
We are concerned, in particular, at the glorification
of war criminals. There is no place in any twenty-first
century society for the glorification of war criminals
and the denial of genocide.
It is high time that the State institutions begin to
function fully again and that efforts taken to dismantle
State competences cease. The country needs to focus
on a positive agenda. All sides have a responsibility to
do so.
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Like all of us, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
not spared the serious problems resulting from the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Now, again, like all of
us, the population is feeling the consequences of the
war in Ukraine in higher food and energy costs. It is
therefore more important than ever that responsible
politicians now return to State institutions and address
these challenges together, for the benefit of the entire
population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we know, elections have been called for next
October, but the political deadlock and paralysis of State
institutions are already compounding the frustration of
the country’s citizens. It is a factor driving so many
young people who, rather than waiting for the ballot
box, sadly seem to be voting with their feet and leaving
the country.
Despite the challenges, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been able to make significant achievements over
the past quarter-century in building up its institutions
of Government and developing its economy and
society. It has shown that the political path can work for
all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This could
continue if elected representatives, working together
with the national leaderships, demonstrate the political
will required.
Ireland fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European Union (EU) perspective. This is why we call
on all parties to work towards common goals, address
the challenges facing the country and step up the pace
on implementing the reforms needed for EU accession.
That means addressing the needs of all citizens. We
call on all parties to uphold and respect equality and
inclusion as key principles that will underpin a stable,
prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such an
approach should enable women to rightfully participate
in decision-making in all its dimensions.
We know that, regrettably, the participation of
women in politics remains low. We urge the authorities
to ensure the development of effective mechanisms
for the implementation of quotas to enhance women’s
political representation. We yet again call on the High
Representative to focus on the issue of gender equality
and for reporting on the issue to be included in future
reports of the Office of the High Representative.
That is a fundamental issue for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We know that there are frustrations on all sides
regarding the functionality of the country. We

S/PV.9029

understand them, but those issues must be addressed
through a constructive dialogue on constitutional and
electoral reform.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to undertake
further constitutional and electoral reforms to ensure
equality and non-discrimination of all citizens,
notably by implementing the Sejdić-Finci case law
of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR).
No legislative or political steps that would make the
implementation of the Sejdić-Finci and related ECHR
rulings more challenging or further deepen divisions
should be taken.
We must be clear in calling for an inclusive process
of constitutional and electoral reform through genuine
dialogue and in line with international standards. Such
a process would eliminate all forms of inequality and
discrimination in the electoral process. At the same
time, we stress the importance of the State elections
proceeding as scheduled next October.
An agreement on such issues would undoubtedly
bring Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to EU candidate
status. Progress is required on the 13 other key reform
priorities set out in the European Commission opinion,
in particular on the rule of law. That is essential to
restoring citizens’ trust in the judicial system. Bosnia
and Herzegovina will move forward on its EU path only
once it delivers on that critical mass of reforms.
Ireland believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
place is in the European Union. While it has much
challenging work ahead of it, we hope that its leaders
will resume the dialogue needed to tackle the issues
facing the country step by step in a pragmatic way.
We will certainly continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in overcoming the dismal legacy of the
past and realizing its full potential as a sovereign State
within the European family of nations.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking
the High Representative, Mr. Christian Schmidt, for
the in-depth and objective briefing today, as well as
for the sixty-first report of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on BosniaHercegovina distributed to the Security Council
(S/2022/374, annex).
We welcome the presence of the High Representative
and congratulate him on his efforts to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its people in implementing the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Albania fully supports

22-345729/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and commends his engagement and activities. His
competencies and his executive mandate, as decided
by the Peace Implementation Council, should be
accepted and respected by all the relevant domestic
and international actors and seen as part of the wider
spectrum of efforts of the international community to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina move ahead.
I also welcome the presence of the Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Šefik Džaferović, at this meeting.
The situation in Bosnia Herzegovina remains
complex. Unfortunately, there is a persistent lack of
cooperation among the parties, often accompanied
by tensions. We commend the engagement of High
Representative Schmidt and his Office to de-escalate.
We encourage all political actors in the country to join
his calls for dialogue and cooperation at all State levels.
That is in the interests of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens, who want stability, economic development and
a better future.
We believe that the 5+2 agenda remains a good
basis for the reforms needed in the country. We
welcome the initiative of the High Representative to
establish an expert working group for a sustainable
resolution of the issue of State and defence property.
We encourage all political actors regarding an inclusive
process of constitutional and electoral reform through
creative dialogue and in line with European standards.
The differences and ongoing discussion should not
negatively impact the electoral process scheduled for
October of this year.
We welcome the clear positioning of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the support and defence of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations in condemning
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is stuck in a prolonged
political crisis, mainly because of the unacceptable
steps taken by Republika Srpska to undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of the
country. Through many different initiatives, Milorad
Dodik, a Serb politician of Republika Srpska, is
trying to transfer — but the right word would be
stealing — competencies from the central Government
to the institutions of Republika Srpska, in violation of
the national Constitution and the Dayton Agreement.
Such a destabilizing platform aims to undo the reforms
undertaken during the past 26 years to stop the Euro10/25

11/05/2022

Atlantic integration process and open the path for the
dissolution of the country. That should not be accepted.
We are particularly concerned by the continuation
of the political rhetoric of denial of the genocide
committed in Srebrenica, the glorification of war
criminals and the use of hate speech with ethnic slurs.
Stoking division among ethnic groups in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for political games is Dodik’s signature,
and his repeated public denial of the genocide is central
to his efforts. Referring to the genocide as a fabricated
myth or as the greatest deception of the twentieth century
in a delusional denial is an insult to more than 8,000
civilians who were slaughtered in Srebrenica. Yielding
to nationalism and praising convicted war criminals are
not just mere provocation. Any misstep in Bosnia and
Herzegovina risks affecting the wider region.
It therefore comes as no surprise that such
unacceptable behaviour was rightfully sanctioned, and
we welcome the actions taken by the United States of
America and the United Kingdom against Dodik for his
continued and intentional attempts to undermine the
functionality of the State and the hard-won peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Western Balkans is a complex but dynamic
and fast-developing region. Yet not all actors involved
there push in the same direction, which remains a
growing concern and a source of destabilization for
the region. Trying to gain influence by using the rise
of nationalism and divisions on religious and ethnic
issues only polarizes politics and creates a sense of
insecurity in several countries in the Western Balkans,
in particular Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore, the
lack of a clear perspective towards the Euro-Atlantic
integration creates undue space for unwelcome and
harmful interference.
We should refuse and condemn openly and strongly
any threats to the security in Bosnia and Herzegovina
by exploiting ethnic and religious tensions, with an
ultimate goal of blocking reforms and the derailing of
the Euro-Atlantic integration process in the country. In
that context, I must recall the declaration of the Russian
Ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 17 March :
“If [Bosnia and Herzegovina] decides to be
a member of any alliance ... Ukraine’s example
shows what we expect.”
We believe that only cooperation and genuine
dialogue among all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

having clarity on what has prevented progress so
far, on the one hand, and what it takes to move the
country ahead in normalcy, on the other, are the only
way to unknot the never-ending deadlock. The role
of the High Representative and his Office remains
vital in facilitating dialogue and guaranteeing the
constitutional order.
It is crucial that the European Union remain
seriously engaged, because the European perspective
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is very important for the
country and for the region, especially for young people.
They need a clear perspective; they need jobs; and they
need a project with which to identify.
We should help Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single
united country and its citizens. A unified message
from the Security Council is what they need and what
they deserve.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank High Representative Christian Schmidt
for his briefing and welcome the Chair of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to today’s meeting.
France expresses its concern about the ongoing
political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which began
last summer. The crisis is marked by the crippling of
central State institutions and by initiatives aimed at the
unilateral transfer of certain powers to the Republika
Srpska. It jeopardizes the achievements of 30 years of
institution-building and reform in the country under
the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement and on the path to
membership of the European Union. We therefore call
upon all leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resume
the dialogue and compromise necessary to ensure the
proper functioning of the country’s institutions and the
path to accession to the European Union.
The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
right to effective democratic institutions that fully
respect the principles of the rule of law, in particular
serving justice and combating corruption and organized
crime. That underpins the 14 priorities outlined in 2019
in the opinion of the European Commission on the
membership application of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the European Union. Those priorities must continue to
guide reform efforts for the benefit of all inhabitants of
the country.
We are particularly attentive to the full and effective
participation of women in political life, which may help
to resolve the political crisis.

S/PV.9029

France deplores the fact that an agreement has not
yet been reached on constitutional and electoral reform
that guarantees the principle of non-discrimination and
equality for all citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
line with European Court of Human Rights rulings. We
will continue to support efforts to reach a compromise
on the issue. However, the lack of an agreement on a
new electoral framework must not deprive the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina of their fundamental
right to elect their representatives. We call upon the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all
necessary measures to ensure that upcoming elections
are organized and funded as planned.
In the light of such worrisome dynamics, France
believes that international presence in Bosnia
Herzegovina remains crucial for the stability of the
country and the region, in line with the provisions of
the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement.
With regard to the military dimension, since
2004, the European Union has played a leading role
in peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina, through
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We trust that that presence will continue
over the long term.
The European Union also fully participates in
reducing tensions between Serbia and Kosovo with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, such
as during the presidential elections in Serbia in April.
With respect to the civilian dimension, France
fully supports the work of the High Representative in
his dialogue with all stakeholders and welcomes the
fact that he was able to participate in today’s Security
Council meeting.
As the European continent faces unprecedented
challenges resulting from the war led by Russia against
Ukraine, we will spare no effort to ensure stability
in Europe, in particular in the Balkans, where open
wounds remain from the conflict that took place during
the 1990s. We reiterate the importance of justice,
compensation and guarantees of non-repetition for all
crimes committed during those conflicts. The processes
of transitional justice and reconciliation remain the
only solid foundation for the future of the country. We
categorically condemn the glorification of indicted war
criminals and the denial of genocide.
Lastly, France reiterates its commitment to the
European prospects for Bosnia and Herzegovina and

22-3457211/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

for all Western Balkan countries. As President of the
Council of the European Union in the first half of 2022,
in June France will organize a conference on the Western
Balkans, with the participation of the 27 member States
and six States of the region, to collectively reaffirm our
commitment to European integration and to continuing
to build the necessary cooperation to respond to
common challenges.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank High Representative
Christian Schmidt for his briefing and for his report to
the Security Council (see S/2022/374).
The Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement remains the
cornerstone for building enduring peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It must continue to define
the framework to find solutions related to inter-ethnic
conflict settlement, through inclusive dialogue, based
on equality, mutual respect, compromise and consensus.
We urge the Office of the High Representative to
continue to collaborate with all parties objectively
to build trust and overcome the impediments to the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, which remains
the basis for the attainment of long-term stability. We
also call on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to make the necessary efforts for the achievement
of progress on those five objectives and conditions
and ensure compliance with the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

11/05/2022

On the matter of the Office of the High
Representative, it is important that any disagreement
among members of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council be resolved through consensus
and constructive engagement, in line with the Peace
Agreement.
In conclusion, we continue to encourage the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue
pursuing a lasting solution that takes into consideration
the needs of its people and all stakeholders.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to welcome to the Chamber His Excellency
Mr. Džaferović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Serbia and Croatia to
today’s meeting.
Since our previous meeting on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/PV.8896), the political situation
in the country has remained marked by a profound
deadlock. Disagreement remains among the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on important issues concerning
State governance, thereby giving rise to greater political
uncertainty. At the same time, China also notes that
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
Republika Srpska, have pledged to uphold national
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

Kenya reiterates the need to avoid and counter the
use of divisive rhetoric and hate speech, particularly
through social media. In that regard, it is important to
have a deep understanding of the grievances driving it,
as well as the instigators and outlets of such rhetoric,
the aim being to develop and implement innovative
and practical measures to address the drivers and
root causes.

China’s position on Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been consistent and clear. With respect to the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is important to respect
the wishes of its people for the future of their country.
We encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to engage actively in constructive dialogue and
cooperation to achieve national reconciliation.

Kenya believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina will
find its own way to democracy and stability, but that
cannot be achieved without the rule of law. We therefore
concur with the High Representative on the necessity
to maintain the rule of law, particularly regarding the
status of the many unimplemented international and
domestic court decisions.

The year 2022 is an election year in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that all parties will move
towards each other, continue to commit themselves to
seeking consensus through dialogue and consultation
and work together to advance the country’s political
agenda.

We take note of the challenges to the voluntary
return and harmonious reintegration of refugees and
displaced persons. Collaboration among the parties is
key, as it creates an environment that is conducive to
the return of refugees and displaced persons to their
homes of origin.
12/25

The High Representative and the Bonn powers
are special arrangements from a special era. In order
to achieve long-term peace and stability and the
accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European
Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina must find a feasible
path to fully restored sovereignty. Given the evolving
situation, in a fair, balanced and prudent manner, the
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.9029

international community should provide constructive
assistance, in a way that meets the genuine needs of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
today’s meeting, as well as the participation of Croatia,
Serbia and the European Union.

External forces choosing sides will not help to
reconcile the differences or resolve the disagreements
among ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Arbitrarily imposing unilateral sanctions that are not
based on international law may also aggravate tensions
and further complicate an already difficult situation. It
is certainly not an effective way to resolve the issue.

This year marks the twenty-seventh anniversary of
the signing of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or what is known as
the Dayton Agreement, which represents a diplomatic
achievement that ended the devastating Bosnian war,
whose tragedies remain vivid in the hearts of its
survivors. In that context, the United Arab Emirates
expresses its concern about the recent developments and
existing political tensions that threaten to exacerbate
the political and security situations in the country.
The current situation requires drawing lessons from
the past and building upon them to ensure a better and
more stable future for generations to come. That calls
for working to diffuse tensions and resolve differences
among the parties in accordance with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution in order to prevent the current
situation from worsening, particularly in the light of the
dangerous juncture that Europe is going through as a
result of the war in Ukraine. In that regard, my country
would like to emphasize the following points.

China supports all efforts that are conducive to
the maintenance of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and commends the role played by Serbia,
Croatia and other countries of the region to that end.
We note that the number of troops have increased
significantly in the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea). We hope
that EUFOR-Althea will continue to play a constructive
role in maintaining security and stability in the country
and in providing assistance in mine clearance and the
fight against terrorism.
The geopolitical situation in Europe is now
facing new challenges that have had a severe impact
on energy and food security worldwide. Compounded
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
the economy and people’s well-being in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are now under intense pressure, as
evidenced by the fast-rising inflation and persistent
high unemployment. The international community, the
European Union and European partners in particular
should continue to scale up pandemic and development
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
expeditiously boost its socioeconomic recovery.
China attaches great importance to friendly
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our friendship
is extended to all the people in the country. Bilateral
cooperation in various fields, including agriculture,
energy and its infrastructure and trade, has continuously
deepened. Following the COVID-19 outbreak,
China — acting with urgency — provided vaccines
and donations of several batches of pandemic-related
supplies to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will continue
to do what we can, according to our capacities, in order
to help the country achieve long-term peace, stability
and development.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Christian Schmidt for his briefing. I
also welcome the participation of Mr. Šefik Džaferović,

First, the United Arab Emirates underscores its
support for the unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in accordance with international
law and the Dayton Agreement. In that context, the
Agreement must be adhered to as an agreed reference
for resolving differences among all political parties.
Cooperation between both entities constituting Bosnia
and Herzegovina is one of the essential elements of
the Agreement, which all parties must abide by. We
also emphasize the importance of full respect for
national institutions.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates commends
the important role played by the Office of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina in
maintaining peace in the country by protecting the
political aspect of the Dayton Agreement over the past
three decades. It has also supported political reforms
backed by the international community.
Thirdly, encouraging peaceful coexistence among
the various communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and maintaining open channels of communication
among them is essential to achieve sustainable peace. In
that context, the United Arab Emirates condemns any
attempt to provoke sectarian and ethnic tensions, spread
hate speech, encourage racial incitement and glorify war

22-3457213/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

crimes and their perpetrators. Those acts undermine
the prospects for achieving positive engagement and
threaten renewed violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My country also stresses the importance of dialogue
and building bridges among various communities, as
that will contribute to strengthening a peaceful, secure
and prosperous society.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates hopes
that the current efforts to establish sustainable peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue. In that
context, the role of the Peace Implementation Council
is important, including through the endeavours of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Intensifying
international efforts will help support the political
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve the
aspirations of its people, which will be reflected on
the maintenance of peace and security throughout
the Balkans.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note with regret that, in the six months
since the previous Security Council debate on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see PV.8896), the
state of affairs in that country has not improved. We
are witnessing the deepest internal political crisis of
the entire post-conflict period and an unprecedented
decline in the level of inter-ethnic trust and dialogue.
It is becoming increasingly difficult for the constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina to find common
ground, while the Dayton ideals of compromise and
consensus have become almost unattainable.
We are concerned about the increasing trend
towards centralization of the multi-ethnic Bosnian
State around Bosniaks, the majority ethnic community,
to the detriment of the constitutional rights of the
other two peoples and the entities of the country with
broad authority. That is also evident in the discussion
of electoral law reform and in adopting foreign policy
decisions that do not reflect the interests and will of
the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We see that as
a flagrant violation of the 1995 General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is being directly encouraged by a number of Western
countries, including those responsible for ensuring
its implementation. In that connection, we regret that
today’s statement by Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was not agreed
upon with the other members of the Presidency, in
accordance with the established procedure.
14/25

11/05/2022

Clearly, the necessary conclusions from the
consequences of the reckless interference of the
previous High Representative, Mr. Inzko, in the affairs
of sovereign Bosnia and Herzegovina and its peoples in
the summer of last year have not been drawn. We are
now witnessing a conscious rejection of the approach
previously approved by the international community
of the transfer of full responsibility to the legitimately
elected authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
favour of the manual control of the Bosnian processes
by Brussels, Washington and a number of European
capitals. Foreign approaches and rules are being
actively imposed. The practices of illegal unilateral
sanctions against Bosnian political representatives,
as well as pressure, threats and blackmail, are
becoming widespread.
That is the path towards further degradation of
intra-Bosnian dialogue and the destabilization of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which by no means helps to
normalize the situation in the country and ensure its
socioeconomic development. Responsibility for the
continuing deterioration of the political climate in the
country and the mass exodus of the population lies
on the shoulders of those who are trying to reshape
the Dayton-era Bosnia and Herzegovina from the
outside in order to suit their own interests. We warn
of the extremely dangerous consequences of such a
misguided approach, and we call for an end to further
experimentation on the independent Bosnian State
and its peoples so that they may be enabled to develop
independently, in full compliance with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The destructive role of the Office of the High
Representative is becoming increasingly apparent. That
mechanism has lost any semblance of impartiality and
propriety and has become a tool for imposing decisions
of dubious value and feasibility. Attempts to invoke the
so-called Bonn powers to annul unwanted domestic laws
are unlawful and legally null and void, both because
there is no agreement on their use by the international
community and because those emergency tools were
granted personally to the High Representative, whose
post, following the resignation of Valentin Inzko,
remains vacant. As we emphasized at the beginning of
the meeting, we believe that German citizen Christian
Schmidt is a private individual and has no mandate to
represent the international community.
We consider inappropriate the attacks on the
Russian Ambassador in Sarajevo, contained in the so22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

called report (see S/2022/374), in the context of the
situation in Ukraine, which has nothing to do with the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that a frank and concrete discussion is
needed on practical ways to close the Office of the High
Representative as soon as possible, as it has exhausted
its positive functions.
We note with particular concern that the European
Union forces carrying out European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea)
in accordance with a Security Council mandate are
increasingly creating an atmosphere of danger and fear.
Without any justification or explanation, the military
contingent of the operation was doubled in March.
Armed men in camouflage are patrolling the streets of
Bosnian cities, and heavy military equipment is being
moved around, sowing panic among the population.
Such behaviour raises serious questions about the
added value of the continued presence of EUFORAlthea in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has gone from
being a source of stability to an element of intimidation
and political confrontation, which is completely
unacceptable and dangerous.
The upcoming general election in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is of great importance. The voting should
take place in accordance with Bosnian law and in full
compliance with the principles of representation in
Dayton, and the results should express the sovereign
will of the peoples. We demand that outside parties stop
interfering in the election agenda.
We call on the Security Council to provide a
constructive assessment of the current events in Bosnia
and Herzegovina through the lens of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, which was endorsed by a Security Council
resolution, and not on the basis of arbitrary speculation
on the part of the Office of the High Representative. As
an alternative source of information on the situation in
the country, we suggest familiarizing ourselves with the
report of Republika Srpska, which has been circulated
as document S/2022/376. Russia, as one of Dayton’s
guarantor States, fully supports the fundamental
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the equality of the
three constituent peoples and the two entities with
broad authority.
The 1995 Peace Agreement remains fully relevant.
The balance of interests of the three peoples therein
remains in effect. Moreover, there is no alternative to it.

S/PV.9029

Attempts to destroy it could have serious consequences
for the Balkans and for Europe as a whole.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Christian Schmidt for his briefing on
the most recent report (see S/2022/374) submitted
pursuant to resolution 1031 (1995). I also welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Šefik Džaferović,
Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the representatives of Serbia and Croatia, at
today’s meeting.
The General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is fundamental for
building enduring peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Agreement continues to define the
framework to find solutions related to inter-ethnic
conflict settlement through dialogue by the parties on
the basis of equality and mutual respect, compromise
and consensus. The Office of the High Representative,
as an ad hoc international institution mechanism, has
been overseeing the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Agreement.
The disagreement over the Office of the High
Representative needs to be resolved through constructive
engagement, in line with the Peace Agreement. The
expeditious implementation of the 5+2 agenda should
continue to remain the top priority for the Office of the
High Representative.
However, we remain concerned that the recent
political developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
undermine the progress made in the past 26 years.
To realize the objectives of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, all sides need to engage in
dialogue in a spirit of mutual understanding and
empathy towards each other’s positions.
We must support all endeavours towards
cooperation, development and peace and avoid divisive
rhetoric that could undermine the Peace Agreement. We
hope all parties and leaders will re-commit themselves
to work together in a constructive and inclusive manner.
In that regard, it is important that the Office of the
High Representative work with all parties objectively,
understand differing viewpoints and aim to build trust
and strengthen the constitutional framework of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We reiterate that the General Framework Agreement
for Peace provides the basis to find solutions related
to inter-ethnic conflict settlement through dialogue

22-3457215/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

11/05/2022

by the parties based on equality and mutual respect,
compromise and consensus.

Government, as well as of defence property and the
entrenchment of the rule of law.

In conclusion, India supports all efforts, including
those of the European Union, in promoting dialogue
and compromise towards the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

We believe that the chosen path of Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards a peaceful and viable State,
integrated with the European Union, is one that needs
the broad support of the international community
through concrete steps, as defined by the Brussels
requirements of February 2008.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the presence of the His Excellency Mr. Šefik
Džaferović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank Mr. Christian Schmidt, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period 16 October
2021 to 15 April 2022.
Ghana is concerned by recent developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The political crisis risks
undermining the further implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. More worrisome, it threatens the stability
that has held the country together over the past two and
a half decades.
We therefore appeal to all political actors
and stakeholders to forge a collaborative working
arrangement for the fulfilment of the commitments
and obligations made under the provisions of the
Peace Agreement. That requires the fostering of
an environment for equal opportunities for all and
a re-commitment to peaceful coexistence in the
multi-ethnic and multi-religious societies of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we call for avoiding
potentially divisive rhetoric, as well as upholding zero
tolerance for hate speech, which fuels strife among
the people.
The political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have a responsibility to maintain the unity of the
country and to ensure the effective functioning of State
institutions at all levels. In that respect, we hope that
the encouraging signs of cooperation in Brčko district
will serve as an inspiration for representatives of both
entities. Overcoming the deep mistrust in society is
essential to any enduring effort to address the fiscal
needs of State institutions and to meet their obligations
towards all the people of the country.
We also encourage further efforts to address all
aspects of the 5+2 agenda, including the acceptable and
sustainable resolution of the issue of the apportionment
of property between the State and other levels of
16/25

In that regard, we also urge the Office of the High
Representative to adopt a posture that enables it to
deepen engagement with officials of the entities in order
to help them to overcome their internal challenges and
work constructively towards the objectives.
We further urge the Presidency of the country to
unify its public messaging, enhance the coherence of its
actions and serve as the fulcrum of stability and hope that
the institutions and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
require to overcome this challenging period. That
is especially necessary as previously settled areas of
competence between the State and entities are being
positively interpreted in order to adapt to the effective
functioning of a progressive and unified State structure.
We note the economic situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and call for the necessary cooperation
and support in a manner that overcomes the present
challenges in the decision-making processes for the
benefit of the people, especially the youth. We also
call on the authorities throughout the country to fulfil
their obligation to provide enabling conditions for the
safe return and reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons without discrimination, in accordance with the
General Framework Agreement for Peace.
In conclusion, we entreat Council members to adopt
a common approach in responding to the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, irrespective of our differing
views on the continuing relevance of the Office of the
High Representative. We must, in that context, sustain
our unified support for the sovereignty and integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, while being mindful of
the need to avoid any situation in the Western Balkans
region that could worsen the precarious security
conditions currently prevailing in Europe.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I welcome the
presence of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the Security Council today. I
thank Mr. Schmidt for his informative briefing, which,
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

together with his report (see S/2022/374), outlines some
of the serious challenges that Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face.
There is still considerable work to be done before
the General Framework Agreement for Peace is fully
implemented. History also shows us how political
instability can increase under specific conditions.
We are therefore concerned that the current political
crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina could eventually
develop into a more serious security situation. We are
particularly concerned about the increase in aggressive
ethnic rhetoric, and we call on the authorities to both
condemn and refrain from hate speech.
The already difficult political climate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina also has the potential to further deteriorate
due to the impact of the war in Ukraine. While the
responsibility to maintain stability and security rests
with the local authorities, the international community
must, and will, respond appropriately if needed.
Norway strongly believes that the contribution
of the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) to maintaining
peace, stability and a safe and secure environment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is vital and, unfortunately,
still necessary. In that respect, we welcome the
deployment of an additional 500 reserve personnel as a
precautionary measure. EUFOR-Althea’s mandate is to
be renewed in November, and Norway will work hard
with other Council members towards the renewal of a
strong mandate.
Justice and accountability for war crimes, including
conflict-related sexual violence, are essential to
building sustainable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in April in
his latest report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2022/272), while there has been a reparation scheme
in place for many decades, insufficient progress has
been made. We encourage the acceleration of measures
to deliver justice for survivors and urge the High
Representative to engage with authorities and partners
on furthering accountability for crimes of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Norway fully supports the Office of the High
Representative and believes in its important role in
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace.
Nevertheless, we look forward to the day when that is

S/PV.9029

fulfilled and the Office can be closed and international
supervision of Bosnia and Herzegovina phased out.
However, that requires Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make further progress on the 5+2 agenda. That is possible
only if all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
work together constructively and in the best interests of
all people in the country. We urge the authorities to stay
committed to the transition process towards a peaceful,
reform-oriented and prosperous European country. The
international community also stands ready to support
and contribute to those necessary reforms.
Let me end by reiterating that Norway fully
supports the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
fundamental structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
single sovereign State comprising two entities and the
Brčko district.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank High Representative Schmidt for
his briefing and welcome the Chair of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Džaferović. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Croatia, Serbia and the European Union in this meeting.
I will focus my statement on three points, namely,
the political impasse, elections and hate speech.
First, the past six months have been characterized
by the paralysis of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
apparatus and by systematic challenges to the
institutional architecture derived from the Dayton
Accords. The creation of a parallel legislative and
institutional system by the Republika Srpska, as well
as its unilateral withdrawal from agreements and its
denial of the Constitutional Court’s decisions, represent
a threat to the State. They undermine the work done in
the past 25 years and divert the country from its process
of integration into the European Union. We regret that
progress on the 5+2 agenda, with the exception of
certain advances in Brčko district, is practically nil. We
reiterate that progress under that agenda is essential for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Secondly, democratic exercise is fundamental
to the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
upcoming elections in October will be critical, and we
hope that women and young people will participate
fully and meaningfully in them. We therefore call on
the Bosniak and Croat sides to reach an agreement
on electoral matters, including with regard to their

22-3457217/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

financing. We hope that all parties will redouble efforts
to find a solution to their differences and that, after the
elections, a functional Government will be formed and
that the events of 2018 will not repeat themselves.
Thirdly, Mexico notes with concern reports of the
justification of war criminals, the denial of genocide and
war crimes and the rejection or dilution of the findings
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and local courts. It is unacceptable that such actions
receive no official condemnation. It is particularly
alarming that, in some cases, it is public officials are
the ones disseminating those messages and promoting
nationalist narratives that fuel divisive rhetoric to the
detriment of peaceful coexistence.
We paid close attention to the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence in December and echo
his call for the reconciliation process to emanate from a
comprehensive strategy to maintain peace. We therefore
urge the Parliamentary Assembly to enact legislation
on the denial of genocide and other war crimes. We take
note of the High Representative’s proposal to withdraw
the amendments to the criminal code presented by his
predecessor, so that the Assembly can legislate on the
matter in line with international standards.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support for
the work of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in safeguarding peace and
security in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank the High Representative for his briefing
to the Security Council today. I also thank Chair of
the Presidency Džaferović for his participation in
this meeting.
The United States welcomes High Representative
Schmidt’s report (see S/2022/374), which is in line
with precedent and the requirements of resolution
1031 (1995). Moreover, his assessments are incredibly
valuable. He has ensured that the international
community is informed about the situation on the
ground. He has done an admirable job under difficult
circumstances, and especially as Europe’s security is
threatened by Russia’s brutal war against Ukraine.
Twenty-seven years ago, the United States helped
forge the Dayton Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Dayton Accords remain vital to
18/25

11/05/2022

the maintenance of international peace and security
because what was true when Dayton was signed in 1995
remains true today. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is paramount
and unquestionable.
But as we have heard today, this hard-fought stability
is at risk. We agree with the High Representative’s
assessment that this is a dangerous path for all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the wider region. Local
political leaders are using inflammatory rhetoric,
threatening to prevent or boycott elections, and refusing
to tackle corruption. The United States condemns
this behaviour.
Specifically, we should all be concerned by steps
taken by Mr Milorad Dodik and the Republika Srpska
to block State institutions from implementing the will
of the people and seize competencies from the State.
Republika Srpska authorities are also working to
withdraw from the constitutional, legal and institutional
order of the State and establish parallel frameworks. I
want to be clear: these actions are undemocratic, they
are escalatory, they are not in the spirit or letter of
Dayton, and they jeopardize the health, prosperity and
future of the entire country and its citizens.
Calls to obstruct elections or create a new territorial
organization by Bosnian Croat leaders are also
dangerous and could undermine peace and security in
the region. Unfortunately, all ethnonationalist leaders,
including Bosniak parties, have chosen to employ
corruption, fear and division to stay in power. They
have eroded trust in the country’s institutions from
within. All of the country’s leaders bear responsibility
for the challenges it now faces.
The United States regrets the growing division and
rhetoric that political parties are using to stoke tensions
and distract from other issues, including widespread
corruption. We appreciate the High Representative’s
efforts to calm these tensions and encourage parties to
resolve differences through dialogue.
Elected officials must return to good governance
at all levels of government. Now is the time to advance
much-needed progress on necessary anti-corruption
reforms, democratic reforms, economic reforms, rule
of law reforms and reconciliation. And, as we have
learned time and time again, differences can only be
resolved through dialogue in established institutions
and not through obstruction and boycotts. Authorities
at all levels must continue to fight against corruption,
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

which is robbing citizens of economic growth and a
more prosperous future, undermining its institutions
and hindering the country’s chosen Euro-Atlantic path.
The most powerful antidote to corruption is
democracy. We therefore welcome the decision of the
Central Election Commission to call for elections on
2 October. We urge immediate allocation of funds to
enable the elections to be carried out. It is the basic
duty of any credible democracy to enable its citizens
to exercise their right to choose their elected officials.
Finally, we want to emphasize the importance
of completing the 5+2 agenda, the requirements that
must be met before the closure of the Office of the
High Representative and the country’s transition
from international supervision. Until the 5+2 agenda
is completed, the role of the High Representative in
ensuring the full implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Agreement remains indispensable.
We regret the continued attempts by some members of
the Council to undermine the High Representative’s
mandate and legitimacy so as to throw out his efforts to
bring a permanent enduring stability and prosperity to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to all of its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would again like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of the latest note by the President
(S/2017/507), which encourages all participants in
Council meetings to deliver their statements in five
minutes or less, in line with the Security Council’s
commitment to making more effective use of
open meetings.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Šefik Džaferović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Džaferović (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke
in Bosnian; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council in the month of May, and I wish
you every success in your mission. I also welcome
Mr. Schmidt, the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, whose report on the situation in the
country (see S/2022/374) I consider to be an objective
account of the situation in our country.
Let me address some key points with regard to the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For over 10 years,

S/PV.9029

our country has been in a deep political crisis. This
crisis was caused by secessionist threats, a blockade
on institutions and moves by the Republika Srpska
authorities in violation of the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Dayton Peace Agreement and
27 years the Agreement’s implementation.
In the time frame since the end of the war, in
accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement, and
with the support of the international community, we
have made substantial progress with reforms. The clear
provisions of Article III of the Dayton Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, prescribe the possibility
for Bosnia and Herzegovina to establish additional
State institutions and assume the competencies it
needs to preserve its sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and international subjectivity.
By implementing these provisions of the Constitution
established under the Dayton Peace Agreement, we have
formed a joint army, intelligence service, ministries, a
State tax system, judiciary and other institutions, which
have strengthened peace, and, thanks to them, the State
has been able to function independently. As all relevant
analyses show, these reforms have benefited citizens
of all parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including both
entities and Brčko district.
We have implemented these reforms with the
consent of political representatives from both entities
and all peoples, while decisions have been made in the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in accordance with the prescribed procedures.
Furthermore, we also did that with the support of the
international community, including this organ, for
which we in Bosnia and Herzegovina are very grateful.
During the period from 1997 to 2014, when such
reforms were being implemented, in its resolutions on
the situation in our country the Security Council gave
clear support to the process of strengthening State
institutions and encouraged the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to follow that path. Along with that
support, in resolutions 2123 (2013) and 2183 (2014),
respectively, this organ further stated that the process
of strengthening State institutions fostered the building
of a fully functioning, self-sustaining State, able to
integrate itself into European structures.
Unfortunately, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, over
the past 10 months, we have been witnessing efforts to
destroy everything that has been achieved through the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement.

22-3457219/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Republika Srpska authorities are threatening
to unilaterally disband all those State institutions and
appropriate their competencies. For that purpose, they
adopted or sent for processing specific laws in the areas
of justice, State property and medicines. That threatens
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, since, as I said, the Dayton Constitution
unequivocally states that additional State level
competencies are needed in order to preserve Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Considering the Security Council’s mandate, let me
warn the Council of the dangers of such secessionist
activities directly undermining the Dayton Peace
Agreement as a cornerstone of peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in that part
of Europe.
Given that, due to a complex decision-making
system, Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have fully
developed proper mechanisms to prevent secessionist
activities in a timely manner, we need the support of
the international community. Experience with regard
to the implementation of the Dayton Agreement shows
us that such support has always proved to be beneficial
and effective.
It is therefore important that, as part of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, the Office of the High Representative
do its job in accordance with the mandate that was given
to it. The High Representative, Mr. Schmidt, decided to
suspend the secessionist State property law, which is
important for stability.
However, in order to completely stabilize the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is necessary
to annul all unconstitutional laws, as well as the
conclusions of the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska of 10 December 2021 and all other acts that are
contrary to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Furthermore, it is also necessary to unblock the
work of institutions. Since the summer of last year,
the State institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, led
by the Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
have not worked at all due to the absence of
representatives of the Republika Srpska and the lack of a
quorum. Recently, after pressure from the international
community, representatives of the Republika Srpska
began attending the sessions, but they still refuse to
work at full capacity and take decisions, which means
that the blockade has not stopped. It was just slightly
20/25

11/05/2022

mitigated due to the sanctions announced or imposed
by the international community.
It is necessary for the blockade to end and for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully emerge from the
crisis in order to ensure stability and progress. The
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina need to commit
to reforms, with the aim of improving citizens’ living
standards and ensuring progress on the path to EuroAtlantic integration.
In that regard, the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are aware of their obligations when it
comes to implementing the reforms in the European
Commission’s opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for membership of the European Union,
as well as the reform programme that has outlined the
framework for the continuation of our NATO path. I
take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the
European Union and NATO for their commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and our European and EuroAtlantic perspective.
I firmly believe that, in the current geopolitical
situation, where we feel the strong consequences of the
aggression against Ukraine for the stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the entire Western Balkans,
the European Union should respond positively to the
request for candidate status within the framework of
the new enlargement methodology. Despite numerous
internal disputes, we managed to find a united voice on
this issue, and I think that that should be encouraged.
Granting candidate status, coupled with
restrictive measures against the Dayton subversives,
can ensure the full stabilization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and initiate a new round of
reform momentum.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is committed to
strengthening peace in the region through the
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation. We are committed to having good
relations with our neighbours, based on mutual respect.
All open issues need to be resolved through dialogue
and agreement or, in the absence of a consensusbased solution, through the institutions in charge of
implementing international law.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports regional
cooperation. We participate in a vast number of regional
initiatives that seek to promote political and other forms
of cooperation in the region. Bosnia and Herzegovina,
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

along with other Western Balkan countries, joined the
Common Regional Market as part of the Berlin process.
We believe that strengthening regional economic
cooperation, while respecting European Union
standards in that area, can have an extremely positive
impact on the overall situation.
Although, as a State, we do not undermine anyone,
we are concerned about the signals from part of our
neighbourhood. We are particularly concerned by the
rapid armament of neighbouring countries, primarily
Serbia, which, by including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
entity Republika Srpska in its national defence strategy,
has shown worrisome disrespect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are concerned about the protection that Serbia
is offering to convicted war criminals, such as Novak
Đukić, and numerous other suspects in the Srebrenica
genocide wanted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
judiciary. At the same time, citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who had once defended the country are
being prosecuted before Serbian courts. The matter
is solely under the jurisdiction of the Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and not under that of the judiciary
of a neighbouring country, with regard to which the
highest United Nations judicial institutions established
that it had participated in international conflict on the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are also concerned about the interference
of the Croatian authorities in the regulation of the
election law. The position of the President of Croatia
that he supports the unilateral change of the Dayton
Agreement through the establishment of a third entity
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is especially worrisome, as
well as the fact that he is ready to condition possible
NATO enlargement on changes of the election law in
our country.
The election law in Croatia is its internal issue, and
we do not interfere in that. We therefore do not expect
Croatia to interfere in the way in which we in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will regulate our electoral system.
In its judgments, the European Court of Human
Rights in Strasbourg ordered Bosnia and Herzegovina
to reform the Constitution and the election law in order
to guarantee all citizens their individual rights, and not
to further increase the privileged status of constituent
peoples over other citizens, as persistently requested by
the Croatian authorities.

S/PV.9029

Next autumn, Bosnia and Herzegovina will face
two extremely important events.
First, in October, the general elections await us.
Democratic elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
been held regularly since the signing of the Dayton
Agreement and are a cornerstone of stability. For the
first time in the past 27 years, conducting elections has
been called into question because Croat ministers in
the Council of Ministers are preventing the provision
of the necessary funds for the elections. Given the
unforeseeable consequences that the obstruction
of the elections would have for stability, should the
obstructions continue in the Council of Ministers, the
responsibility would then lie with the Office of the High
Representative, who must take appropriate decisions
to provide the necessary financial resources for the
conduct of elections.
Secondly, in November, the Security Council will
decide on the extension of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFORAlthea). According to Security Council resolutions,
the EUFOR-Althea mission, along with the NATO
headquarters in Sarajevo, is the legal successor of the
previous military missions established by the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The presence of international
military forces is extremely important for maintaining
peace and implementing the military aspects of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
I take this opportunity to call on the Security
Council, on behalf of the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to extend the EUFOR mandate in
November, as it is an important guarantor of peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and a mechanism
to deter activities that may threaten peace.
In January this year, there were several serious
security incidents directed against the returnee
population. After the increase in the number of EUFOR
members, there were no more security challenges.
Lastly, let me say that the way out of the current
situation lies in strict adherence to the Dayton-Paris
Peace Agreement and all 27 years of its implementation.
All actors involved in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must respect the existing framework and
the solutions that our country has enforced. No one
has the right to unilaterally destroy the existing and
painstakingly agreed solutions.

22-3457221/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: Let me let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
presidency of the Security Council.
I will speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
At the outset, let me join others in thanking High
Representative Schmidt for his briefing and reiterating
our continued support for his work and the work of
his Office to implement the 5+2 agenda in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I would also like to welcome the Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Šefik
Džaferović, to the Security Council and thank him for
his statement.
The EU deeply regrets the prolonged political crisis
in the country, which has held back further progress on
reforms in 2021. It also condemns the blockage of State
institutions. The EU urges all political leaders to refrain
from and renounce provocative and divisive rhetoric
and action, including questioning the sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of the country.
Rhetoric and initiatives aimed at rolling back
reforms and withdrawing from State institutions are
unacceptable and endanger the country’s alignment
with the EU acquis and the political commitment to
EU integration. All political leaders need to engage
in dialogue to overcome the stalemate as a matter
of priority.
The EU takes note of the very limited progress in
reforms and acknowledges the steps taken, including
the holding of local elections in Mostar in December
2020 for the first time since 2008, the resumption
of the Stabilization and Association Parliamentary
Committee and the adoption by all levels of Government
of the action plan on public administration reforms and
strategies on public financial management. The EU
urges the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to focus their joint efforts on fulfilling all four key
priorities identified in the Commission’s opinion on
the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina for EU
membership, as endorsed by the Council in 2019 and in
line with the interest of all citizens to advance towards
the European Union.
22/25

11/05/2022

The EU expresses its appreciation and reaffirms its
support for the efforts of the EU Special Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in that regard. Only by
delivering on reforms will Bosnia and Herzegovina
advance towards the European Union.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the European
Union’s firm support to the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina-Althea and to the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanović (Serbia): I thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
members of Security Council and all other speakers for
their statements.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council on the
report of the High Representative (see S/2022/374)
takes place at a time when the international community
is facing many challenges and when the importance of
respecting the principles of international law is being
fully reaffirmed. Serbia is a staunch supporter and firm
advocate for full respect for international law.
Peace and stability in our region and the development
of good relations and cooperation in all areas with our
closest neighbours are the top foreign policy priorities
of the Republic of Serbia. We believe that those goals
are for the benefit of our citizens and all people in the
region. We consider Bosnia and Herzegovina to be our
key partner in achieving those goals. Unfortunately,
recently, the region of the Western Balkans has been
burdened with unnecessary political tensions, messages
and political narratives that represent obstruction to any
constructive solution. That has significantly marked the
recent political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including relations between the two entities and the
three constituent peoples.
Serbia firmly believes that its active policy
contributes positively to the process of reconciliation in
our region and to the strengthening of good-neighbourly
relations. Dialogue, along with mutual respect for the
legitimate interests of all parties involved, is the most
effective way to preserve the peace and stability of the
region in order to build a better future for all of us. Our
region has a common past, from which we must learn,
but we must patiently build the future together, as we
have a duty to ensure lasting peace for generations
to come.
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Republic of Serbia takes this opportunity
to once again reaffirm its respect for the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
territorial integrity of the Republika Srpska within
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a guarantor of the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, Serbia wishes to point
out that, 27 years after the signing of the accord, it is
important to reaffirm the validity of, and full respect
for, the Agreement, which put an end to the civil war
and provided the basis for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and throughout our region. That has been
and will continue to be our position.
Unilateral interpretations of the Agreement must
not be allowed, as that will jeopardize existing peace
and stability. At the same time, Serbian policy towards
its neighbours is clear — non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries. The people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina should freely decide upon their own
future without pressure or foreign interference. We are
explicitly against the imposition of solutions that are not
the result of consensus. We believe that such attempts
pose a threat to the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the region as a whole.
Serbia supports the ongoing dialogue to resolve all
outstanding issues within Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that key decisions relevant to its future are to be
taken following dialogue and agreement between the
entities and among the three constituent peoples. We
believe that that is the only way to find a solution that
is acceptable to all.
We are convinced that all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must unite their efforts and make a sincere
and consistent contribution to building mutual trust,
which will enable more efficient cooperation within
the joint institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Republic of Serbia is ready to assist in that process,
while reiterating its position that these are internal
issues of Bosnia Herzegovina.
I would like to take this opportunity to once
again confirm our commitment to peace, stability and
reconciliation. All victims of conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, regardless of their ethnicity, deserve
our respect, empathy and sincere condolences to their
families. Sadly, they cannot be brought back to life
but what we can and should do is restore confidence
in our future by condemning all crimes and bringing
perpetrators to justice. We must avoid the politicization
and misuse of this very painful issue and, in that

S/PV.9029

context, avoid attempts to revise solutions for peace
that have been reached thus far.
In principle, Serbia does not support the imposition
of sanctions as a way of resolving political crises.
In that context, we do not support any potential
sanctions against Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia
will not, in any way, impose sanctions on its people
or on representatives of Serbian people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska. Instead, Serbia
will continue to build trust by strengthening economic,
political, cultural and other forms of cooperation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that the Open
Balkan Initiative is an example of successful regional
cooperation and efforts to achieve common goals,
including European Union membership.
Serbia fully supports the activities within the
Berlin process and action plan for establishing the
regional market. The Open Balkan Initiative represents
a more focused way of putting those ideas into concrete
practice. The commitment of all Western Balkan
countries to establishing a common regional market
will greatly contribute to their stability, as well as to
regional stability and security, and is of vital interest to
all its citizens. We call on the international community
to support the Initiative, not only to help to preserve
peace and stability in the region, including in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also to build a more prosperous
future for the new generation of the Western Balkans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me to welcome High Representative Christian Schmidt.
Croatia remains committed to working closely with the
Office of the High Representative, as well as with the
stabilization force.
We again wish to stress the importance that Croatia
attaches to the territorial integrity, stability, functionality
and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on
the principles of equality and non-discrimination of
all citizens and constituent peoples, as enshrined in
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A stable
and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina plays a pivotal
role in the stability of the Western Balkans and, by
extension, that of Europe. The country should be
decisively progressing on its path to European Union
integration, while fully protecting and promoting
constitutional equality among its three constituent
peoples and effectively guaranteeing the rights of all

22-3457223/25

S/PV.9029

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

citizens. Croatia is firmly committed to helping Bosnia
and Herzegovina successfully engage the multitude
of tasks ahead, including bolstering the fight against
corruption, overcoming rule-of-law deficiencies,
strengthening the economy and, finally, resolving the
deep-rooted political issues that are obscuring the
entire political and socioeconomic landscape.
Internal political and institutional crisis in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is cause for great concern.
The paralysis of State institutions, political tensions
among the constituent peoples and general mistrust
are mirrored in the growing centralist and separatist
tendencies, thus endangering the regular and democratic
functioning of the State. The total lack of substantive
progress, coupled with the prevailing dysfunctionality
and the decreasing democratic standards, are matched
by the complete absence of political will to finalize the
electoral reform. All of that makes for an unsustainable
and unfavourable political environment.
For too long, ongoing violations of the principle
of equality among the constituent peoples have not
been appropriately addressed. The existing electoral
framework enables systemic electoral engineering
and, in particular, deprives Croats of Bosnia and
Herzegovina of their right to elect their legitimate
representatives. In its current form, electoral law
weakens and delegitimizes key State institutions and
negatively affects their functioning. To stop that decay
of democratic norms and allow for fair participation
in the electoral process and to ensure that its results
are legitimate, changes in the electoral law and limited
constitutional reform are urgently required.
It is imperative to implement the principle of
legitimate representation of constituent peoples and
ensure the full implementation in political institutions
of the principle of non-discrimination of all citizens.
The so-called “integrity package” mentioned in the
report of the Office of the High Representative (see
S/2022/374), however relevant, does not address the
crucial issues of equality and legitimate representation.
Disregarding those fundamental principles, enshrined
in the Constitution through the Dayton-Paris Peace
Agreement, as well as evidently obstructing their
full implementation, threatens the core of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would benefit from more
constitutionalism and less unitarism and separatism.
Ensuring just representation should be regarded as the
24/25

11/05/2022

building block for lasting stability and sustainability
in any country. We are deeply concerned about the
actions of some Bosniak political leaders who are
openly obstructing electoral reform and who abuse the
electoral process for political gains using a winnertakes-all mentality.
Elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina are due this
year. If another cycle mired with political crises is to
be avoided, consensus on electoral reform must be
reached swiftly and without further delay. That should
be done in accordance with the rulings of the European
Court of Human Rights and the relevant decisions of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially the Ljubić case. Croatia remains a steadfast
partner in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve
a better future for its citizens. We remain committed
to working with all the international actors that share
the same values-based goal and vision of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In order to continue improving the socioeconomic
conditions, Croatia is committed to working with Bosnia
and Herzegovina in further expanding the level of
cooperation, especially in the increasingly volatile global
trade and market circumstances, financial conditions
and supply disturbances. Besides having excellent trade
relations, both countries are implementing a number of
infrastructure connectivity projects.
We continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and we urge the relevant domestic political actors to
demonstrate courage and integrity in aspiring for the
well-being of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Schmidt
to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Schmidt: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the expressions of support in our efforts
to settle and solve the complicated situations and
challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would like to
underline that the country has a lot of opportunities. We
have to look to maintain the basic Dayton principles,
including ensuring the principle of the equality of the
three constituent peoples.
It is not that easy to incorporate that principle into
electoral law. I encourage all people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to understand that such an electoral law
comes close to the principle of democracy by finding
a reasonable compromise. Unfortunately, we have
not been able to do so. That is not the failure of the
22-34572

11/05/2022

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

international community, which should now, in the
eleventh hour, encourage the stakeholders to gather and
work on the electoral law — not to renegotiate. Indeed,
there are many shortcomings in the actual electoral law,
and they have been named here.
Secondly, I would like to underline that the
challenge of reconciliation is an emerging one. We
must learn to not focus exclusively on the past. Today I
heard some comments regarding decisions taken by my
predecessor, Mr. Inzko. To be very clear, the point at
issue, which nobody in the international community can
deny, is that we do not want any former war criminals,
who have been identified as such in international
courts, to be celebrated as heroes of the past.
On the other hand, my offer, which the Mexican
representative noted today, is to simply sit and
talk — not one about the other, but rather talk together.
It is clear to see that every people in this country and in
this region has had its share of suffering and victims.
We were recently given the opportunity to visit the
Jasenovac concentration camp in Donja Gradina, where
many Serbs lost their lives during the Second World
War. We must also take that into account. I encourage
and thank the United Nations, especially Ms. Nderitu,

S/PV.9029

United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, for its steady commitment. Ms. Nderitu
is very committed to this endeavour, like other
representatives of the United Nations. I would like to
underline that I am very thankful for all of the support.
It is very important to continue this work.
Finally, I already included in my next report an
observation about the role of women in politics and
society. We have very encouraging examples that the
younger generation — female and male politicians — are
very committed and are taking their responsibility
seriously. That includes the mayors of Sarajevo, Mostar
and Banja Luka, especially with regard to the issue of
reconciliation. This could be a significant contribution
to a better future in this country.
I am discharging my duties with the understanding
that my work should be finished and completed in
due time, as soon as possible. As long as it is not yet
done, we must commit to do all we can to make the
situation better.
The President: I thank Mr. Schmidt for the
comments and clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

22-3457225/25
