TWENTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 754) . . . . +. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................
Adoption of the agenda ......................................

Page
1
1
I

The situation in the Middle East:
fn) Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressedto the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11010);
(b,J Progress reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency
....................
Force (S/l 1056 and Add.1 and Add.l/Corr.l)

1

S/PV.1754

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuHy operative on that date.

SEVENTEENWUND ED AND FIFTY-FOURTHMEETING
eld in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Peter JANKOWITSCH

2 November

(Austria).

(b) Progress reports of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/11056 and Add.1 and
Add.llCorr.1)

f’resent:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table ill order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l754)
1. Adoption

1973, at 9.30 p.m.

of the agenda.
At the invitation of the I+csiden.?, Mr. A. E. AhdelMemid (Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A! AlJazzar (Syrian Arab Republic) took places at the Council
table.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1010);
(6) Progress reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Emergency Force (S/110.56 and
Add. 1 and Add. l/Corr. 1)

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with further decisions
taken at previous meetings, I propose also, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia and Zambia to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote. I shall ask them to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that they will be called upon to be seated
at the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

7’he lneeting was called to order at 9.55 p.m.
Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
As President of the Council my first
duty at this meeting is a very pleasant one, namely, to
express,
on behalf of every member of the Security
Council, 1 am sure, our deep appreciation to Sir Laurence
McIntyre,
who conducted our business as President of the
Security Council during the month of October. We all know
that it was a heavy month. The Council was, and still is,
faced with an international crisis of major proportions.
Inevitably, this was reflected in the debates in this chamber,
and we were thus very fortunate to have as President a
diplomat who maintained not only his own equanimity but
also the equanimity of the Council.

5. The PRESIDENT: With regard to our consideration of
the item on the agenda, I am authorized to make the
following statement:

2. I wish to reiterate, on behalf of the Council, our
feelings of gratitude to Sir Laurence McIntyre, whose
wisdom,
unfailing courtesy and patience helped US to get
through a very difficult month.

“1. The members of the Security Council met for
informal consultations on the morning of 1 November
1973 and heard a report from the Secretary-General on
the progress so far made in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 340 (1973).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Broody (Saudi
Arabia) took the place reserved for him at ihe side of the
@until chamber.

“United Nations Emergency Force (Security Council
resolution 340 (1973) of 25 October 1973): implementation-second
phase

Adoption of the agenda
“2. After a lengthy and detailed exchange of views it
was agreed that in regard to the next stage of implementation of resolution 340 (1973):

nze agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(01 Letter
dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United States of America to the
United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010);

“(a) The Secretary-General wiil immediately consult,
to begin with, Ghana (from the African regional group),
Indonesia and Nepal (from the Asian region group),
Panama and Peru (from the Latin American regional
1

,

-

Mr. President, in a spirit of compromise and in the absence
of anything better. We are conscious of the fact that the
formula we have just adopted is not the best in terms of
equity of representation of the geographic membership of
the Organization, the sovereign equality of the States
Members of the United Nations and the universality of the
purposes and principles of the Charter.

group), and Poland (from the Eastern European regional
group) and Canada (from the Western European and
other States group), the latter two with particular
responsibility for logistic support, with a view to dispatching contingents to the Middle East pursuant to
Security Council resolution 340 (1973). The SecretaryGeneral will dispatch troops to the area from these
countries as soon as the necessary consultations have been
completed. The Council members agreed that at least three
African countries are expected to send contingents to the
Middle East. The present decision of the Council is
intended to bring about a better geographical distribution
of the United Nations Emergency Force.

12. On the other hand, we want results and we want to
implement practical measures which will help vindicate the
Council’s powers and carry out its functions in relation to
the situation in the Middle East generally and in particular
in relation to the current cease-fire, which we want to
establish in the Middle East.

“(b) The Secretary-General will regularly report to the
Council on the results of his efforts undertaken pursuant
to subparagraph ful so that the question of balanced
geographical distribution in the Force can be reviewed.

13. Thus, taking into account the exigencies and the
requirements of the Charter, the imperatives of peace and
international security and the disposition of the members
of the Council, we have accepted the formula just adopted
by the Council in order to set in motion the second phase
of the implementation of Security Council 340 (1973).

“3. The above-mentioned agreement was reached by
members of the Council with the exception of the
People’s Republic of China which dissociates itself
from it .”

14. It is the hope of the non-aligned members of the
Council that, in implementing the subsequent phase or
phases of this exercise, due regard will be paid to the need
to involve as many Members of the Organization, through
their groups, as possible in a manner that will ensure
effectiveness while respecting the rights of all Members of
the Organization.

6. As I hear no objection, I assume that the Council
agrees.
7. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation jhz Chinese): In
our statement at the 1750th meeting of the Security
Council, of 25 October, the Chinese delegation pointed out
the following.

1.5. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me very briefly to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month of November.
I should like to assure you of my delegation’s full
co-operation in the execution of your difficult task, hiy
delegation would also like to express its special appreciation
to the outgoing President, Ambassador Sir Laurence
McIntyre, who led out deliberations with brilliant efii.
ciency through the very difficult month of October.

8. The dispatch of the so-called United Nations Emergency Force will turn sovereign Arab States in the Middle
East into an area under international control with infinite
evil consequences in its wake and will pave the way for
further international intervention in the Middle East with
the super-Powers as the behind-the-scenes bosses. The fierce
contention between the two super-Powers on the question
of the composition of the so-called Emergency Force
during the informal consultations in the past two days once
again testifies to the correctness of the aforesaid judgement
of the Chinese delegation,

16. My delegation would like to thank the Council for the
honour of being included among the countries which the
Secretary-General will consult with a view to dispatching
contingents for the United Nations Emergency Force. We
have conveyed our readiness to participate in UNEF if
requested and not objected to by the parties concerned. If
these conditions are fulfilled, Indonesia will consider it aa
honour to be able to contribute a contingent for UNEF. We
shall be ready to dispatch our contingent to the Middle Eas!
within a week after necessary consultations are completed.

9. It is now clear to all that what both of them are
concerned about is merely the right of their respective
military presence and that if they are not able to send in
their own forces directly, they try by all means to squeeze
in the forces which they can influence so as to exercise
indirect control. All pretexts are sheer hypocrisy. A
superpower which styles itself the friend and benefactor of
the Arab countries, while completely disregarding the
sovereignty of the Arab countries, has contended so hard
on the composition of the dispatch of the Emergency
Force. Does this not suffice to show its true intention?

17. We have been associated with similar United Nations
activities before, and we hope to be able to contribute
positively to the effective functioning of UNEF.
18. Mr. DE GLJIRINCAUD (France) (irztcrpretatiorr /?w
French): Mr. President, I shall not go at any length into
congratulations. I have already addressed them to loif
during our consultations, and in view of the urgency of tire
problem before us, I shall proceed immediately to some
comments which I should like to make.

10. Consequently, the Chinese delegation, as a matter of
course, cannot be a party to the agreement on the
composition of the so-called United Nations Emergency
Force.
11. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): My delegation, like those
of the other non-aligned members of the Council, has
accepted the consensus read out to the Council by you,

19. The French delegation is gratified that, after a lengthy
exchange of views, the Council has reached agreement on a
2

test tllat CaIl facilitate the work of the Secretary-C;eneral
atld encourage him to continue his efforts to set up the
bited
&tions Emergency Force.

mY appreciation for the work of Sir Laurence McIntyre,
those expressed by other representatives.

to

28. 1 should like to associate my delegation with the
request of the representative of France that in later stages
of the implementation of resolution 340 (1973) the off&s
made bY our fellow members of the European Community
to Participate in the Emergency Force should be taken fully
in consideration.

20. 1 understand that the text we have approved,
on which
WV flave Weed, represents a second phase of the implementath
Of the Emxgency Force and that new consultations
~$11 take Place, that new contacts will be established, as is
mntioIled
in ParagraPh 2 (b) of the text we have just
aPWov&
with a view to reviewing
the
question
of
W%raphical
distribution
among the component contingents to the Furce.

29. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Security Council has just
adopted a decision which represents a definite step forward
h the practical implementation of its resolution 340 (1973)
on the formation of contingents of the United Nations
Emergency Force in the Middle East. In the first place, the
Council, under whose guidance this United Nations action
in the Middle East is being taken in accordance with the
resOlUtiOn in question, has determined which countries
Members of the United Nations are to take part in the
second phase of the formation of the United Nations
Emergency Force, and secondly, the Council has strengthened and applied in practice the recognized principle, which
it had reaffirmed, of equitable geographical distribution in
the composition of the Force. In its decision, the Council
has aho officially reaffirmed the principle that to this end
countries should be drawn from every geographical region,
without any exception and without any discrimination
whatsoever. This is a very important decision of the
Council, and it is one which opens up a new page in the
work of the Council and in the history of the United
Nations.

21. At that time, I hope that room will be provided for
uther cantingents, for Europe of the Nine. A colltingent
fKm Europe of the Nine is already part of the Force-the
Irish cuntingent--and
several States of Europe
of the Nine
have offered t0 participate in the Force, in particular
13elgium and Italy.
21. 1 should simply like to recall this so that when the
the
WIIES the offers of these two countries, or one of
fh~~ al least, may be taken into consideration.
23. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish),
hit-. I’rcsident, may I warmly congratulate you on behalf of
the dclegatian of Panama and express to you our fervent
hope that under your skilful guidance during the month of
Nove~llbcr WC will make considerable progress in our efforts
40 give mankind a safer world in which to live. To the
csutgoing President, Sir Laurence McIntyre, may I express
Our appreciation for his accomplishments.
24. 011 behalf of my Government, I have the honour to
state that the armed forces of Panama, whose Commanderin-C’lkief is General of Brigade Omar Torrijos, accepts with
great ~>leasurc the task entrusted to it by the Security
C’uuncil
in selecting us to provide contingents for the
Lhrited Nations Emergency Force for the Middle East,
which was created under Council resolution 340 (1973).
TOW contingent to be sent by the Republic of Panama is
;1warc of the very delicate role entrusted to it, and its duties
arc to fulfil the task of helping to find the stable and lasting
IXZW.ZC that all of us desire for that important region of
the world.

30. Moreover, the decision has eliminated the artificial
barriers against the participation in Emergency Force of the
socialist States, as well as the non-aligned countries,
including African countries.
31. In addition, the Council’s decision provides that the
Secretary-General will regularly report to the Council on
progress in the formation of the Emergency Force, to
enable the Council to keep informed of the situation, since
this international measure within the framework of the
United Nations is being carried out under the guidance of
the Council. Under this provision, the Security Council Will
&O have an opportunity of examining and reviewing the
question of the application of equitable geographical
distribution of States in the Emergency Force, with a view,
naturally, to improving and perfecting it further.

35. ~%mamn is a peace-loving nation and we are heartfelt
bciicvers
in jtlst arrangements based on reason and the
purp~~ses
and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations ibnd 011 the tenets of international law. Our armed
forces consider it both an honour and a privilege to serve
1)~ cause of international understanding and co-operation.
the National Guard of Panama, aware of its obligations
towards
the nation and the international CommunitY, will, 1
;LIl~ sL,re, carry out with distinction the commitment that
WC lye assumed on behalf of all Panamanians.

32, On the other hand, these positive aspects of this
Council decision do not constitute full implementation of
the Charter of the United Nations, of the relevant Provisions of resolution 340 (1973) or of the guidingPrinciples
for the formation and functioning of the EmergencyForce
approved

by

the

Council

in

its

M.ohtiOn

341

(1973).

2(,. ~~~~ l express the warmest thanks, on behalf of mY
~~0verrln~ent,
to all members of the Council and States
hlembcrs
of the Orgdnization, for with this new gesture
tlley llavc ;igain pr.oved the faith and confidence that they
hrrvc in tllc foreign policy of the Panamanian nation.

Considerableefforts must still be madebY all membersof
the Council and by the Security Council as a whole to
ensurethat the execution of suchmeasures
bY the United
Nations conforms strictly with the Charter and with the
resolutionson the subjectadoptedby the Council.

MAITLAND
(United
Donald
27. Sir
bjr. I>resident, may I add my congratulations

33. Accordingly,
the Soviet delegationconsidersit essential to state h this connexion that its Positionof Principle

Kingdom):
to You, and
3

slander and attack one Power under the notorious two.
Power formula. I therefore believe that the sponsors of this
proposal and those who supported the proposal will duly
take into account the fact that the efforts of this critic and
of those whom he represents are directed towards ellsuring
that there should be no peace in the Middle East and that
the United Nations should take no part in strengthening
peace and defending justice in the interests of the victims of
aggression. This will surprise no one, and everyone will
understand that such a position is beneficial and useful to
the aggressor and those who support him, not to tile
majority of the members of the Council, not to those
non-alignedcountries which submitted the proposal that
hasnow beenadopted by the overwhelmingmajority of the
Council, with the exception of one of its members, ~110
prefersto do nothing to ensurethat the aggressorceasesitis
bloody businessin the Middle East and ceasesto aggravate
the international situation and create tension which threa.
tens the security not only of the Arab peoplesvictimised
by aggression,
but of the peoplesof the world.

with regard LOthese kinds of United Nations measures and
on the question of United Nations peace-keeping operations, including the financing of these operations, has been
explained on many occasions and is well known. At this
‘me, we again reaffirm this position in connexion with the
adoption of this resolution by the Council.
34. Special attention must also be drawn to the fact that
the United Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East,
including the new contingents of this Force, for the
formation of which the Council today took practical steps,
should be dispatched to the area as soon as possible. In this
connexion, it is essential to emphasize most particularly
that the United Nations Force should immediately take the
necessary steps to ensure that the troops of the parties are
withdrawn to the positions which they occupied at 1650
hours GMT on 22 October 1973. That is the most
important task of the United Nations Force.
35. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation considers it
necessary to draw attention to the urgent decision adopted
by the Council as a matter of paramount importance on 27
October this year, at a consultative meeting of members of
the Council. The substance of the decision is that, in
accordatlce with Council resolution 340 (1973), the
Secretary-General should give urgent and immediate orders
to the Commander of the United Nations Force in the
Middle East to propose to Israel that it should withdraw its
troops to the positions which they occupied at. 1650 hours
GMT on 22 October 1973. As we all know, the Secreta,-yGeneral dispatched that directive immediately, that very
day, in pursuance of the Security Council decision in
question, which was adopted unanimously, since not only
did no member of the Security Council voice any objection,
but not one of them expressed any contrary opinion, in any
form whatsoever. The Council is entitled to know what the
results of that measure have been and how its decision and
those orders by the Secretary-General to the Commander of
the United Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East
have been carried out. I believe that the Council is entitled
to expect a report on this important matter.

37. Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretatiou fr01a
S~anishJ:The delegationof Peruis very gratified at the step
forward that the Council hastaken in implementation ofits
resolution 340 (1973). We trust that that step will help
pavethe way to lastingpeacein the Middle East.
38. The Government of Peru is gratified at the oppor.
tunity given it in the decisionwe have just approved of
fulfilling one of the obligations imposedupon us by tltc
Charter. The armed forces of Peru will placeat the disposal
of the United Nations EmergencyForce their long-stattdiog
tradition of probity and their efforts, as well as their
technical experience, and will, I am sure, be equal to tile
delicatetask awaiting them.
39. Mr. SCALI (United Statesof America): My delegation
is deeply gratified that the Council has reachedagreemeal
on important steps to be taken in the implementatiortof
Security Council resolution 340 (1973). In the lengtllg
consultationsthat led to this result, my delegationhasheld
firmly to the view that our first responsibility has beento
create an effective United Nations Emergency Force. Or
course, my Government fully believes in a broadly bagd
geographicalrepresentationin the peace-keepingforce. But
I am confident that no memberwould disagreethat it nlusl
be consistent with the overriding importance of havingII
effective force.

36. As for the criticism levelled by one member of the
Council against the decision adopted by the Security
Council today, it comes as no surprise to anyone. Ele used
the hackneyed, out-worn, notorious two-Power formula,
and in doing so he naturally concentrated his attacks
against one Power, as is his wont. This has become ahabit of
his,
and, as we have already pointed out, it has become
second nature to him. But he is wide of the mark. The
redutiOn which the Council has just adopted is not a
reSOhtiOn
of two great Powers or one. We all know this,
and so does the critic. Accordingly, in speaking against this
resolution he is speaking against the position of the
majority of the members of the Council, representing the
non-aligned countries in the Security Council and constituting the majority. This is their collective opinion and proposal
on this question, which takes into account the desires of
the victims of aggression and is designed to protect the
victims of aggression and implement the Security Council
reSolUtiOn on the complete evacuation of the territories
seized by the aggressor from the countries subjected to
aggressive attack. This critic cannot find words to censure
aggression and the aggressor. His only business here is to

40. We must remember that we now enter the pllax oT
practical operations. We are dispatching the forces ul
severalnations into lines which only a few days ago wm
battlefields. Three armieshave fought in harsh con&cl ill
that area. The lines are tenuous and uncertairl in nun)
places. The situation remains tense and dangerous.TII?
unforeseencan easily happen. It is critically importnttt thal
we have an integrated, harmonious and impartial
furce
which can efficiently carry out its duties. To do lessis to
betray the trust of those countries which have generou$
offered their young men for this delicate arId dangerous
task. Wewish them well in their mission.
41. Our plan is perhapslessthan perfect. WCshalt ill fh
days aheadbe trying to improve it. For the present, we11n
4

take satisfaction that this Council has worked tirelessly and
constructively
to fulfil in this instance one of its highest
responsibilities
under the Charter-that of peace keeping.
We can only hope that our efforts will make possible a
further success: the creation of a just and durable peace in
the Middle East.

success in the elimination also of our second concern-that
is, that the Secretary-General, who is now authorized by
our decision, will take the measures necessary to speed up
the dispatching of the United Nations Emergency Force to
the area, to complete the composition of the forces and
then report to us about further measures for the final
composition of the Force.

42. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all welcome you to the presidential chair and
thank you and other members of the Council for the kind
wards addressed to me.

48. I cannot end my intervention this evening without
expressing my hope that this will be just the first step
towards the final goal put forward in the resolutions the
Council has adopted in the last 10 days: not only the
establishment of the cease-fire but the establishment of the
cease-fire on the lines of 22 October; not only the
supervision of such a cease-fire on the lines of 22 October,
but a step towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. I express my hope that with the decision we have
taken this evening that final goal will be achieved.

43. My delegation is glad to join in agreement tonight on
this fourth step in the process of setting up ‘a United
Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East beginning, as
we did, with our adoption of resolution 340 (1973),
following it with our authorization to the Secretary-General
of 2.5 October to take interim measures to establish the
beginnings of the Emergency Force on the ground in the
hdiddle East and following that with our approval of the
Secretary-General’s
report [S/l1052/Rev.1]
setting forth
the mandate of the Force.

49. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I did not particularly
wish to speak tonight because, as I have said before and say
now, the greatest need is to take action. However, since
most of the members of the Council have spoken, and since
we have taken a decision, I think we can relax and perhaps
make a few comments.

44. We have taken a little time to reach agreement on the
fourth step, but by agreeing on this further measure, this
further consensus, tonight, we have, I think, kept up the
momentum which all of us agree it is essential to maintain
towards establishment of this Force in the Middle East in
the quickest possible time and at the necessary strength. I
think we can all take satisfaction from the fact that we have
moved forward to this point. It will not be the last point.
There will be further steps to be taken, but my delegation is
happy that we have been able to take the process as far as
we have tonight.

50. My first comment, of course, is to offer you,
Mr. President, our congratulations and our good wishes for
your presidency during the month of November.
51. Secondly, I should like also to offer our thanks and
appreciation to Sir Laurence McIntyre for his tireless
devotion to our work last month.
52. My third comment would be one of apology. I
apologize most sincerely to all members of the Council, to
all members of the various delegations represented around
this table and many others besides, to the public and to the
press, for the incredible hardships and difficulties we have
imposed on them. Sometimes without food, without drink,
without sleep, we have worked, but I should like to think
that all this has been worth while. But in trying to achieve
the kind of decision we adopted today, our main purpose
was not to worry about comforts, not to worry about
compliments and apologies, but to strengthen the hands of
the Secretary-General to establish a Force which could
easily be sent to the Middle East for the task we have
already entrusted
to him in resolution 340 (1973),
339 (1973) and 338 (1973).

45. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, during our
informal consultations I have already had the opportunity
to congratulate you and to express my deep appreciation to
Sir Laurence McIntyre, our President for the month of
October, so I shall not repeat what I said on that occasion.
46. I am speaking to express the satisfaction of my
delegation with the decision just adopted by the Council.
During our consultations we and other non-aligned members of the Council expressed concern regarding implementation
of resolutions
338 (1973),
339 (1973)
and
340 (1973), which call not only for a cease-fire but also for
a return to the lines of 22 October. We were also concerned
that there should be speedy action, as envisaged in
resolution
340 (1973), to dispatch the United Nations
forces to the area as soon as possible. We then tried in the
consultations
to remove all artificial barriers and obstacles
in the way of the composition of the United Nations
Emergency
Force which,
according to resolution
340 (1973) and the report of the Secretaly-General, was to
be established on the principle of equitable geographical
distribution.
No conditions were laid down for the composition
of the Force other than those contained in
resolution 340 (1973) excluding the permanent members of
the Security Council.

53. We all realize that this is the second phase of our task
Our greatest ambition, if you want to put it that way, is not
only that should peace prevail in the Middle East but that it
should be brought about on principles of justice and equity,
on principles of fair play and practical sense, on principles
of the equality of the nations in the area. We hope that this
particular measure that we have adopted today will help
attain all these various objectives.
54. As far as the geographical distribution of the Force is
concerned, as has been pointed out by Sir Laurence
McIntyre and by the representative of Yugoslavia, we are
proceeding very slowly but very surely, and I am quite sure
that, given goodwill on all sides, we shall succeed in making

47. I am particularly glad that some of those artificial
barriers and obstacles have been removed by adoption of
this decision. I express my hope that there will be some
5

--

_/

59. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I could not fail to take note 0f
a comment made by one member of the Council who spoke
at today’s meeting to the effect that the cease-fire line is,
allegedly, difficult to determine. It may not be easy, but it
is essential to determine this line, and that is the task of the
United Nations Emergency Force.

UNEF a really practical, effective international force. In
this, of course there are many hesitations, many difficulties,
many reservations, but none the less the fact that the great
Powers are for a change co-operating in a way which we
consider healthy is to be weIcomed. Whether or not the
Soviet Union did co-operate in some other peace-keeping
operations is, to my mind, irrelevant. The fact is that on
this specific problem it is prepared to co-operate with the
United States and many others to establish this Force. So
we should not do anything that would come in the way of
this co-operation. This is an important point. So let us not
be slaves to our past but look forward to the future, and
any reasonable, fair solution which could be brought about
by our efforts should be welcome not only to the
non-aligned countries but, I believe, to all Members of the
United Nations.

60. References to the difficulty of determining the ceasefire line benefit only the aggressor. They cover up his
unwillingness to implement the Council’s decision, and
when one or another member of the Council advances such
a proposition, this is not directed towards the implementation of the Council resolution on a cease-fire and on the
withdrawal of the troops of both parties to the line existing
at the moment of the cease-fire. As we all know from the
press, there was recently a case where an official, a colonel
in the United Nations Force in the Middle East, made a
statement to the effect that the task of the troops In the
area was to entrench themselves on the lines where they
were situated, and not to think of the cease-fire lines
prevailing on 22 October. According to today’s report in
The New York Times, this officer was dismissed by the
Secretary-General for making such a statement. The
Secretary-General acted quite rightly, since that kind of
statement by an official representative of the United
Nations not only undermines the decision of the Security
Council, but helps the aggressor to cover up his unwil.
lingness to implement the Council resolution. In this
connexion, it will suffice to draw attention to the speed
with which Golda Meir, the Prime Minister of Israel, made
the most of this unfortunate or, perhaps, deliberate
statement-it is hard to say which-by
a colonel in the
United Nations Force. According to a UP1 report, she said:
“We cannot withdraw to a line when even a spokesman
from the United Nations in Cairo said the other day he does
not know where it /the line/ is.“1 That shows who benefits
from such a statement by an official representative of the
United Nations. Such statements are even greater benefit to
the aggressor and Mrs. Golda Meir when they are made in
the Council by a member of the Council who voted for the
Council’s
resolution on the cease-fire and on the corn.
pulsory withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops to the 22
October line.

55. Moreover, I should say that, in the practical application in the field of the United Nations Force and
machinery, the Secretary-General has enough discretion to
arrange the disposition of men and materiel in such a way
that many of the difficulties which arose in 48 hours of
continuous discussion will be eliminated. I am sure that,
with military help and military advice, the SecretaryGeneral will avoid such complications as may arise because
of the long history of the Middle East and the various
attitudes of the countries and States in relation to that
problem.
56. Lastly, I hope that gradually the African countries,
which are, after all, the nearest neighbours of Egypt and
Israel, will contribute in large measure to the success of this
Force.
57. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): On instructions from my
Government I should like to put on the record of the
Council the following statement issued from State House in
Mombasa by the President of Kenya, His Excellency Mzee
Jomo Kenyatta:
“Occupation of land by force of arms is not only
against the United Nations Charter, but also against the
national principles of Kenya. Therefore, as long as Israel
continues to occupy Arab land taken by force of arms,
Kenya has decided not to maintain diplomatic relations
with Israel. We believe that this action will accelerate the
implementation of the Security Council resolutiona”

61. The Soviet delegation cannot but draw attention to
this fact and remind the Council once again that, in
addition to the decisions adopted by the Council on the
cease-fire and on the withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops to
the 22 October line, the Council, at the proposal of the
Soviet delegation, reaffirmed its decision on the matter on
27 October and instructed the Secretary-General to send an
urgent cable to the Commander of the United Nations
Force in the Middle East, directing him to request from the
Israeli side that it should withdraw the Israeli troops to the
22 October line, in accordance with the Council’s decisions
and in implementation of those decisions.

58. Mr. HLJANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
Just now Mr. Malik once again attempted to use his
worn-out language to distort the principled position taken
by the Chinese delegation and to sow discord in the
relations between China and the non-aligned countries. This
is completely futile. Numerous countries of the third world,
including the many nonaligned countries, can see very
clearly how the Soviet Union and the other super-Power
have utilized the temporary difficulties of the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples, selling out their interests and
vehemently contending for spheres of influence. The recent
ugly performance of contention between the two on the
question of the composition of UNEF is a fact known to
all. Your vicious intentions are very clear. These facts
cannot be covered up by any means.

62. The Soviet delegation considered it advisable to bring
this fact to the special attention of the Security Council.
1 Quoted in English by the speaker.
6

..-”

63. As for the reply of that critic who is such a poor
marksman, it is so hackneyed that the delegation of the
Soviet Union does not consider it necessary to take any
notice of it. We repeat, this has become a habit of his, it has
become second nature, and no explanations can be of any
help to this critic.

my understanding relates both to the Egyptian and Syrian
fronts, would be forthcoming shortly. Since that time the
Force Commander has continued to make efforts to ensure
that the official reaction of Israel to his request is received
as soon as possible.
69. I was informed by General Siilasvuo on 2 November,
that is today, that General Dayan’s reply was not expected
before the Prime Minister’s return from Washington.

64. The PRESIDENT: As no other member of the Council
wishes to speak at this point, I shall call on the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.

70. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the Council
wishes to speak at this stage, I shall call on the representative of Israel.

65. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I appreciate the agreement reached by the Council on the second phase of the
United Nations Emergency Force. I shall immediately take
the necessary steps to implement it.

71. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I should like to
offer you my delegation’s felicitations on the assumption of
your high office and to wish you success in guiding the
deliberations of the Security Council.

66. It will be recalled that in its informal meeting of
Saturday, 27 October, before the adoption of the resolution of the Council approving the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the setting up of IJNEF, the members of the
Council
requested me to instruct the interim Force Commander immediately to request the commander of the
Israel armed forces to return his troops to positions
occupied by them at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October 1973.
The following
is the text of the cable I immediately
dispatched to the Force Commander:

72. When Egypt and Syria launched their aggression on
6 October, the Security Council took no action to stop
their renewed bloodshed. When, on the initiative of the
United States, the Council was convened in the evening of
8 October, after almost three days of sanguinary fighting, it
took no decision to call for an end to the hostilities. The
Council remained silent when Israeli towns and hamlets
were bombarded by deadly missiles. It appeared unconcerned when innocent Jewish villagers were being strafed
and murdered by Syrian aircraft. When Egyptian and Syrian
military forces, joined by the armies of eight other Arab
States, continued to kill and to deal one blow after another
to peace, to world security, to the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council remained passive and seemed uninterested.

“Security Council in informal meeting on 27 October,
in accordance with its resolution 340 (1973), requested
me to instruct
Commander immediately to request
commander of Israel armed forces to return his troops to
positions occupied by them at 1650 hours GMT on 22
October 1973.
“In subsequent discussion, Council made it clear that
authority
to do so was already given through adoption of
resolutions 338 (1973), 339 (1973) and 340 (1973).”

73. It was only after two weeks, when Israel had decisively
repelled the Arab armies and thwarted their destructive
designs, that the supporters and accomplices of Arab
aggression in the Security Council sprang to action. It was
only
on 21 October, when the forces of aggression were on
the verge of collapse, that there was suddenly dynamism
and agility in the Council to save them, if necessary by a
cease-fire. This has continued ever since.

67. My report on the establishment of UNEF, which
includes the terms of reference of the Force, was cabled to
the Force Commander immediately it became available on
26 October,
and the revised version and the Security
Council resolution approving it was transmitted to the
Commander
on 27 October. I have kept the Council
informed of the initial measures taken to deploy the Force
and to undertake the urgent tasks required of it, especially
in relation to the Suez area.

74. Israel did not start the war; Israel did not want the
war; it accepted the cease-fire resolution 338 (1973) of 22
October 1973. The efforts to save the aggressor, to assist
him, to comfort him, did not stop, however. It was not
enough that Israel’s counter-thrust in self-defence against
Egypt and Syria cease. The Security Council was called into
special meetings to deliver the defeated Egyptian forces
from encirclement. Then a campaign was mounted, and the
Security Council was once more activated to supply those
forces with provisions.. To crown this solicitude for the fate
of those who have made mockery of the United Nations
and spread death and devastation in the area, a special
emergency force was quickly brought into being at the
frantic behest of Egypt and Syria.

68. The Force Commander, having taken these first
measures to establish and deploy the Force and having had
extensive consultations with the Egyptian military authorities, flew to Tel Aviv to meet with General Dayan on 29
and 30 October. The purpose of these meetings was to hold
preliminary
talks concerning the terms of reference of the
Force and the best method of implementing them. In a
meeting on the morning of 30 October, the Force Corn
mander informed General Dayan that, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 340 (1973) he had been instructed to
request -that Israeli armed forces return to positions
occupied by them at. 1650 hours GMT on 22 October.
General
Dayan could not give an official reply, but
undertook
to see the Prime Minister on the afternoon of 30
October to convey the Force Commander’s request. It was
understood
that the official answer to this request, which in

75. Never in history has there been such a spectacle of
concern for those who have displayed no concern whatever
for the world, its hopes and prayers. Never have humanitarian values been so sacrilegiously invoked in the service of
those who have trampled all humanitarian principles into
7

81. The PRESIDENT:

dust. With all its failings and one-sided attitudes, never
before has the United Nations been used to give such solace
and protection to the aggressor, to the violator of the
Charter, to the transgressor of law and morality.

I call on the representative

of

J5wA.
82. Mr. ABDEL-MEGUID
(interpretation from Frencll):
Mr. President, it is with special pleasure that I tender to you
my most sincere congratulations on your assuming the
onerous burden of the presidency of the Security Council, I
am convinced that you will fulfil your duties with all the
skill, tact and ability that we know you possess and that we
appreciate, I can assure you that, in turn, you may count
on us fully.

76. Today, an urgent night meeting has been convened to
discuss the organizational aspects of the Emergency Force,
questions of logistics and composition and notions such as
geographical representation. At the same time, a vital
humanitarian problem created by the Yom Kippur aggression remains unresolved. Even as we sit here to consider
questions which could have been attended to by the
Secretary-General, young men are lingering on in prisonerof-war camps, their families torn between hope and
anguish, their captors making mockery of elementary
precepts of humanity and of the obligations emanating
from the Geneva Convention.

83. Our thanks are addressed also to the representative of
Australia, Sir Laurence McIntyre, who, during his presidency last month, worked indefatigably to discharge his
duties during a very serious period in international affairs,
He successfully conducted the business of the Council, and
for this we are grateful.

77. We have repeatedly drawn the Security Council’s
attention to this inhumane conduct. On 29 October, I
dispatched to the Secretary-General a second letter in five
days on this grave probiem.

84. My delegation believes that this is no longer the time
for words, but for action, and we await this action on tile
part of Israel. An obligation rests on Israef in accordance
with Security Council resolution 340 (1973). The repn.
sentative of Israel, instead of launching into a diatribe
against Egypt and Syria, drawing on his well-known
vocabulary of insults and distortion, would have been
better advised to state that his country is going to carry out
its international commitments.

[The speaker read out the text of the letter contained in
document S/l 1060.]
78, Egypt and especially Syria have defied repeated
requests by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
They have turned a deaf ear to appeals by Governments and
international organizations. Here in the United Nations,
they have responded only with vituperation and calumny
and tried to confuse and to conceal their guilt by the usual
outbursts of fabricated allegations and irrelevant claims. NO
falsehoods regarding Israel’s observance of humanitarian
rules, no distortions of Israeli attitudes, no baseless and
absurd accusations such as those contained in the Syrian
and Egyptian letters circulated today can veil the stark,
incontrovertible fact of Syria’s and Egypt’s violations of
their obligations in respect of prisoners of war.

85. In resolution 340 (1973) the Council demands “that
immediate and complete cease-fire be observed and that the
parties return to the positions occupied by them at 1650
hours GMT on 22 October 1973”.
86. Is the representative of Israel unaware of his country’s
isolation from the international community? We have just
heard the statement of the representative of Kenya, and in
recent daysthe number of African States that have broke11
diplomatic relations with Israel hascontinued to increase.
Doesthat meannothing to the representative of Israel?If
he doesnot understand, it is becausehe and his Govemment are stubbornly arrogant, asthey have been for years.
And this, in my delegation’sview, bodes no good for the
future.

79. As long as Syria and Egypt do not fulfil their
humanitarian duties towards military prisoners who are in
their power, as long as Syria and Egypt do not abide by
their international undertakings regarding prisoners of war,
they will remain stigmatized in the eyes of civilized
mankind. This is the problem which requires the most
urgent attention. Is the shedding of blood on the battlefield
not tragic enough? Can Governments be permitted to
repudiate their obligations towards unarmed, defenceless
prisoners of war? Can disregard for the wounded be
tolerated? Can any pretext be accepted for such behaviour? Can mankind allow that law and morality be
discarded and replaced by cynical propaganda, by borrowed
slogans, by partisan views, by one-sided formulations which
bring havoc to basic values, subvert rights and ignore the
real problems? What import should be attached to another
discussion in the Security Council, to another decision on
the technicalities of supervising the cease-fire, if fundamental, elementary humanitarian rules and obligations
continue to be violated?

87. The United Nations and aboveall the Security Council
are endeavouringto establisha just and lasting peacein the
region. It is not Egypt that is raisingobstacles,but Israel;
and it is Israel that must suffer the consequencesof its
actions. The international community cannot remail1
passivein the face of theseconstant acts of aggression
on
the part of Israel. The most recent one is described by nlg
delegationin a letter dated 1 November 1973 [S/11068/,
which mentionsthe latest violations committed by Israel
againstthe civilian populations of the villages of Goneifa.
Fayed, Kebrit, Abu Sultan, Ein Ussimand Serapium.Israeli
forces arrested600 civilians and interned them in a campal
Abu Sultan. They fired at the livestock in that whole area;
they destroyed the shoppingcentres in Faycd and Fanan.

80. Right now, it is this problem, the problem of prisoners
of war, that is the central issue. Its swift solution in
accordance with the Geneva Convention is a crucial test for
the future.

88. As wesay in that letter:
“We have informed the Commander of the United
Nations Emergency Force in the area and requestedfhL
8

tories will give Israel an assured opportunity to consolidate
its hold over them; and whereas Israel is the client of the
United States, or vice versa, in the Middle East, there will
continue to be turmoil in that region. If you note that the
super-Powers shy away from what may lead to military
confrontation, the critical situation in the Middle East will
be frozen but the dangers will remain.

release and return of the civilians expelled or captured
civilians.
“The Israeli forces are still cutting the water supplies
from the city of Suez.
“This confirms once more the persistence of Israel in
violating its obligations under the fourth Geneva Convention . . .”

96. What is the alternative? There is no alternative except
to wait until the people of the United States get tired of
footing the bill to UNEF and of the massive United States
aid to Israel-at their expense, at the expense of the United
States taxpayer. Then, and only then, will the leaders of
Israel come to their senses and may agree to haul down the
flag of Israel and let the Jews in the Middle East live in
peace with the Palestinians as brothers under a common
flag. Otherwise, the future is indeed grim, as was rightly
mentioned by our colleague, Ambassador Huang of China,
since the policies of the super-Powers are still based on
power politics and spheres of influence and such policies
may precipitate another conflict which could plunge the
whole world into the abyss of destruction”

89. As far as Egypt is concerned, we are still in favour of a
just peace. We have declared our acceptance of resolutions
338 (1973), 339 (1973) and 340 (1973) of the Security
Council. My delegation takes note with satisfaction of the
constructive action of the Security Council to put an end to
the aggression of the Israeli forces against a Member State
of the United Nations. Regarding the lamentations that the
Council had just heard-and not for the first time
-concerning
the action decided upon by the Council, they
are exactly the same as those of all guilty people after they
have heard the verdict of the judge.
90. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on my list of
speakers is that of the representative of Saudi Arabia,
whom I now invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

97. Now I have some remarks in regard to what
Mr. Tekoah said before my colleague from Egypt took the
floor to answer him. Mr. Tekoah used harsh words. He said
that the Arabs were the violators of the Charter. Remember
that the Charter was signed in 1945, two years before the
partition of Palestine and three years before Israel was
declared a State. What did the Charter indicate in paragraph 2 of Article 1, which we should know by heart at this
time. But in order to refresh the memory of every one of
us, I shall read out slowly what it states:

91. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I shall
take issue with you for having deferred my turn to
speak. The hour is late. Your are new in your post here.
With all due respect to the country from which you come, I
think that you should have followed usual practice. But I
do not want to quarrel and dissipate the issue. But
remember, Presidents of the Council, that it is not Baroody,
but a representative of a State, a sovereign State Member of
the United Nations. I inscribed my name after that of the
representative of Israel, but I was not called upon until
now..
Never mind; you are forgiven.
not

“2. To develop friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples, and to take other appropriate
measures to strengthen universal peace;“.

92. Notwithstanding
the lengthy consultations which
resulted in the decision which you read out, Sir, regarding
the selected nationalities of the contingents that will
constitute the United Nations Emergency Force, may I, as
someone who hails from the Middle East, be frank and tell
you
that it is most unlikely that UNEF will vacate its posts
within six months, a year or possibly several years.

I saw with my own eyes the signing of the Charter by 50
States.
98. And what happened? Two years later the selfdetermination of the indigenous people of Palestine99. Mr. President, will you please once and for all stop
Mr. Tekoah from interrupting me. He can exercise his right
of reply.

93. Israel is still in-gathering Jews from the Soviet Union
and other parts of the world and needs more living space
for these immigrants, Only this morning I read dispatches
that, notwithstanding
the policy of Austria, many Soviet
emigrants of the Jew&h faith are streaming into Austria on
their way to Israel.

100. The right of self-determination of the indigenous
people of Palestine in 1947 was cast by the wayside. Leave
aside 1919 or 1923 when the indigenous people of Palestine
constituted 94 per cent of the population of Palestine. I am
now talking of 1945. The indigenous people of Palestine
were more than two thirds of the population of Palestine;
and sovereignty lies in the people, not in the machinations
of the then great Powers, and in particular the United
States, in whose lap, indiiectly, the United Kingdom threw
the question of Palestine. The Charter was violated, not by
Mr. Tekoah then, but by the United States which sponsored
partition. So let Mr. Tekoah beware when he uses the words
“violators of the Charter”, attributing the violations to the
Arabs.

94. The nationalities of UNEF are not the crux of the
matter
and should not have called for such lengthy
bargaining between the super-Powers. Israel and the Arab
States are poles apart in regard to Jerusalem-I repeat, if
not on behalf of the Arab world, on behalf of Saudi Arabia,
to Jerusalem-and
the restitution of the right of selfdetermination
of the Palestine people. Leave aside, Israeli
occupation of territories of three neighbouring Arab States.
95. Furthermore,
since Israel’s policy is predicated on
expansion, the presence of UNEF in the occupied terri9

I

I

have it, if we do not bum the oil-because there is some to
that effect, the Americans tell me.

101. When we, the Arabs, in 1947 requested that no hasty
action be taken and that the problem be referred to the
International Court of Justice, we were stymied. What was
the International Court of Justice for? It was to look into
the right of self-determination, as stated in the Covenants
of the League of Nations as well as in the Charter of the
United Nations. And what did the major Powers do, and
more particularly the United States and the United Kingdom? They wowId not let the case go to the International
Court of Justice.

108, If that man does not behave, somebody must make
him behave. AS I talk, you see, he mumbles. I know Inany
Jews who are polite. I do not know what happened to Km,
109. The PRESIDENT:

Order, please.

110. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Now you spoke,
Mr. President. The Sphinx finally spoke, Thank you for
asking for order.

102. And today, this morning, in the General Assembly
hall, those who voted “no” against Guinea-Bissau began to
talk about international law, and they cast by the wayside
the right of self-determination of the people of GuineaB&au. Whom do they think they are fooling? The United
States supported Portugal, for whose people we have a great
deal of sympathy because they themselves are victims of
Portuguese colonialism. A Congressman of theirs, a legislator, or whoever it was, said that there were juridical
problems-I
am paraphrasing-and infractions of international law. Rationalizations.

111. If Mr. Tekoah’s intention is to break the thread of
my thought, I can produce other threads to refute his
distortions.
112. At one time everybody knew that Israel was the pet
of the United Nations. NOW, Israel’s representative &al.
lenges the United Nations and attributes to it so-called
injustices. He makes a mockery of the United Nations. But
it is by virtue of the United Nations that he is sitting there,
by the perfidy of certain Powers that were fishing for votes
and others that were under the pressure of the international
Zionists, and now he takes issue with the United Nations
whenever he considers that the vote is not in favour of the
usurping State he represents. Law and morality. He talks of
law and morality. By what law and what morality do you
wrest a country through Balfour’s perfidious Declaration?
You have the right to talk about morality when you started
terrorism and bloodshed in the Holy Land? I think
Mr. Tekoah should go back to the facts of the 1920s and
1930s and then I am sure he would not be loose-tongued
about morality.

103. When it suits them, they do not consult the
International Court of Justice, And they have sold the
indigenous people of Palestine first down the Thames, and
then down the Potomac in Washington. Challenge me, my
good friend Mr. Bennett. Challenge what I said and go to
the records of 1947 when I used to uncover some of the
nefarious policies with regard to that question. An Ambassador of yours and an Ambassador of the United Kingdom,
in 1949 and later, wanted to see the Foreign Minister, and
as usual, the Foreign Minister would ask, on what subject?
The Foreign Minister at that time was Prince Faisal, the
present King. And then there was the attitude of your
representatives in the United Nations towards the United
States and the United Kingdom, and twice His Majesty
refused to see your representatives.

113. And, God is my witness, we Arabs do not want to
hurt the Jews as such. What we are doing here is defending
ourselves from an alien element in the body social and the
body politic of the Arab world. It is an alien culture, It is an
alien way of life. It is not because they are Jews. They
could have been Moslems, they could have been Christians,
they could have been atheists, they could have been of any
religion or political persuasion. For heaven’s sake, please
note that these Khazars are a foreign element. They played
on the sentiment of even our Sephardic Jews and in.
gat,hered them there. They discriminate against them. They
almost call them “Arab Jews”.

104. You used all kinds of tricks to stifle the voice of
reason and of truth. You voted for Portugal because it gave
you bases to trans-ship lethal weapons to Israel, to crush
the Arabs in their homeland.
105. Mr. Tekoah referred to the prisoners of war, and I for
one sympathize with all prisoners of war, be they Jews or
gentiles, because after all they are the people who suffer.
Prisoners of war usually return after negotiations by the
two parties in the conflict. It could be a month, it could be
two months; anyway, ultimately they return. But what
about the million or million and a half Palestinian refugees
living on seven cents a day, less than the price of a
newspaper in New York City or “Jew York”. What about
those who are in camps, a million of them’? They do not
count!
They are but a handful compared with the
prisoners of war!

114. One last word for the benefit of Mr. Tekoah, for his
diatribes against the Arabs. Our Semitic people have been in
the region for 6,000 years. These Khazars began to flock
into the Middle East in the last 50 years. And the State
that was the torch-bearer of democracy at one time, none
other than the United States, espoused the cause of the
usurper.. The United States is hardly 200 years old; we are
6,000 years old, my good friend Mr. Bennett, and if you
pursue that policy I, as someone who is descended from an
ancient people, can tell you that we have seen many
empires, we have seen many imperialists get drunk with
power-and where are they now? They tottered, and fell
down, and you read about them in history books. You and
I, my good friend Mr Bennett, representative of the United
States-and if it were Mr. Scali sitting there I would address
him-beware. We are not eternal You and I may fade out
of the picture, for man’s life is limited, and I guess you are
approaching your sixties. Your successors will get tired of

106. Mr. Tekoah is impertinent, impolite, but I will not
say more than that. Mr. Tekoah has lost his nerve.
107. Where is your gavel, Mr. President? Are you that
afraid of the international Jewish bankers, that they will
throttle Austria? We will lend you some money, if we still
10

being bled by those who have permeated your legislature,
your government, in order to chastise us. What have we
done to you, my good friend Mr. Bennett? What have we
done to your country? From a distance of 6,000 miles you
come and support those Khazars and make them your
agents. Or are you their agents? Have we trespassedagainst
you? Tell us.

115. Ah, the Soviet Union may have interests in the
region. The Soviet Union may have qualms about your
presence there, but we address you because you were the
ones who kept aiding the Zionists, to our detriment. God is
great. He will chastise the evil-doers.
The meeting rose at 11.50 p.m.

i

11

WOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite I Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Genevn.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Lnformez-vous
aupres de votre libreire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes. New York ou GenL:ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicnciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section do Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vcnta en iibrerias
a su librero
o dirijase

in other

currencies)

y casss distriR: Nnciones

73-82001

-August

1979-2,200

i
