S/PV.9083

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9083rd meeting

Wednesday, 29 June 2022, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Mibissa
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40538 (E)
*2240538*

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and
Mr. Omar Alshogre, Syrian Emergency Task Force.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Last week, the Secretary-General
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths briefed the
Security Council on the very grave humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.9068). As they underlined,
the three prongs of the framework of resolution
2585 (2021) — crossline, cross-border, and early
recovery — have been absolutely essential to bringing
life-saving and life-sustaining humanitarian assistance
to all parts of Syria during the past extremely difficult
year for the Syrian people. With humanitarian needs
growing and civilians in desperate need, it is essential
for the Council to renew this framework for an
additional 12 months.
As the Secretary-General has stated, that is a
moral imperative. And, at a time of global turmoil, the
Council’s unity on humanitarian issues in Syria would
also signal that the main stakeholders in this conflict
can firewall key aspects of the Syria issue from their
differences elsewhere in the world and cooperate.
It would be a kernel of the constructive diplomacy
on Syria that I have long called for, and it would be
absolutely essential, if we are to move along the path
of implementing my mandate as set forth in resolution
2254 (2015). Indeed, a political settlement of the
conflict is the only sustainable way to end the suffering
of the Syrian people.
To focus on a political way forward, it is vital that
tensions and the dangers of military escalation are
2/19

29/06/2022

contained. In a number of flashpoints, we are seeing
ongoing and even increasing violence. Afrin and
the north-east are seeing a significant escalation in
hostilities, with clashes and drone strikes, exchanges
of fire and recent statements by Türkiye about a
new military operation. As the Secretary-General’s
spokesperson stressed, Syria does not need more
military operations but, rather, a political solution and
more humanitarian assistance.
The north-west has seen exchanges of rocket fire
and reports of pro-Government air strikes pick up
again, along with a United States strike on Al-Qaida
affiliate Hurras Al-Din and infighting among armed
opposition groups in Afrin and northern Aleppo.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
other listed terrorist groups continue to launch attacks
and claimed responsibility for killing Syrian army
soldiers this month. Killings and violence attributed to
ISIL continue in Al-Hol camp, where conditions remain
dire, underlining the need for progress on repatriations.
The south-west has seen multiple security incidents.
This month also saw reports of Russian air strikes near
Al-Tanf on an armed opposition group partnered with
the United States. Meanwhile, strikes attributed to
Israel appear to be increasing in scale and scope. Let
me echo the Secretary-General’s concern, as expressed
by his spokesperson, about the reported strikes on
Damascus international airport on 10 June.
Let me remind the Council of the firm position
of the United Nations that directing attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure is strictly
prohibited under international humanitarian law. Let
me also remind the Council of the firm position of the
United Nations on respect for Syria’s sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and independence. Let me note also
that there is a risk that a miscalculated move in any of
those flashpoints could lead to a broader conflict in a
volatile situation.
As we have seen time and again, conflict can
escalate fast in Syria. If it does, mass civilian
displacement and suffering are sure to follow, with the
potential for wider regional instability. That is why we
are concerned by the violence across all of Syria’s fault
lines and any intention to carry out new operations. That
is why we reiterate our call for a nationwide ceasefire,
a cooperative approach to countering listed terrorist
groups and a focus on supporting the political process.
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Let us also not forget the acute economic crisis in
Syria resulting from more than a decade of war and
conflict, corruption, mismanagement, the Lebanese
financial crisis, the coronavirus disease, sanctions
and, now, the war in Ukraine. Earlier this month, the
World Bank reported that Syrian economic activity had
halved in size between 2010 and 2019, and we know
for sure that the situation has not improved since then.
The Bank warned that that economic crisis may lead to
increased social unrest in Syria.
Let us also not forget that creating conditions for
safe, voluntary and dignified refugee returns is a core
element of resolution 2254 (2015). A recent survey by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees of Syrian refugees’ perceptions and
intentions found that 92.8 per cent of refugees living in
Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq do not intend to return
to Syria within the next 12 months. Given the causes
cited by refugees themselves, a wide range of actions
would be required to create such conditions, addressing
the many obstacles to returns in terms of the security
situation, livelihoods, basic services, housing, military
service and protection.
In the light of realities such as those, I have long
been proposing that we work, step for step, on a series
of confidence-building measures to deal with many of
the most immediate concerns of the Syrian people and
advance towards a safe, calm and neutral environment
and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). I
have continued bilateral engagements with the Syrian
parties and international stakeholders on various entry
points in that regard, sharing and receiving some ideas.
As I informed the Council in closed consultations
last month, when I was in Damascus in May I identified
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria, Mr. Mekdad,
a number of topics on which I thought we could have
deeper discussion on actions that the Syrian authorities
could take — topics that he undertook to consider.
As the Council is aware, I have long called on
the parties to take unilateral action on a meaningful
scale on the tragic issues of the detained, the abducted
and the missing, including in the framework of
confidence-building and moving step for step. That
issue, immense in scale, is a continuing and central
feature of the trauma of the Syrian people. We need
to do more than the one-to-one simultaneous release
operations that have resulted from the Astana working
group and which saw another 10 detainees — five on

S/PV.9083

each side — released just before the Astana meeting
held on 15 and 16 June.
Bearing that in mind, I briefed the Council in
closed consultations last month on my engagement with
Foreign Minister Mekdad on the presidential decree of
30 April and its implementation. My Office in Damascus
has since followed up on that engagement. I have also
engaged with human rights organizations, victims and
family associations and civil-society contacts who have
also shared their assessments, including estimates of
many hundreds so far released but no recent reports of
further releases.
We continue to stress the potential of the decree and
the importance of its comprehensive implementation
if that potential is to be realized. This opportunity
should not be missed. We hope that there will be
further action by and communication with the Syrian
Government on this issue and on the other topics for
confidence-building measures.
In parallel, there are a number of topics in which
others, including outside players, could take positive
steps, too, regarding Syria and advancing resolution
2254 (2015). I am continuing to engage key players on
what such steps could look like and have appreciated
their readiness to engage.
We continue to convene the Syrian-led, Syrianowned Constitutional Committee, which, if approached
the right way, could contribute to a political settlement
to implement resolution 2254 (2015). I last briefed the
Council during the eighth session of its small drafting
body, which concluded on 3 June. The co-Chairs agreed
that the ninth session would convene in Geneva on
25 July. Formal invitations have been sent accordingly,
and we are taking logistical steps to move ahead with
the session.
I told Committee members at the conclusion of
the eighth session that I appreciated the tone and
substantive nature of the dialogue in the room. But I
was also honest with them that I saw real challenges
relating to the pace of work and to the inability of
the members to identify and conclude areas of initial
provisional agreement, even on points where there was
potential consensus in the room.
I met with the co-Chairs together at the end of
the session to discuss what could be done to address
those challenges. They have welcomed the fact that I
share ideas on ways to expedite the work and produce
results and continued progress, and I have done so. I

22-405383/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

am looking forward to them reverting to me with their
reactions or any other ideas.
As my regular briefings to the Council suggest,
a daunting set of challenges faces the Syrian people.
I was reminded of that when I was briefed on the
results of my team’s regional outreach with Syrian
civil society. Syrians briefed my team extensively on
political developments, the socioeconomic situation,
humanitarian and protection issues, women’s rights,
the inclusion of youth in the political process, local
governance and social cohesion initiatives. What united
all of those voices was the need to see urgent action to
implement a comprehensive political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Today I have warned of the risks of further
escalation, and I have urged everyone to find the unity
and sense of purpose to contain those risks, support
humanitarian objectives and promote concrete steps on
the path to a settlement. My message is simple: do not
forget Syria, find unity on Syria and help the Syrians
begin to emerge from this tragic conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alshogre.
Mr. Alshogre: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this chance to amplify the voice of the Syrian
people. This is the first time since I left Syria that I
face the people who supported the regime in killing
my father, in killing my oldest brother, in killing my
youngest brother, in killing my childhood friends.
When the soldiers came to our home to kill my
family, my Mom heard one of them speaking Farsi.
He was an Iranian officer sent to kill our hope — our
hope for democracy. That is when the people of Syria
realized that we have more than one enemy and we need
more than one friend.
I stand before the members of the Security Council
today holding 14 messages sent to them by 14 Syrians
representing all of Syria’s 14 governorates. Each of
them wants to tell Council members the following.
Rama from Dara’a governorate says to members:
“You have the power to turn our nightmare into a dream
so, please, do it.”
Ali from Damascus asks: “Isn’t it surprising how
powerful you are, but powerlessly you act in the face of
our enemy?”
4/19

29/06/2022

Sarah from Homs says to members: “My daughter
is severely sick; can any you help fly her out to a safe
hospital anywhere in the world?”
Yasir from Hama say: “I lost everything on your
watch; and you just like to blame things on other
members. You blame on Russia, just to push the
responsibility away from you.”
Hiba from Latakia says: “Syria has never been
scarier than now; even the supporters of the regime are
being arrested by the regime and tortured and killed.”
Just so members know, I am not going to filter the
voices of the Syrian people. I am telling the Council
exactly what they said. And here it comes.
Kareem from Idlib says: “You have been acting so
lame since 2011. I lost everything I ever loved and had.
Fuck you for not being useful, for not being respectful
of human lives and human rights!”
Sana from Aleppo says: “All we need is protection.
I am tired of being afraid of the sky. I don’t want it to
drop more bombs.”
Shero from Al-Hasakah says to members: “Don’t let
Russia, China and Iran play you; act like you understand
your position of power. You sit on the Security Council,
not on a carousel in Disneyland.”
Ranim from Rif Dimashq says: “I am claustrophobic.
Whenever they bomb, I have to go and hide in the
basement or in a tiny room, and I can’t breathe. I can’t
breathe. I just wants this to end.”
Shadi, a very young person from Quneitra, says:
“I recently tamed a cat — who is right now, in this
conflict, my world. So please help me keep her safe and
alive. Her name is Judy.”
Mariam from As-Suwayda says: “It always seems
impossible until it is done.” I know she stole the quote.
Khaled from Al-Raqqa says: “While you may think
that the war in Syria has ended, it has not. People are
still being targeted. People are still being killed.”
Lubna from Deir ez-Zor says: “There is only one
way to end the war in Syria, and that is by bringing the
Al-Assad regime to justice.”
The last, and fourteenth, message is from Tartus,
my hometown, which I wrote myself. Since the start
of the Syrian uprising in March 2011, Russia has
vetoed more than 15 Security Council draft resolutions
concerning the conflict in Syria. Among other things,
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the draft resolutions covered human rights violations,
the use of force against civilians, toxic chemical
weapons and calls for a meaningful ceasefire. Russia
did that to provide political cover for the Syrian regime
and to protect Moscow’s strategic interests and arms
deals with the Syrian State.
My question is: what is wrong with members? Did
they shut off their humanity entirely? How do they
sleep at night? How do they look their children in the
eye? And they should not dare tell me anything about
the sovereignty of the Syrian regime. That is by now
just too lame an argument.
The Iranian regime and the Iran-backed militias
did not get enough from killing the brilliant minds in
Iraq, such as Ehab Al-Wazni and Hashim Al-Hashemi,
who were key leaders of the opposition to Iran’s brutal
regime. Killing them was not enough. They therefore
crossed the border, came to Syria and slaughtered, raped
and burned humans, animals and trees. If anyone wants
proof of that, they need only search atrocitiestracker.
org, a project of the Syrian Emergency Task Force that
sheds light on the evidence and the testimonies of the
families and victims of Iran, Syria and Russia in Syria
and Iraq.
Earlier this year, a member of the Council welcomed
the Syrian dictator, Bashar Al-Assad, into its home.
Does the United Arab Emirates not have any respect
for the people who have been suffering for years, for
everyone who died under torture in Syria and for every
mother who lost a child? Does it not have any respect
for those people? Normalizing Al-Assad is a crime.
Tourists and travellers from around the world must
know of the support of the United Arab Emirates for
the killing of children and women in Syria.
I will make sure that they find out and understand
how completely devoid of morals the leadership of the
Emirates is. And when the people know, where will
they hide? Behind Burj Khalifa? It is not big enough to
hide their shame. Shame on the United Arab Emirates.
And shame on Jordan, the country that does not allow
pregnant women in Rukban camp to go to a safe
Jordanian hospital to give birth. Shame on them both;
they are insulting the great people of the United Arab
Emirates and of Jordan.
Recently, the United States Government has limited
itself to empty statements, with no action. It is supposed
to be the leader of the democratic world. I do not even
see it in the global arena anymore. It will never be able

S/PV.9083

to protect its democracy, the rights of its women and its
schoolchildren if it ignores human rights elsewhere. It
is all connected. Together with a lot of people, I used to
think of America as the greatest country in the world.
Now we actually need proof of that.
And there are other members. We have Brazil,
Mexico, Ireland, Gabon, Kenya and Ghana, which we
actually do not see taking a clear stand. They should
take a clear stand against dictatorship to support the
people who need their help. It is now time to stand in
solidarity with the people of Syria, who are fighting for
freedom and dignity.
Türkiye and Lebanon have been very generous
in welcoming so many refugees. For that we are no
doubt very grateful. However, Syrians currently face
discrimination, racism and insults on a daily basis.
We would like to ask the Governments of Türkiye and
Lebanon, as well as the Governments of other countries
that host Syrian refugees, to show greater responsibility
in honouring those who seek refuge in their countries.
The people of Syria will remember those who were
good to them, as well as those who were bad to them.
As I address the Council today, there are millions
of people who depend on humanitarian aid in northwestern and north-eastern Syria. Those innocent
people are held hostage by Russia, which continues
to hold hostage all cross-border points, including Bab
Al-Hawa.
The reason I have been shaming members for the
past five minutes is because I know that the Council has
the power to do much, but it chooses not to. Here are
three actions that members can take to prove to their
citizens that they care about human rights and mitigate
the suffering of the Syrian people.
First, members should put as much pressure as
possible on Russia to extend the mandate for Bab
Al-Hawa and open all other cross-border points to allow
for the delivery of humanitarian aid. That should not be
a negotiation; we are talking about humanitarian aid.
Secondly, they should follow Germany’s lead in
using copious amounts of evidence to prosecute the
Syrian regime and its allies. That step could help to
slow down or prevent the normalization of a regime that
continues to insult Council members on a daily basis by
committing crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Thirdly — and perhaps the most difficult but most
important thing to do — members must fight with us,

22-405385/19

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9083

the Syrian people, to set free every mother, father,
brother, sister, neighbour and friend being held captive
for simply taking to the streets, demanding their rights
and asking for accountability and justice.
(spoke in Arabic)
To all Syrians, including widows and widowers,
who hope to see freedom: freedom will come.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Alshogre

for

I would like to recall that, in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the practice of the Council,
briefers do not pose questions to member States; it is
the other way around.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for the practical
demonstration of how an irresponsible choice of briefers
representing civil society can turn a serious discussion
into a low-grade talk show and farce.
We would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen, for the
overview of the political situation in Syria. We believe
that the ninth session of the small drafting body of the
Constitutional Committee, which is scheduled to be
held at the end of next month, will be a very important
event. We are convinced of the need to continue to
direct intra-Syrian dialogue with the assistance of the
United Nations, in line with the resolution 2254 (2015).
We believe that progress on the Syrian political
settlement track is urgently needed now, as the situation
on the ground remains tense. The main security threats
to Syria and the region as a whole are posed by groups
the persistent large-scale presence of terrorists who
have found refuge in areas not under the control of
Damascus, such as Idlib, areas across the Euphrates
River and Al-Tanf. However, we believe the root causes
of the explosive situation lie in the current policy
followed by the countries of the West of flirting with
6/19

29/06/2022

terrorist elements in an attempt to use them for their
own geopolitical purposes.
In that context, we are convinced that the way to
resolve the Syrian crisis is by ending the illegal foreign
military presence, which violates the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and
by the unconditional cessation of regular air strikes
by the Israeli Air Force. The most recent strike, on
10 June, targeted the Damascus International Airport.
The airport sustained serious material damage, namely,
the runway was damaged, which led to the grounding
of all flights, including United Nations humanitarian
service flights.
We regret that, due to the politicized and biased
positions of Western delegations, the draft Security
Council press statement that we proposed was rejected.
Time and again, we see the extent to which the
politicized stances of Council members reflected on
their principles.
At the same time, there is currently a serious
deterioration of the economic and humanitarian
situation. According to United Nations estimates,
the number of those in need has reached a record
14.6 million people. That is evidently the direct result
of the suffocating unilateral sanctions imposed by the
United States and the European Union. That situation
persists almost one year after the unanimous adoption
by the Council of resolution 2585 (2021), which was
intended to alleviate the humanitarian suffering and
needs of the Syrians, inter alia, by conducting early
recovery projects.
The acute problem of the return of refugees
remains. The host countries — Lebanon, Jordan and
Türkiye — do not hide the fact that they have reached
their limits with regard to further accommodating the
refugees Meanwhile, Western countries stubbornly
refuse to help Syrians return home. They prefer to pay
for refugees to stay in the host countries. For our part,
we deem it to be necessary to ensure the fundamental
right of refugees to return home, pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015), provided that such efforts are carried out
strictly in coordination with Damascus.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the
decree of the President of Syria, Bashar Al-Assad,
establishing an amnesty for Syrian citizens convicted
of terrorist activity and crimes committed prior to
30 April 2022, except for crimes that resulted in a
loss of life. That decision by the Syrian leadership, in
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

addition to the January amnesty for objectors, creates
a favourable environment for Syrian citizens who wish
to return home.
Damascus has also demonstrated its willingness
to take concrete steps to foster civil reconciliation and
work on issues related to detainees and missing persons.
In other words, the Government of Syria is working to
implement resolution 2254 (2015).
Russia has also made a considerable contribution
to the overall settlement. Along with our partners in
the Astana format — Iran and Türkiye — we held the
eighteenth international meeting on Syria in Nur-Sultan,
which culminated in the adoption of a joint statement
that was circulated as a Security Council document.
We note the successful operation that led to the
simultaneous release of detainees on 13 June as part
of the special working group established with the
assistance of the Astana format. That operation proved
the willingness of the parties to expand cooperation
under the auspices of the working group. It is a unique
mechanism that has proven its worth and effectiveness
in building trust among the Syrian parties.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and, as always,
for all his hard work to encourage a political process
that might bring the conflict to an end.
I also want to extend a special thanks to
Mr. Alshogre for his powerful testimony today, which
was both compelling and painful to hear. It was also
important for all of us to hear the voices he brought to
us. The only message I could possibly hope to leave him
with today is that the United States is very proud, as a
country, to have been able to take him in after what he
experienced and stands firmly with the Syrian people.
We were reminded yesterday of the stark realities
of the horror of the Syrian conflict by a number that
was released by the United Nations: 306,887 — that is
the number of civilians who have been killed since the
beginning of the uprising in March 2011 to the end of
March 2021. It is of course more than a sobering statistic
for all of us. Those people had hopes and dreams; they
had hobbies; and they had families and many loved
ones, as we just heard. The human scale of the conflict
should shock us all, and we should all be compelled to
redouble our efforts to find a solution to the crisis.
The United States fully supports the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the

S/PV.9083

Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and efforts to ensure accountability for all
those crimes.
We urge enhanced efforts towards the
implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015),
including by addressing the issue of arbitrarily detained
and missing persons. Each month, the United States
notes its concern about the more than 30,000 Syrians
who are arbitrarily detained or missing. We very much
appreciate Special Envoy Pedersen’s focus on that
issue. We take note of the Al-Assad regime’s decree of
30 April and reiterate our calls for further information
on that announcement.
However, to be clear, to date the regime has released
only a few hundred prisoners — a small fraction of
those who remain detained by the regime. We urge the
Al-Assad regime to fully, transparently and effectively
implement the decree so that a much larger proportion
of detainees can be released. We also urge the regime
to coordinate directly with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other non-governmental
organizations to ensure that those efforts are humane
and transparent.
The amnesty should not be used to justify or
encourage refugee returns before there are real
conditions in place that facilitate the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees. Safety and security,
including such concerns with regard to the rule of law
as we see today, remain major obstacles to any potential
returns, and I believe they explain the statistic that the
Special Envoy shared with us on the percentage of
refugees who want to return.
We reiterate our call for a nationwide ceasefire,
which is another key aspect of resolution 2254 (2015).
We are also concerned about any potential decision by
Türkiye to take military action on the Syrian side of the
border. Nothing should be done to break the ceasefire
lines that have already been established.
We appreciate the Special Envoy’s efforts on the
Constitutional Committee. We know that he shares our
disappointment that, after eight rounds and more than
two years, there have been no significant outcomes
from those discussions. The clear responsibility for that
lack of progress lies solely with the Al-Assad regime, as
it continues to stall the chance for any fruitful dialogue
through its intransigence.

22-405387/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

29/06/2022

It would be helpful to take stock of the process to
date and determine how best to take it forward. We hope
that the ninth round of talks, to be held in Geneva next
month, will offer an opportunity to make some of the
long-overdue progress that the Syrian people deserve.

Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by certain
countries. We urge those countries to immediately
cease related activities. We also call for the immediate
withdrawal of the foreign troops stationed in the
country without the consent of the Syrian Government.

Finally, the United States looks forward to working
collaboratively with other Security Council members in
the coming days to reauthorize and expand the mandate
for the United Nations cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism into Syria. As we heard, the
mechanism provides a critical lifeline of assistance.
Cutting off that assistance would be devastating for
millions of Syrians, so we urge all fellow members to
support and strengthen that essential lifeline for the
Syrian people.

The eighteenth round of talks in the framework
of the Astana process was also held recently. China
supports the countries concerned in their efforts to
de-escalate the conflict through enhanced coordination.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that the only
way to end the dire humanitarian crisis is through a
credible, inclusive political process as described in
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and
appreciate his efforts to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and promote the political process
in Syria.
The core group of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee recently held its eighth session, at which
substantive dialogue was held on the text of a draft
constitution. In view of the highly complex and
sensitive nature of the Syrian dossier, the very fact
that the caucus meeting was held at all is a positive
development. China firmly supports the Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2014), and calls on all parties in Syria
to actively cooperate with the Special Envoy to strive
for substantive progress on the draft constitution. The
Constitutional Committee should remain independent
and free from external interference.
Progress cannot be achieved in the Syrian political
process without an enabling environment. China
therefore welcomes the amnesty announced recently
by Syria, which is conducive to creating favourable
conditions for domestic reconciliation in the country.
Significant progress in the political process is
inconceivable while Syria continues to be subjected to
foreign invasion and illegal occupation. The Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic recently
sent consecutive communications to the President of
the Security Council that condemn the violation of
8/19

Terrorism must be eradicated. China is concerned
about the widening scope of terrorist attacks south of
Damascus by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
The international community should crack down
firmly on terrorist forces in Syria, in accordance with
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and should denounce any double standards.
Syria is a founding member of the League of Arab
States and an important member of the Arab world.
China welcomes the strengthened interaction between
Syria and other Arab countries in the diplomatic,
economic and trade spheres. China looks forward to
Syria’s early return to the Arab family, which will be
conducive to forging coordinated peace-promoting
efforts in the region and an early settlement of the
Syrian question.
The mandate of the Syrian cross-border
humanitarian aid mechanism will expire in July. China
hopes that the Security Council, with full respect for
Syria’s sovereignty and the ownership of the Syrian
Government, will hold a comprehensive discussion on
such issues as cross-border and cross-line aid, early
recovery and unilateral sanctions. That discussion must
promote efforts to strive for consensus and eliminate,
in a targeted manner, the obstacles facing humanitarian
assistance in the search for feasible solutions to postresolution 2585 (2021) arrangements.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his informative briefing.
In 2015, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015), endorsing a road map for a peace
process in Syria and setting a timetable for United
Nations-facilitated talks between the Government and
members of the opposition. In 2022, after seven years
of intense human suffering and displacement, as well as
the destruction of essential civilian infrastructure, we
still have not achieved any real progress in implementing
resolution 2254 (2015).
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The Constitutional Committee has already held
eight sessions, and its members seem either unable or
unwilling to bridge their differences in most areas in
order to come up with concrete results. Meanwhile,
terrorism remains a very serious threat on the ground,
with spillover effects across the region. Humanitarian
needs are at their peak, with millions of people relying
on international aid to meet their most basic needs.
Needless to say, the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons is also deteriorating with each
passing day.
When
the
authorization
of
cross-border
humanitarian operations expires on 10 July, the
Council will once again have to take a very important
decision on the matter, with a clear impact on the lives
of millions of people, especially women and children.
Brazil agrees that at this time we have no choice but
to continue supporting the provision of international
humanitarian assistance to all those in need in Syria
through all feasible modalities. It is important to stress
that cross-border assistance is by no means a long-term
solution, but rather a temporary measure to alleviate the
humanitarian needs of part of the Syrian population.
With regard to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, we note with concern that sanctions
continue to affect the ability of the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies to operate in Syria.
Brazil adds its voice to the Secretary-General’s appeal
to all the relevant parties to find ways to address the
challenges that various humanitarian actors in Syria
face in ensuring reliable access to financial services.
The members of the Constitutional Committee must
once and for all understand the responsibility that is
in their hands and their important role in guaranteeing
Syria’s future. As we look forward to the ninth session
of the Constitutional Committee, scheduled for late
July, Brazil reiterates the call for all members to work
with a sense of compromise and responsibility and
stresses the importance of genuinely seeking avenues
on which to move forward.
At our previous meeting, Mr. Pedersen noted
that the 3 April amnesty decree was potentially a
confidence-building measure between the parties
(S/PV.9022). I thank the Special Envoy for his update
on that issue. As we continue to closely follow the
decree’s implementation, Brazil calls on all parties to
stop torture, ill treatment, forced disappearances and
all other violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law.

S/PV.9083

We strongly support all families in their quest to
determine the fate of Syria’s missing persons, including
those forcibly disappeared, abducted or arbitrarily
detained. The recent news about the exchange of
prisoners in the framework of the Astana process is
welcome. Brazil would like to thank all those involved
in the negotiations that led to that agreement and all
those who are working to implement it.
I reiterate Brazil’s position, which has remained
unchanged since 2011: only a Syrian-owned and -led
United Nations-facilitated process, with due regard for
preserving Syria’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,
will alleviate the immeasurable suffering that this
conflict has inflicted. A military solution remains
elusive, and unilateral sanctions will lead only to more
violence and broader volatility in the region. All the
parties concerned must exercise the utmost restraint
and avoid further escalation. They must refrain from
harming civilians and increase efforts to comply with
international humanitarian law.
I want to conclude by thanking Special Envoy
Pedersen once more for his continuing efforts to move
us away from the current stalemate in the realization
of the political process envisioned in resolution 2254
(2015). We also commend him for his efforts to continue
involving the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board in
the peace process. A political agreement cannot be
sustainable if women’s voices are not heard.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen
for his very thorough briefing and his tireless efforts.
Today I will focus my remarks on three issues:
the political process security and refugees and
missing persons.
With regard to the political process, we take
note of the recent Astana format meeting. We regret,
however, that the eighth session of the small body of the
Constitutional Committee did not achieve any progress.
We therefore hope to see a reversal of that trend at the
ninth session, to be held at the end of July in Geneva
in accordance with the terms of reference. We urge the
parties to engage constructively and, in doing so, to
make progress in the discussions.
In that regard, my delegation reiterates its
support for Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to move
towards a political solution and commends his regular
consultations with civil society. We want to underscore,
as others have done here today, the crucial need for

22-405389/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

29/06/2022

women to participate in all phases of the Syrian political
process in order to achieve a sustainable solution.

to meet the growing needs of the more than 11 million
Syrians for whom there is no other alternative.

With regard to the security issue, we are obviously
concerned about the announcement of a new military
intervention in northern Syria, in particular the
attempt to justify it under Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. That would be totally contrary to
the provisions of international law, specifically with
respect to the use of force and self-defence, and if it
were to occur it would undermine Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), comprising
Gabon, Kenya and Ghana.

We call for all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and refrain from an escalation of tensions
that could lead to the further displacement of civilians
and exacerbate the already dire humanitarian
situation. It is time to foster dialogue and cooperation
among neighbours, including to coordinate counterterrorism activities.
We are also deeply concerned about the resurgence
of hostilities in the north-east, as well as the continuing
instability in the southern part of the country. In that
context, we condemn the recent attack on Damascus
International Airport.
With regard to refugees, we acknowledge the efforts
of the receiving countries. Unfortunately, the conditions
have yet to be secured to facilitate the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees. We encourage continued
support for humanitarian organizations and increased
funding to support host communities.
On the other hand, while we recognize that some
detainees have been released, given the magnitude of
cases under consideration the number of those who
have been freed is very limited. We call on the Syrian
authorities to release all arbitrarily detained persons,
starting with women, children and the elderly. At the
same time, the whereabouts of missing persons must be
determined, and humanitarian organizations must be
granted access to detention centres. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s final report on that issue.
It is important to make progress on all of
those matters in order to create confidence and an
environment conducive to political dialogue, as well
as to move towards reconciling and rebuilding Syria’s
social fabric.
Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate that
it is important for the Council to reauthorize the Bab
Al-Hawa border crossing in the coming days in order
10/19

We thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing
and welcome his continuous engagement with the
various stakeholders in Syria as part of his efforts
to facilitate and encourage a much-needed political
solution to the conflict in that country. We also welcome
the participation of the representatives of Syria, Iran
and Türkiye in this meeting.
As highlighted in today’s briefing, the state of
affairs in Syria remains concerning and requires
the full and continuous attention of the international
community. We must continue to give the country
the lifeline it requires for a lasting resolution of the
conflict. We believe that a political solution is the most
promising path to peace and security in Syria. That
requires the immediate establishment of a nationwide
ceasefire, as well as an inclusive and pluralist dialogue
on the way forward that takes into account the interests
of Syrians and culminates in the eventual restoration of
State authority over the entire Syrian territory.
We are concerned about the slow progress in the work
of the Constitutional Committee, which did not record
any tangible outcomes after a number of proposals were
discussed in the last round of negotiations. Although we
welcome the dialogue between the parties, we call for
more constructive engagement on the substance of the
constitution and the need to explore ways to expedite
action on the sticking points that will lead to concrete
results for the people of Syria. We stress that those
issues need to be taken into consideration, especially
when the Constitutional Committee reconvenes on
25 July.
The need to advance a broader political process
is ever-more crucial. Confidence-building measures,
such as the release of detainees and the determination
of the plight of missing persons, would contribute to
enhancing the process. More detainees need to be
released, with special attention paid to the elderly,
women and children. It is essential for such issues to be
addressed as expeditiously as possible, otherwise peace
will remain elusive for the people of Syria.
The amnesty granted by the Syrian Government is
an important step towards reconciliation, and we believe
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

that it can contribute to confidence-building measures.
We stress that is an area that could be positively
leveraged by the Special Envoy’s step-by-step approach
to get key Syrian stakeholders, with the support of
the international community, to make concessions in
exchange for reciprocal actions from others, which is
in the country’s long-term interests. We therefore look
forward to receiving additional information on the
implementation of that approach.
We recall the important role of women in the
consolidation of the political climate in Syria and
welcome their involvement in the peace process,
particularly in the context of discussions within the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
The A3 is troubled by the presence of mercenaries
from certain countries in Syria, as it undermines
regional and international security, and it wishes to
stress that Syria should not be used as a ground on
which other States settle their scores. The situation
in the north-west remains precarious, and air strikes
and terrorist activities continue in the north-east,
particularly in Raqqah governorate.
Also, the Al-Hol camp, in which thriving terrorist
cells are reported to be operating, is of concern to us, as
their activities continue to worsen the security situation
and endanger lives, particularly those of women and
children. In that regard, we reiterate the need for
decisive collective action to combat Security Councillisted groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
We call on all State and non-State actors in Syria to
exercise maximum restraint. In that respect, we call on
neighbouring countries to desist from actions that would
create more instability in Syria. What is needed now
includes a political solution, a cessation of hostilities
and the need for respect for Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, which
must be upheld by all countries.
The A3 encourages the efforts made by regional
and international actors towards achieving political
stability in Syria in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). That resolution remains the most important
road map for the much-desired political solution to the
crisis in Syria. We reiterate the need for unity of the
Council in the renewal of resolution 2585 (2021), which
would be a critical step forward in complementing the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

S/PV.9083

The A3 reiterates its continued support for a
comprehensive and durable political resolution of the
crisis, in solidarity with the Syrian people in their quest
for peace, urges all parties to the conflict to cease their
fire and encourages all stakeholders and actors in the
region to show a greater commitment to finding lasting
solutions to the conflict through the political process. In
conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and for his briefing and his clear,
insightful updates, which we really appreciate. I also
want to thank Mr. Omar Alshogre for being with us here
today. Civil society has a critical challenge function,
which is important even when it is uncomfortable.
As we heard from the Special Envoy, violence has
continued across Syria, particularly in the north-west,
and remains a serious concern. It is atrocious that 72
civilians, including 12 children, were killed in the
months of April and May. Indiscriminate attacks and
direct attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
are violations of international humanitarian law.
We call on all actors to comply fully with their
international legal obligations. I reiterate Ireland’s call
for a nationwide ceasefire across Syria to protect human
lives and help build trust and confidence on the political
track. Ireland condemns the attack on a civilian bus in
Raqqa on 20 June, which killed 13 people, including
two civilians. That was another stark reminder of the
threat posed by terrorism and the need for sustained,
comprehensive efforts to counter it.
The footage of a massacre that took place in 2013 in
the Tadamon neighbourhood of Damascus, which was
published in The Guardian in April, was very shocking.
The footage revealed the brutality of the perpetrators. It
is even more disturbing that the families of the victims
discovered the fate of their loved ones in that way.
The release of that video reminds us of the absolute
necessity of ensuring accountability for the war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed in Syria. It
also highlights the importance for the Government and
other parties to share information on the fate of the
missing and the disappeared. Withholding information
deliberately prolongs the suffering of the hundreds of
thousands of family members, who often risk arrest,
extortion and abuse in the search for their missing
loved ones.

22-4053811/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

We continue to call on the Syrian Government and
other parties to release all those arbitrarily detained,
including children, women and the elderly, and for
unimpeded access for all independent monitors to places
of detention. We take note of the Syrian Government’s
amnesty decree in April and stress that all releases must
be conducted in a transparent and verifiable manner.
Ireland continues to support a referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
and, in the absence of such, strongly supports United
Nations efforts, including through the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We believe
that more can be done to support victims and survivors,
as well as their families, who have spent far too long
in limbo.
The continued suffering of innocent children in
Syria is an affront to all of humankind. Those who have
survived the past 11 years of conflict have had their
childhoods taken from them, and it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to ensure that Syria moves
towards a sustainable and inclusive peace.
We will continue to support Special Envoy
Pedersen’s efforts, including through the Constitutional
Committee and his step-for-step approach, in pursuit
of the implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254
(2015).
It is imperative that the Syrian conflict’s
disproportionate impacts on women remain a focus.
Women from all parts of Syria’s society must be
empowered to fully and equally participate in the
political track, including through, but not limited to,
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board. In that regard,
Ireland would be happy to receive an update on the
Special Envoy’s engagement with the Advisory Board.
Ireland and the European Union remain committed to
ensuring that the situation in Syria remains high on the
international agenda. We assure Council members that
Syria is not forgotten.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Omar Alshogre for
their briefings.
We appreciate the Special Envoy’s updates, including
on the previous session of the Syrian Constitutional
12/19

29/06/2022

Committee. It is positive that the delegations were
able to discuss the submitted revisions to the text and
that areas of common ground were identified. We do,
however, share the Special Envoy’s view that there
is a need for more expediency in the Constitutional
Committee’s work, as well as strengthened efforts by
all parties to produce concrete results. We welcome its
newest round of negotiations, to be held in July.
Norway continues to urge the members of the
Committee to contribute constructively and with a
spirit of compromise. We note that the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board also met recently in Geneva. Its
contributions to the process are important. Norway is
pleased to support its work and will continue to urge
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in the political process.
Let me now turn to the Syrian authorities’
announced amnesty decree. The issue of detainees and
missing persons in Syria is a matter of great concern.
We are closely following the implementation of the
amnesty decree, and we call for more information
from the Syrian authorities about the scope of the
amnesty and what systems will be put in place to verify,
systematize and provide transparency.
We worry about the escalations we have seen in the
northern parts of Syria. Such escalations of violence
lead to increased human suffering for the population.
We urge all actors to contribute to de-escalation and
uphold international law.
Let me conclude by paraphrasing the SecretaryGeneral, who recently reiterated that the only way to
end the humanitarian tragedy in Syria is through a
truly nationwide ceasefire and a political solution that
enables the Syrian people to determine their own future.
We urge the Syrian parties and the countries involved
in Syria to move forward towards an inclusive political
solution — one that will first and foremost benefit the
Syrian people, as well as neighbouring countries and
the broader international community.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Omar Alshogre for
their briefings.
As the war continues, so does the Damascus regime’s
oppression of the Syrian people. The evidence gathered
on the Tadamon massacre, perpetrated in April 2013,
leaves no doubt about the Syrian regime’s repeated and
systematic war crimes and crimes against humanity.
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9083

With regard to the amnesty decree issued
unilaterally by the regime, we note that the United
Nations has not yet been able to pursue any verification
process for it; neither data nor lists have been shared
with the Organization. Under those conditions, that
amnesty has no basis in reality and does not in any
way constitute a first step. Let me remind the Security
Council that 120,000 people are still listed as being
detained in the regime’s jails. The regime has also
adopted a new law on cybercrime that allows it to make
new arbitrary arrests.

Finally, France’s position is clear: at a time when
humanitarian needs are more significant than ever
before, it is essential that we renew the cross-border
mechanism for a minimum of 12 months, as requested
by the Secretary-General, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations. I call on all members
of the Council to demonstrate unity and responsibility
in that regard.

I would also like to recall that the regime’s
systematic use of sexual and gender-based violence in
detention centres, including against returning refugees,
has been documented by the United Nations and
civil society.

We note that the previous session of the small body
of the Constitutional Committee deliberated on the four
proposed constitutional principles: unilateral coercive
measures, State institutions, the supremacy of the
constitution and transitional justice. While the parties
have not reached common ground, we need to examine
the reasons for the lack of any major progress over the
past two years.

All of those facts demonstrate that it is futile to
believe that normalizing relations with the regime can
create stability in Syria or in the region.
I would also like to add that the announcement
about a possible new Turkish military operation in
northern Syria is worrisome. We must refrain from
taking any action that would aggravate the crisis in the
country and threaten the stability of the region or the
efforts of the Global Coalition against Da’esh.
There can be no lasting peace without a solid political
process. The latest meetings of the Constitutional
Committee have not yielded any tangible progress.
The regime no longer wants the meetings to be held in
Geneva, even though that was the meeting place agreed
on by the Syrian people — all Syrians, including the
opposition — and it is specified in the Constitutional
Committee’s terms of reference. We have no choice
but to denounce that new obstructive tactic as a blatant
manoeuvre to turn the Constitutional Committee into
an empty shell. We urge the parties and their allies to do
everything possible to move forward in good faith and
allow the negotiations and drafting to begin in earnest.
As we say every month, without a political solution
that is securely established and verifiable on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015), the French and European
positions on the lifting of sanctions and on reconstruction
and normalization will remain unchanged.
As the Council knows, France will continue to
tirelessly combat impunity in Syria. Perpetrators,
particularly of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
must be held accountable for their actions. That is
essential for building a lasting peace.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
the Special Envoy for his briefing.

External factors have proved detrimental to the
overall political process. The level of engagement to
date has not been able to bridge the trust deficit among
the stakeholders involved. We reiterate again that it is
for the Syrians to determine and decide what is best for
Syria and their own future. The positive outcome of the
previous session is that all sides have agreed to meet
again in the last week of July. We hope that the three
parties will engage constructively and purposefully at
that meeting, with a sense of compromise.
The Special Envoy has been making efforts to
engage with all sides and facilitate the political process,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We believe that
his efforts, particularly his step-by-step approach,
should be supported. The success of that approach
will depend on tangible relief reaching the people of
Syria through the easing of measures that affect their
daily lives. We need to avoid linking humanitarian
and developmental assistance with the progress of the
overall political process. There is also an urgent need
to scale up assistance and ensure that humanitarian
agencies receive the necessary funding to fully execute
their plans.
India has been consistent in calling for support
for regional efforts to find a long-term solution to
the conflict. We have welcomed the progressive
normalization of Syria’s relations with its Arab
neighbours. Any acts that compromise Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity will have a negative

22-4053813/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

impact on the political track. In that regard, the recent
announcement of military action is deeply concerning.
On the security front, we remain concerned about
the overall situation in Syria. As pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s 60-day report (S/2022/492) and
again by the Special Envoy, violence has persisted in
the north-west of Syria; there have been air strikes, as
well as mutual shelling and clashes. There is an urgent
need for serious attempts to establish a comprehensive
nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We believe that the
withdrawal of all foreign forces is essential to realizing
that objective.
India has also repeatedly reiterated the looming
threat posed by the resurgence of terrorist groups in
Syria. United Nations-designated terrorist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, continue to gain in strength,
not just in Syria but also in Iraq. We reiterate that the
global fight against terrorism cannot and should not be
compromised for narrow political gains. The credibility
of the international community’s collective fight
against terrorism can be strengthened only by ensuring
the accountability of terrorists and terrorist groups.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that India is
committed to extending developmental assistance and
human-resource development support to Syria. Our
support for the people of Syria in their endeavour to
obtain lasting peace and stability remains steadfast
and unwavering.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his thorough
briefing. We agree with him that reaching consensus
on the renewal of the cross-border mechanism would
send a positive signal to the Syrian people.
We take this opportunity to welcome the
appointment of Ms. Najat Rochdi as Deputy Special
Envoy for Syria. We would also like to thank Ms. Khawla
Matar for her tireless efforts and dedication to achieving
peace and security. In the context of this meeting, and
despite what we have heard today, we affirm that all of
our actions are aimed at relieving the suffering of the
brotherly Syrian people.
A constitution fundamentally defines the
relationship between the nation and its people and is the
main reference for laws and legislation. It also maintains
the unity of the State, guarantees the rights of its citizens
and promotes their language, culture and aspirations. In
14/19

29/06/2022

the context of Syria, resolution 2254 (2015) identified
the constitutional process as one of the main pillars for
reaching a political solution to the crisis. Therefore,
the Constitutional Committee represents the only
platform for advancing a constructive, Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned dialogue, without foreign interference or
dictates, in order to advance the political process.
Despite significant disagreements about some
of the texts it considered at its eighth session, the
Constitutional Committee took some positive steps
towards finding common ground on a number of other
texts. Accordingly, we stress the importance of focusing
on common ground in order to build confidence among
all parties and overcome points of disagreement. In that
context, my country welcomes the agreement to hold
the ninth session on 25 July.
In the context of confidence-building efforts among
the parties, we welcome the Syrian President’s recent
issuance of a general amnesty for non-lethal terrorist
crimes, which has led to the release of hundreds of
detainees. We encourage all parties to continue to
take such steps during the upcoming period. We also
agree with the Special Envoy’s assessment that the
general amnesty has the potential to be a positive step.
We believe that such a step is necessary and could be
built upon to support sustainable peace and a decisive
solution to the Syrian crisis.
With regard to the significant escalation of
hostilities in northern Syria, especially in the areas of
Tall Rifaat, Manbij, Ayn Issa and Tall Tamr, my country
reaffirms its rejection of any foreign interference,
including acts of aggression in northern Syria, given
the aim of preserving Syria’s unity, independence and
territorial integrity. The United Arab Emirates also
totally rejects any efforts to alter the demography of
Syria, as that would threaten the security and stability
of Syria and the region as a whole and undermine the
future of the political process.
In order to reach a comprehensive political solution,
we need to overcome all security obstacles, most
importantly by addressing the causes of insecurity.
The Da’esh terrorist organization continues to launch
attacks in Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah, eastern Homs and
Hama, such as the recent attacks in Raqqa that claimed
many victims. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates
is deeply concerned about attempts by that organization
to expand its activities and get close to Damascus,
which would have repercussions for the civilians and
the security and stability of Syria.
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we look forward to the brotherly
Syrian people overcoming all their current challenges
and achieving a long-awaited peace while creating
a more stable and hopeful reality for the younger
Syrian generation.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Envoy and Mr. Alshogre for their powerful
briefings today.
Bashar Al-Assad falsely claims that the situation
in Syria is improving. He is trying to play on conflict
fatigue to encourage normalization. We must be vigilant
against that. The 12 years of suffering and terror that
the Syrian people have been subjected to must not be
forgotten. They deserve justice, accountability and
hope for a future based on the political reforms set out
in resolution 2254 (2015).
This is not just about past crimes. The terrible
conditions in Syria continue to deteriorate, as set out
in the latest report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/HRC/50/68).
As we have heard, more than 300,000 civilians
have died as a direct result of the conflict. That is a
devastating number of innocent lives lost. We have seen
no evidence that the regime is either able or willing
to respect human rights or govern in the interests of
all Syrians.
The United Kingdom therefore continues to
strongly oppose efforts to engage the Al-Assad regime
in the absence of behavioural change. We must not
accept any slide into normalization without genuine,
verifiable reforms, an end to attacks on civilians,
answers for families and, ultimately, accountability for
the most serious crimes committed in Syria. As part of
that, we urge a clear-eyed assessment of the regime’s
motives in its portrayal of its recent amnesty. We also
urge a continued focus on the more than 100,000 people
who are still arbitrarily detained.
Precipitous
normalization
undermines
the
international community’s collective leverage and will
ultimately prolong the crisis and the suffering of millions
of Syrians. As we have said many times, a political
solution is the only way to end the conflict. And given
the regime’s consistent intransigence, such a solution
will only be possible through concerted international
efforts and the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). Special Envoy Pedersen therefore retains our
full backing, and we remain committed to working
together with him in his efforts to bring about peace

S/PV.9083

in Syria, including through a United Nations-facilitated
step-for-step initiative.
Finally, it is useful to hear from the Special Envoy,
as we heard from the Secretary-General last week,
that the renewal of the mandate for cross-border
humanitarian support is essential. We look forward to
all members of the Council engaging responsibly on
that over the coming days.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing
and his relentless efforts to put an end to the conflict
in Syria and to bring lasting peace to that country,
ravaged by war, marred by misery and with no clear
prospect towards peace in sight.
We heard the pain and anger in the voice of
Mr. Alshogre, in his own words as well as in the
testimonies from individuals from all parts of
Syria — the voices of those who are trapped in a
nightmare with no end in sight; those who feel lost
because they are lost; those who feel powerless because
they are powerless; and those who look for help because
they need help — all the help that they can get after
the past 11 years, which have inflicted an almost
unimaginable degree of devastation and loss on the
Syrian people.
We heard in his words, some of them not usually
used in this Chamber, the true picture of a country
in distress and of a population in anguish. As that
dramatic situation leaves little or no room for hope, it
is only fitting that the horrific humanitarian situation
is the central preoccupation of our work here in this
Chamber. Therefore, the renewal of the cross-border
mandate next month is of paramount importance to
preserving that lifeline for millions of Syrians, as the
Secretary-General recently told the Council and as
was echoed today by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
The most recent amnesty should not allow the
regime to use its people as hostages, seeking to
bypass resolution 2254 (2015) in an effort to secure
international acceptance and extract concessions
from the international community while maintaining
the status quo. That does not bear the hallmarks of
transparent action aimed at building trust. We still do
not know who has been released and where or how many
more innocent Syrians are being held in captivity, and
we do not know how many have been killed. What we

22-4053815/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

know instead is the anguish of the thousands of Syrian
families that have been searching for their loved ones
for more than a decade, most of them in vain.
The Constitutional Committee is the most tangible
sign of progress for the political transition in Syria, yet
it has met eight times without being able to produce
any results. Despite the commendable efforts by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Pedersen, the Constitutional Committee continues to
be disappointing. It must not make a mockery of Syrian
aspirations. No one should be allowed to undermine all
efforts to move the political transition forward.
We know that a genuine political transition is
essential, as enshrined in the spirit and the letter of
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), if there is
to be any real, meaningful hope of averting a further
catastrophe in Syria. We call on all those involved to
show goodwill and genuine commitment, including
through a clear timeline, with clear deliverables, if we
are to put any faith in the process. We also support the
equal, full and meaningful participation of women in
the process. Otherwise, we risk further betraying the
trust of the Syrian people.
In concluding, I want to emphasize that Albania
sees no alternative to full accountability for the crimes
committed by all parties involved if Syria is to ever step
back from the abyss and return to being a prosperous,
important and peaceful country. No sustainable future
can be built on impunity. No lasting peace can ever
have crimes as its foundation. We should not support
the politics of erasure in Syria. Transitional justice
must therefore be at the heart of efforts to move towards
a genuine political transition that leads to a free and
democratic Syria — a Syria for all, not just for a few.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to once again draw the attention of
speakers to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Government has made significant
progress during the last few months, which is
16/19

29/06/2022

unprecedented and proves the Syrian Government’s
keenness to support national reconciliation and local
settlements. That unwavering approach has proved
efficient in enabling Syrians to return to normalcy
and in harnessing their potential and energies towards
building Syria’s future, achieving stability and
ensuring progress.
I have informed the Council about the amnesty
decree issued by the President of the Republic on
30 April; it is exceptional in legal, social and political
terms. That decree has benefited large numbers of
detainees and judicially wanted persons within and
outside the country, and its implementation is still
under way.
Diplomatic missions abroad have opened their
doors to receive applications and requests from Syrians
who would like to benefit from the decree and receive
support to regularize their status. The Ministry of
Foreign Affairs receives many such requests daily
and refers them to the competent authorities for their
response as soon as possible.
Syrian State institutions are continuing their efforts
to strengthen the legal and legislative architecture and
to develop laws aligned with the relevant requirements.
Over the past few months, a number of important
decrees and laws have been enacted to regulate
essential issues, including the possession of weapons
and ammunition and preventing the illicit trafficking
thereof; amending the penal code; abolishing sentences
of life and temporary imprisonment with hard labour;
and enforcing the criminalization of torture and
imposing deterrent penalties against those responsible
for it.
The fourth session of the International Conference
on the Return of Syrian Refugees was held in Damascus,
attesting unequivocally to the strong will of the Syrian
Government to continue to remove all impediments to
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees to
their homes and places of origin.
I would like to say before the Council that those
States that are preventing Syrian refugees from
returning to their homeland must stop those practices
and refrain from creating any impediments that prevent
them from returning freely and with dignity. That
requires first and foremost the lifting of the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Syria, which are killing
the Syrian people and are totally unjustifiable.
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The eighteenth meeting on Syria in accordance with
the Astana format was held in the city of Nur-Sultan. Its
concluding statement stressed firmly the importance of
maintaining the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and
emphasized once again the continued actions to combat
terrorism and confront Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front,
along with their affiliated individuals and entities,
including those that constitute a threat to civilians
within and outside the de-escalation zone in Idlib.
The statement rejected all attempts to create a new
reality on the ground, including the so-called autonomy
initiatives and separatist agendas in north-eastern
Syria. It also denounced the actions taken by certain
States that support terrorist entities and separatist
militias. The statement condemned as well the ongoing
Israeli military acts of aggression against Syria, which
jeopardize security and stability in the region, and
called for the cessation thereof. It also declared its
refusal of all unilateral coercive measures imposed on
the Syrian people along with the illegal diversion of oil
revenues that should go to Syria.
The statement also welcomed the mutual release of
a number of abductees and detainees that took place on
13 June within the framework of the Working Group on
the Release of Detainees/Abductees.
Syria reiterates its appreciation to the Russian and
Iranian guarantors for their efforts in that regard and
condemns the practices of the Turkish regime, which has
reneged on its previous commitments and obligations
under the Astana agreements and Sochi arrangements.

S/PV.9083

It is regrettable that a certain party that was
nominated by Türkiye and that claims to represent
Syrians continues to insist on hindering any progress
in the work of the Committee. It promotes ideas that
run counter to the will of the Syrian people and their
aspirations and vision for a better future in which peace,
stability and prosperity prevail. How is it possible for
a Syrian to justify the continuation of the unilateral
coercive measures that all Syrians suffer in their daily
lives? That person also calls for implementing additional
unilateral coercive measures. How is it possible for any
Syrian to publicly call for foreign military interference
in their country’s internal affairs?
My country is committed to a political solution
based on Syrian national dialogue and a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, without any external
interference. In that regard, it stresses the importance
of fully complying with the terms of reference and rules
of procedure of the Constitutional Committee. At the
same time, my country rejects all external interference
in its work and the imposition of predetermined results
and artificial timelines.
Syria regrets the Security Council’s failure to
condemn the Israeli aggression against Damascus
International Airport and condemns the obstacles that
certain States have placed in the way of the Security
Council’s condemnation of that aggression under
pretexts that clearly reflect a blind bias in favour
of Israel.

In that regard, Syria reiterates its rejection and
condemnation of the Turkish regime’s statements on the
establishment of a so-called safe zone in northern Syria,
its bellicose statements and its continued aggressive
policies based on killing, forced displacement,
demographic change and ethnic cleansing, under false
pretexts that in fact serve its own domestic political
motives in order cover up its increasing crises and
export them abroad, thereby posing a threat to the
peace and security of the region.

Syria stresses the importance of compelling Israel
to cease its hysterical and recurrent breaches of Syrian
territories, which are organically linked to the crimes
committed by terrorist organizations, as well as the
United States and Turkish illegal troops present on my
country’s soil, all of which aim to perpetuate chaos
and terrorism in the region and block all prospects for
a political solution decided by Syrians alone, without
egregious interventions. The failure of the Security
Council to discharge its responsibilities suggests to the
States Members of the United Nations that they cannot
depend on international legitimacy. Instead, they must
rely on their own abilities to restore their rights.

My delegation listened to the briefing by Special
Envoy Mr. Geir Pedersen. My country closely
followed the proceedings of the eighth session of the
Constitutional Committee, and we look forward to
the convening of the ninth session after the Special
Envoy has resolved the logistical problems raised by
certain parties.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the Syrian
Arab Republic is a sovereign country that takes pride
in its national and Arab identity and makes its own
decisions based on its national interests, while fulfilling
its constitutional duties and caring for all Syrians. My
country spares no effort in establishing friendly relations
and constructive cooperation with all countries, while

22-4053817/19

S/PV.9083

The situation in the Middle East

upholding the principles of sovereignty, independence
and non-interference in the internal affairs of others.
We condemn the use or threat of use of force, in
accordance with the priorities of Syria’s foreign policy,
which aims to restore security and stability and achieve
sustained prosperity and development for all Syrians
without exception or exclusion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
As we have frequently stated, there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. The resolution of the crisis
must be peaceful and in accordance with the principles
of international law. The end of the occupation and
the restoration of Syria’s full sovereignty are essential
prerequisites for achieving that goal. The violation of
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity continues
to persist through the occupation of certain parts of the
country, the Israeli aggression and terrorist attacks. We
once again reject separatist activities or illegitimate
self-rule initiatives in Syria and condemn any effort to
support such illegal measures.
At the political level, we underline the
Constitutional Committee’s crucial contribution to the
political process of the Syrian crisis and commend the
Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate the convening of its
eighth session. Our delegation was present in Geneva,
actively interacting with all sides in order to help the
process move forward. We welcome the announcement
of the ninth session of the Constitutional Committee, to
be held from 25 to 29 July.
We reiterate our steadfast position that the
Committee must operate in strict conformity with its
terms of reference and rules of procedure, free from
outside intervention, pressure, artificial deadlines
or any other circumstances of a similar nature. The
participation of the United Nations must also be limited
to facilitating the process. Ultimately, it must be a truly
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process.
In their joint statement earlier this month, the
Astana format guarantors reiterated their commitment
to advancing a workable and long-lasting political
process that is led and owned by the Syrian people
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). Iran will
continue its serious contribution to the efforts related
to the release of detainees, and in that regard calls on all
parties to cooperate in realizing that noble humanitarian
18/19

29/06/2022

endeavour. The recent declaration of the general
amnesty issued by the Syrian President is a valuable
contribution to the achievement of peace in Syria.
In the light of the dire situation in Syria, the
provision of humanitarian aid is essential, and political
circumstances should not prevent humanitarian aid
from reaching the people in need. That must, however,
be done with full respect for Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity. We support the
Syrian Government’s full cooperation with the United
Nations and the numerous humanitarian organizations
involved in cross-line aid delivery in Syria.
We also support cross-border aid delivery in Syria,
provided that it be renewed in a balanced manner
and addresses the Syrian Government’s legitimate
concerns. In that context, the implementation of earlyrecovery projects is of a high priority, bearing in mind
the importance of providing essential services to the
people in need. Furthermore, illegal unilateral sanctions
should have no bearing on the implementation of earlyrecovery projects.
We strongly condemn Israel’s repeated violations
of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
including recent terrorist attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure, particularly the attacks against
Damascus International Airport on 10 June, which
resulted in the cancellation of all flights, including
humanitarian flights. The Security Council must
unequivocally condemn the Israeli aggression and
terrorist attacks against Syria. We recognize Syria’s
legitimate right to self-defence under international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): After 12 long and
painful years, the war in Syria continues to pose a major
threat to regional and international peace and security.
The need to address the tragic situation in Syria in all
its dimensions remains as urgent and critical as ever.
Finding a sustainable political solution should remain
our overarching goal. Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Pedersen has our full support in his efforts
towards that objective.
The political process in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Astana process are central in our efforts
for achieving lasting stability and peace in Syria.
Regrettably, the eighth session of the Constitutional
Committee, which was held earlier this month,
22-40538

29/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

once again failed to yield concrete progress. We call
on the regime to stop its delaying tactics and start
demonstrating serious and sincere engagement at the
next session to be held in July.
From the very beginning, Türkiye has been
encouraging the legitimate Syrian opposition to
actively contribute to the success of that process. We
applaud the opposition’s continued constructive attitude
despite all kinds of obstacles and provocation. In order
for the efforts exerted as part of the political process
to yield results, it is also essential that the ceasefire
and the calm on the ground be preserved, including in
Idlib, where the regime’s ceasefire violations targeting
civilians continue unabated.
Since the beginning of 2020, the terrorist
organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG) has carried out at least
1,750 terrorist attacks against Syrian civilians. Those
attacks have been taking place in a context where that
terrorist organization is also illegally preparing socalled elections and social contracts on the ground.
Those initiatives, led by a self-proclaimed illegitimate
autonomous structure, once again confirm the separatist
character of that organization. It truly defies logic that
some Member States still insist on portraying the PKK/
YPG as a reliable partner in the fight against terrorism.
The real fight against Da’esh can be carried out only
with legitimate actors.
As we have consistently expressed for years
now, Türkiye is committed to combating all terrorist
organizations that threaten its security, in line with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We will
not hesitate to continue to take all the necessary
measures to deal with all threats against our vital
security interests. Nobody should expect us to remain
indifferent to a growing terrorism threat emanating
from Syria. We will not stand by and watch the PKK/
YPG terrorist organization’s attacks targeting not only
Syrian civilians, but also Turkish security forces and

S/PV.9083

civilians inside our borders. Türkiye’s determination
in that regard is also an assurance for Syria’s
territorial integrity.
Facilitating the return of refugees should be
an integral part of the overall efforts in the political
process. While addressing their needs, we should also
aim to create conditions conducive to the return of
refugees in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner.
Türkiye has facilitated the voluntary and safe return
of more than 500,000 Syrians to the stabilized areas.
Efforts are under way to increase cooperation with
other neighbouring countries and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Türkiye has been providing assistance to millions of
Syrians within and across our borders. Our humanitarian
efforts for the wellbeing of the brave and resilient Syrian
people have been recognized by the entire international
community. Türkiye is also proud to support the United
Nations and the international humanitarian community
in delivering life-saving cross-border humanitarian aid
to 4.1 million people in need in north-west Syria. In
that context, I reiterate our strong call for the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian aid mechanism. As Secretary-General
Guterres underlined, the continuation of that most
scrutinized and transparent cross-border aid operation
is a moral and humanitarian imperative.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong
determination to address the plight of the Syrian people
and actively contribute to a political settlement that will
meet their legitimate aspirations.
As to the previous speaker, I will not honour him
with a reply. As I have said many times, I do not consider
him as a legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

22-4053819/19
