47

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Füth Committee

1091 (XI). Report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Fonds
A

2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
the twelfth session of the General Assembly the item
entitled "Report of the N egotiating Committee for
Extra-Budgetary Funds".

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the N egotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds 26 appointed at
the tenth session of the General Assembly, and the
recommendation of the N egotiating Committee for a
change in the method of securing pledges of contributions to the voluntary programmes,
Having been notificd of the views of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Children's Fund, 27 and
of those of the Technical Assistance Committee, 28 that
these two bodies favour the retention of their present
fund-raising procedure,

Recognizing the importance of determining the financial resources for activities and programmes to be
financed by voluntary contributions before the reports
on such activities and programmes are considered and
acted upon by the General Assembly,
Recognizing further the need to change the existing
procedure for obtaining financial support for those
programmes of the United Nations financed by voluntary contributions for which those contributions fall
considerably short of the financial targets set for them,

1. Decides:
(J) In the case of the United Nations Children's
Fund, to retain the present year-round fund-raising
procedure;
( b) In the case of the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, to retain the present system of
a special pledging conference, to be held at the initiative
of: the Negotiating Committee;
( c) To convene, du ring the twelfth session of the
General Assembly, an ad hoc committee of the whole
Assembly, under the chairmanship of the President of
the session, where pledges of voluntary contributions
for the two refugee programmes for the following
financial year would be announced, with separate meetings dedicated to each programme;

2. Decides further that States not Members of the
United Nations, but memLers of one o:- E1or,· uf u1e
specialized agencies, shall be invited to attend meetings
of the ad hoc committee for the purpose of announcing
their pledges to the two refugee programmes.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds consisting of not more than ten members,
with the same terms of reference as those laid down in
General Assembly resolution 693 (VII) of 25 October
1952, to serve from the close of the eleventh session
to the close of the twelfth session of the Assembly,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/3194.
., See Official Records of the Economie and Social Council,
Twenty-third Session, Supplement No.2 (E/2937-E/ICEF/

330, E/ICEF/333).

.

*

*

*

At the 662nd plenary mecti11g on 27 Fe/wuary 1957, the
l'rcsident of tlze Ge11cra/ Asscmbly appointed a .\'cgotiating
Committcc for Extla-Budgetary Funds to serve until the close
of the twclfth session of the Assembly. The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTIN A, BRAZJL, CANADA, FRANCE,
LEBANON, NEW ZEALAND, PAKTST.-\N, UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRJT.\JN AND ;\ORTHE1'X lHEL.1:-.:u, and l;!'.1TEll ST.11Es
OF AMERICA.

1092 (XI). Registration and publication
treaties and international agreements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 97 (I) of 14 December 1946
adopting regulations to give effect to Article 102 of
the Charter of the United ?\ations, as amended by its
resolutions 364 B ( 1V) of 1 December 1949 and 482
( V) of 12 December 1950,
H aving consid crcd the report of the Secretary-Gcneral29 and the seventeenth report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to the eleventh session of the General Assembly 30 on
the registration and publication of treaties and international agreements,

N oting the substantial printing economies which have
already been achieved by various means of a technical
nature,
N oting f urtl,er that the lev el of current inflow of
registration material and the rate of production already
achieved will permit, if maintained, the publication of
treaties within a much shorter period than had previously been estimated,
1. Decides to continue the existing system of registration and publication of treaties and international
agreements, including in particular the method of publication of translations and annexes;
2. Concurs in the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in regard to the other questions referred to in the
seventeenth report of the Advisory Committee to the
eleventh session of the General A.ssembly;
3. Renews its invitation to States parties to treaties
or international agreements subject to publication under
article 12 of the regulations to give effect to Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations, to provide
the Secretary-General, where feasible, with translations in English or French, or both as may be needed,
for the purposes of such publication ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take ail necessary measures to achieve an early reduction of the
delay in publication of treaties and international agreements and to accelerate the publication of indexes to
the Treaty S eries;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to bring about whatever further printing econo-

.·

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/C.5/694.

of

• Ibid., agenda item 50, document A/3168.
ao Ibid., document A/3387.
