\.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe,· _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
17_1

9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
!(J4th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/225.

World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the recent developments in the law of
the sea have created new opportunities and responsibilities
for States and that national and international objectives
and policies for fisheries management and development
are being re-examined and adjusted,
Recognizing also the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 190
Bearing in mind the importance of the need to promote
improvements in the production and distribution of all
food and agricultural products, including those from fisheries, and to raise levels of nutrition and standards of livmg,
Noting with appreciation the convening of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations World
Conference on Fisheries Management and Development at
Rome from 27 June to 6 July 1984, with a view to promoting the optimum utilization of world fishery resources
from the economic, social and nutritional points of view,
increasing the contribution of fisheries to national self-reliance in food production and towards food security,
enhancing the capacity of developing countries in the management and development of fisheries and fostering international co-operation in fisheries between developed and
developing countries and among developing countries
themselves,

I. Endorses the Strategy for Fisheries Management
and Development and the associated programmes of
action adopted by the World Conference on Fisheries
Management and Development 191
2. Invites States and international organizations concerned to take into account the principles and guidelines
contained in the Strategy when planning the management
and development of fisheries;
3. Urges all bilateral and multilateral donor agencies
and financing institutions to provide the support required
for the effective implementation of the programmes of
action;
4. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, in collaboration with the organs, organizations and bodies concerned within the United Nations
system, to continue to play its important role in assisting
States in their efforts towards the improved management
and development of fishery resources.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
190 See Official Records of the Third United lVauons Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84 V.3). document A/CONF.62/122.
l9l See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report
of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development,
Rome, 27 June- 6 July 1984 (Rome. 1984), pp. 12-30 and 36-52; transmitted
to the members of the General Assembly hv a note bv the Secretariat (A/C2
39/6)

39/226.

Confidence-building in international economic relations

The (ieneral Assembly,
raking note of the report of the Secrekiry-General 19 '
prepared in response to its resolution 38/ l 96 of 20
December 1983 on confidence-building in international
economic relations.
Recalling that the spirit of mutual confidence made possible the founding of the United Nations nearly forty years
ago,
Connnced that the state of, and trends prevailing in, the
world economy, as well as the deteriorating international
climate, call for new efforts aimed at enhancing confidence
in international economic relations,
Convinced also that there can be no sustained global
development unless there is an improvement in the economic situation of the developing countries, which depends,
inter alia, on structural adjustments in the international
fmancial and trading system and on the reinforcement of
confidence among all States in their economic relations,
Reiterating its concern over the impact of political tensions on international economic co-operation and over the
increasing departure from the multilateral platform of economic exchanges and negotiations on key development
issues,
I. ln\'lles all States and the United Nations bodies and
organizations concerned to continue the exchange of views
on confidence-building in international economic relations
and on ways and means of enhancing such confidence;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his consultations with Governments and the United Nations
bodies and organizations concerned on the scope of possible confidence-building measures in international economic relations and on the role of the United Nations in that
endeavour, and to present his analysis and conclusions
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
through the Economic and Social Council.
104th plenary meeting
/8 December 1984

39/227.

Transport and Communications Decade for
Asia and the Pacific

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, annexed to General Assembly resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1983/69 of 29 July 1983 and 1984/78 of 27 July 1984,
Taking note of resolution 236 (XL) of 27 April 1984 of
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific, 191 concerning a transport and communications
decade for Asia and the Pacific during the period I 9851994.
Recalling the section of the Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries
relevant to the improvement of transport and communications infrastructure, 194
192 A 39 312-E/1984/106 and Corr. I and Add. I and 2.
19 -1 See Official Records o(the F-.'conomic and Social Council, 1984. Supplement No. 14 (E/1984/24). chap IV.
194 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Devl'ioped
Countnc.1, Paris. 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82 1.8), part one, sect. A.

172

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Convinced of the critical role of transport and communications in economic development and the importance,
therefore, of the improvement and growth of transport and
communications infrastructure and services in a manner
commensurate with the anticipated growth of all sectors of
the economy generating the demand for transport and
communications,

I. Endorses the recommendation made in paragraph 2
of Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/78 and
proclaims a Transport and Communications Decade for
Asia and the Pacific during the period 1985-1994. with a
view to:
(a) Raising the transport and communications infrastructural facilities of States members of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific which are
developing countries to a level commensurate with their
development objectives and priorities, giving particular
attention to the special needs of the least developed, landlocked and island developing countries of the region;
(b) Identifying systematically and in a comprehensive
manner the problems of transport and communications in
the region and working out feasible solutions;

(c) Promoting a more effective and efficient transport
and communications network comprising all modes and
means in an integrated way, in particular for development
of intraregional and interregional transport and communications linkages, as well as in the fields of maintenance and
co-ordination of networks, tariff setting and physical planning;
(d) Encouraging effective co-ordination and co-operation in the field of transport and communications in the
region;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to extend all necessary facilities and support to the Executive Secretaries of
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific and the Economic Commission for Western Asia in
their development of the regional action programme for
the Decade in a practical and integrated manner and to
mobilize the necessary international support for the successful implementation of the programmes for the Decade,
bearing in mind the contents of the seventh preambular
paragraph of resolution 236 (XL) of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific;
3. Urges all relevant international organizations, particularly the United Nations Development Programme, to
contribute to and provide assistance for the effective
implementation of the regional action programme for the
Decade;
4. Invites all Governments, in particular those of the
developed countries, to contribute to and participate effectively in the implementation of the regional action programme for achieving the objectives of the Decade;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1986, and every two years thereafter until the end of the
Decade.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
195 Report of the lnternatwnal Conference on Population, 1984. Mextn•
Cur. 6-14 August 1984 (United Na1ion, publication. Sales No. E.84.XIII H
and corrigenda). chap. I sect. fl

39/228.

International Conference on Population

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
87 of 25 November 1981 on the convening of an international conference on population in 1984.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/7 of 30 April 1982, 1982/42 of 27 July I 982 and
1983/6 of 26 May 1983,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 38/148
of 19 December 1983,
I. Endorses the report of the International Conference
on Population, containing the recommendations for the
further implementation of the World Population Plan of
Action; 195
2. Welcomes and strongly supports the Mexico City
Declaration on Population and Development, 1% adopted
by the Conference on 14 August 1984;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government and
people of Mexico for their generous hospitality. co-operation and support;
4. Commends the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the Conference for
the successful organization of the Conference;
5. Affirms that the principal aim of social, economic
and human development, of which population goals and
policies are integral parts, is to improve the standards of
living and quality of life of the people;
6. Also affirms that population growth, high mortality
and morbidity and migration problems continue to be
causes of great concern requiring immediate action;
7. Emphasizes the need, in implementing the recommendations of the Conference, to respect national sovereignty, to combat all forms of racial discrimination, including apartheid, and to promote social and economic development, human rights and individual freedom;
8. Reaffirms the importance attached by the Conference to the formulation and implementation of concrete
policies which will enhance the status and role of women
in the area of population policies and programmes, and the
need to pay attention to specific problems of population
structures;
9. Invites Governments to consider the recommendations for action at the national level and to implement
appropriate population policies and programmes, in the
context of their national plans, needs and requirements;
I0. Emphasizes that international co-operation in the
field of population is essential for the implementation of
recommendations adopted at the Conference and, in that
context, calls upon the international community to provide adequate and substantial international support and
assistance for population activities, particularly through
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, in
order to ensure more effective delivery of population
assistance in the light of growing needs and the increasing
efforts being made by developing countries;
11. Invites the Population Commission, at its twentythird session, to review, within its area of competence, the
recommendations of the Conference and their implications for the activities of the United Nations system, and
to transmit its views to the Economic and Social Council
at its first regular session of 1985;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine, at its first regular session of 1985, the recommen196 !hid.. sect. A.
