A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/107
3 March 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.3 and Corr.1)]
51/107.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran

The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights1 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,2
Recalling that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,3 adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to
25 June 1993, reaffirmed that human rights and fundamental freedoms were the
birthright of all human beings and that their protection and promotion was the
first responsibility of Governments,
Reaffirming that all Member States have a duty to fulfil the obligations
they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this
field,
Mindful that the Islamic Republic of Iran is a party to the
International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling the appointment by the Chairman of the Commission on Human
Rights of Mr. Maurice Danby Copithorne as Special Representative of the
Commission on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

97-77095

/...

A/RES/51/107
Page 2

Recalling its previous resolutions expressing concern at the violations
of human rights by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the most recent, resolution 50/188 of 22 December 1995, the resolutions of the
Commission on Human Rights, including the most recent, resolution 1996/84 of
24 April 1996,4 and those of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, including the most recent, resolution 1996/7 of
20 August 1996,5
Welcoming the cooperation extended by the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights
on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance and of discrimination
based on religion or belief and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on freedom of opinion and expression, who have been able to visit
the Islamic Republic of Iran, and bearing in mind the reports of those Special
Rapporteurs on their visits,6
Taking note of the interim report of the Special Representative,7 and
noting that he will present a further report to the Commission on Human
Rights,
Welcoming the requests by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
for technical assistance and advisory services from the office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights/Centre for Human Rights, as well as
from the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division of the Secretariat,
and taking note with interest of the observation by the Special Representative
in this regard,
Taking note with interest of certain recent developments in the Islamic
Republic of Iran which, in the view of the Special Representative, are
indicators of potential improvement of the status of women in that country,
Considering that continued international scrutiny of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the Islamic Republic of Iran is warranted and that the
subject should remain on the agenda of the General Assembly,
1.
Expresses its concern at the continuing violations of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular the high number of executions
in the absence of internationally recognized safeguards, cases of torture and
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the failure to meet
international standards with regard to the administration of justice and the
absence of due process of law, violations of the right to peaceful assembly
and restrictions on the freedom of expression, thought, opinion and the press;

4

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement
No. 3 (E/1996/23), chap. II, sect. A.
5

See E/CN.4/1997/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1996/41, chap. II, sect. A.

6

E/CN.4/1996/95/Add.2 and E/CN.4/1996/39/Add.2.

7

See A/51/479 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/51/107
Page 3

2.
Also expresses its concern at the grave breaches of human rights
of the Baha'is in the Islamic Republic of Iran and situations of
discrimination against the members of this religious community, as well as at
the discriminatory treatment of minorities by reason of their religious
beliefs, including lack of adequate protection for the Christian minorities,
some members of which have been the target of intimidation and assassination;
3.
Further expresses its concern at the widespread discrimination
against women in the Islamic Republic of Iran and the lack of full and equal
enjoyment by women of human rights, and calls upon the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to take effective measures to eliminate all
discrimination against women;
4.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, as a State
party to the International Covenants on Human Rights, to abide by its freely
undertaken obligations under the Covenants and under other international
instruments on human rights and to ensure that all individuals within its
territory and subject to its jurisdiction, including members of religious
groups and persons belonging to minorities, enjoy all the rights enshrined in
those instruments;
5.
Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement fully the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Rapporteur
of the Commission on Human Rights on the elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief relating to the
Baha'is and to other minority religious groups, including Christians;
6.
Expresses its grave concern at indications, according to the
information received by the Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, of a
significant toughening of criminal legislation and its application in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and in particular at the incidence of capital
punishment imposed for apostasy and non-violent crimes, in violation of the
relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights2 and United Nations safeguards;
7.
Expresses its concern at the harassment and persecution of
persons, including writers and members of the press, seeking to exercise their
freedom of expression;
8.
Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement existing agreements with international humanitarian organizations;
9.
Expresses its grave concern that there are continuing threats to
the life of Mr. Salman Rushdie, as well as to individuals associated with his
work, which appear to have the support of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, notes in this regard that efforts aimed at obtaining
satisfactory written assurances from the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran that it does not support these threats have so far been unsuccessful, and
calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to provide such
assurances;
10.
Deplores the politically motivated continuing violence against
Iranians outside the Islamic Republic of Iran, and urges the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to refrain from activities against members of the
Iranian opposition living abroad and the harassment of their relatives within
/...

A/RES/51/107
Page 4

the Islamic Republic of Iran and to cooperate wholeheartedly with the
authorities of other countries in investigating and punishing offences
reported by them;
11.
Welcomes the cooperation extended by the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the Special Representative, who has been able to conduct a
preliminary visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran;
12.
Expresses its hope that the Special Representative will again be
allowed to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran in the discharge of his mandate;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to
the Special Representative to enable him to discharge his mandate fully;
14.
Decides, on the basis of the report of the Special Representative
and in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human
Rights and the Economic and Social Council, to continue the examination of the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including the
situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is, during its fifty-second
session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
