S/2019/282

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2019
Original: English

Situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2440
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 30 April 2019 and requested
me to submit a report on the situation in Western Sahara before the end of the mandate
period. It covers developments that have occurred since the issuance of my previous
report, of 3 October 2018 (S/2018/889), and describes the situation on the ground, the
status and progress of the political negotiations on Western Sahara, the
implementation of resolution 2440 (2018) and the existing challenges to the Mission’s
operations and steps taken to address them.

II. Recent developments
2.
In the period since my last report, my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, Horst
Köhler, has continued to accelerate efforts to advance the negotiation process. On
5 and 6 December 2018 and on 21 and 22 March 2019, he convened round -table
meetings between Morocco, the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía
el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO), Algeria and Mauritania in
Switzerland. The round-table meetings marked the first face-to-face encounters in the
context of the political process since 2012 and were characterized by a positive spirit
and respectful and constructive atmosphere. In accordance with resolution 2440
(2018), my Personal Envoy briefed the Council on 29 January on the status of
discussions in the round-table process and informed the Council about the
commitment of the parties and neighbouring States to continue their engagement in
the political process. My Personal Envoy continues to undertake consultations on the
matter with relevant interlocutors, including Security Council members, members of
the Group of Friends on Western Sahara and regional orga nizations.
3.
The situation in Western Sahara has remained relatively calm. The ceasefire,
despite some significant violations, continues to hold, with both parties on the whole
continuing to respect the MINURSO mandate in safeguarding the rules enshrined in
military agreement No. 1 and other related agreements. Where violations were
identified by the Mission, the parties did not, however, always show willingness to
resolve them or find mitigating solutions. Both Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO
attempted to justify some of their violations of military agreement No. 1 as being

19-05404 (E)

050419

*1905404*

S/2019/282

necessary to prevent drug trafficking and other criminal activities, despite the
agreement not making allowances for intervention by military forces or the use of
military infrastructure in such cases.
4.
No further presence of Frente POLISARIO “police” has been observed in the
buffer strip in Guerguerat. MINURSO conducts frequent ground and air patrols in the
area, adjusting the intensity of its monitoring to the prevailing situation. There was
relative calm in the area until the latter part of December, despite periodic roadblocks
by civilians in the buffer strip protesting the lack of job opportunities in Western
Sahara and increases in the fees levied by Morocco on commercial traffi c. From late
December, obstructions on the road increased, causing heavy traffic jams. The
Moroccan coordinator wrote twice to my Special Representative to advise that
Morocco may decide to intervene with force if the road blockages became
unresolvable. My Special Representative urged that no intervention take place,
mindful of the political sensitivity of the area. The Secretary-General of Frente
POLISARIO wrote to me to warn against any Moroccan intervention across the berm.
As at the time of writing, the roadblocks continue periodically, but there has been no
intervention.
5.
Between 4 and 7 January, the Africa Eco Race, an annual automobile rally,
crossed Western Sahara, amid media speculation and Frente POLISARIO denials of
plans to re-establish an armed presence inside the buffer strip at Guerguerat to
obstruct the race. On 7 January, MINURSO military observers observed the
uninterrupted passage of the race convoy through Guerguerat. On the same day,
MINURSO military observers reported the presence of four individuals in civilian
clothing inside the buffer strip, travelling in an unmarked vehicle, who, after restoring
a painted Frente POLISARIO/“Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic” flag on stones
alongside the road (present since 2016), left the area. Moroc co officially denounced
this presence as a violation by Frente POLISARIO. After interviewing the
individuals, MINURSO was unable, on the basis of the information gathered, to
establish that there had been a violation of military agreement No. 1 or of relev ant
Security Council resolutions.
6.
On 2 February, a serious incident took place. After MINURSO military
observers had left Guerguerat for the day, a young Sahrawi man lit himself on fire
inside the Moroccan gate, reportedly in protest against the Morocc an “border”
authorities. He suffered injuries that led to his death on 6 February. This prompted an
emotional outcry on social media from many in the Sahrawi community, with some
of the anger directed at the United Nations and MINURSO, largely inspired by
incorrect reports that MINURSO military observers had witnessed the incident first hand and had not intervened. MINURSO reached out through Frente POLISARIO to
correct these impressions and calm the situation.
7.
On 17 October, three Sahrawi illicit gold miners working east of the berm gained
entry to the Mission’s team site in Mijek by falsely claiming a snake bite and
requesting urgent medical attention. Once inside, they revealed their engagement in
clandestine gold mining in a nearby area and claimed th at they were fleeing arrest by
Frente POLISARIO. After mediation by MINURSO, and with the full cooperation of
Frente POLISARIO, the three peacefully departed the team site on 18 October, but
threatened retaliation against Frente POLISARIO and MINURSO unles s they were
allowed to resume their gold mining activities. Frente POLISARIO informed
MINURSO that it considered gold mining illicit everywhere in the Territory east of
the berm and that the three men were criminals making false representations.
8.
A number of demonstrations took place in the refugee camps near Tindouf,
Algeria, including one on 7 February, when approximately one hundred protesters
gathered in front of the compound of the Office of the United Nations High
2/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Rabouni, Algeria, located close to the
building of the “Presidency” of the “Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic”. Protesters
were demanding information on the fate of a former adviser to the late Mohammed
Abdelaziz, Khalil Ahmed, who has been missing in Al geria since 2009. Another
protest took place at the same site on 10 February, against limitations on the import
of vehicles from Europe.
9.
On 6 November, King Mohammed VI delivered an address commemorating the
forty-third anniversary of the Green March, reiterating the commitment of Morocco
to cooperate in good faith with my efforts and those of my Personal Envoy to establish
a serious and credible political process, while taking into account the lessons of the
past. He also highlighted the return of Morocco to the African Union and called for
an end to “division and lack of unity in the Maghreb”, proposing a joint political
mechanism for dialogue and consultation between Morocco and Algeria “using an
open-ended agenda, without conditions or exceptions”.
10. In an official statement the same day, Frente POLISARIO, while reiterating its
commitment to the peace process led by my Personal Envoy, denounced the Moroccan
presence in Western Sahara as “an illegal military occupation” and described the
address of Mohammed VI as an attempt to “ignore one of the parties to the conflict”,
“obstruct the efforts of the United Nations” and “determine the framework and
conditions of the conflict resolution process”.
11. On 16 January, the European Parliament voted to adopt a resolution amending
protocols 1 and 4 to the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement between the European Union
and Morocco, extending the application of those protocols to goods from Western
Sahara. The Representative of Frente POLISARIO in New York wrote to the President
of the Security Council on 18 January (S/2019/63), complaining that the outcome of
the vote “represents a direct blow to human rights defenders and international law. It
also represents a major obstacle to the United Nations-led peace process”. On
24 January, the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations wrote to
inform me of the Agreement, noting that it marked the culmination of a long process
of technical negotiations and political consultations with the legitimate
representatives of local populations and legal validations initiated between Morocco
and the European Union. On 12 February, the European Parliament voted to adopt a
resolution concluding the Sustainable Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the
European Union and Morocco and similarly included Western Sahara in the scope of
application of that Agreement.
12. Moroccan investments west of the berm continued as previously reported.
Morocco maintains that such investments directly benefit the people of Western
Sahara and are implemented in consultation with them. Frente POLISARIO continues
to protest that they are in violation of international law and of the status of Western
Sahara as a Non-Self-Governing Territory. Frente POLISARIO also continues to
claim that all public expressions of dissent, especially pro -referendum or
pro-independence demonstrations, west of the berm are violently repressed by
Moroccan security forces.

III. Political activities
13. During the reporting period, my Personal Envoy continued his exchanges on the
issue of Western Sahara with relevant interlocutors, including Security Council
members, members of the Group of Friends on Western Sahara and regional
organizations.

19-05404

3/18

S/2019/282

14. On 29 and 30 October 2018, my Personal Envoy held bilateral meetings with
the President of Côte d’Ivoire, the President of Senegal and the President of South
Africa on the margins of the meeting of the Group of 20 on the Compact with Africa,
held in Berlin. All interlocutors stressed the urgent need to resolve the conflict,
highlighting that a mutually agreeable solution would greatly benefit the African
Union and strengthen its position as a partner for stability and peace in the world.
15. On 5 and 6 December, my Personal Envoy convened an initial round-table
meeting on Western Sahara in Geneva that was attended by representatives of
Morocco, Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania. He chose the round -table
format as a symbol of the willingness of people of diverging positions to find a new
way forward through dialogue. The round table was the first face -to-face meeting held
in the context of the political process in six years and was characterized by a sincere,
respectful and constructive atmosphere.
16. At the outset of the meeting, all delegations laid out their positions and their
understanding of the situation since the last round of talks in 2012. All stressed the
need for compromise and declared their willingness to engage in the political process.
On many issues, the delegations reiterated long-standing divergent positions. Frente
POLISARIO emphasized the right to self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara and highlighted the legal situation. Morocco stressed that a solution had to be
“realistic” and underscored the need to draw lessons from past failed attempts to
achieve a resolution to the conflict. Both Algeria and Mauritania participated in the
entirety of the meeting and pledged their support and strong engagement in the
process.
17. During a session on challenges and opportunities for cooperation in the region,
delegations expressed agreement on the high socioeconomic cost of the current
situation for the region, highlighting that the ongoing protracted conflict hampered
cooperation, paralysed economic development and jeopardized security in the entire
Maghreb region. They further agreed on the urgent need to increase regional
cooperation, not least in the light of high rates of unemployment and a growing
frustration among the young generations. My Personal Envoy was encouraged by this
conversation, which he interpreted as an important aspect in the search for common
ground between the parties and the neighbours.
18. At the conclusion of the meeting, all delegations underscored the difference in
atmosphere between the Geneva round table and previous encounters, concluding that
it could mark a new beginning for the political process. The delegations issued a joint
communiqué conveying their willingness to meet again in the first quarter of 2019.
My Personal Envoy complemented the communiqué with a press statement, in which
he reiterated his assessment that a peaceful solution to the conflict was indeed
possible.
19. On 11 December 2018, at a meeting with King Mohamed VI of Morocco in
Rabat, I expressed my gratitude for the constructive engagement of Morocco in the
political process and the initial round-table meeting on Western Sahara held in
December in Geneva. The King reiterated his country’s commitment to the political
process and commended my Personal Envoy on having brought Morocco, Frente
POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania together.
20. In a letter to my Personal Envoy dated 26 December 2018, the Secretary-General
of Frente POLISARIO, Brahim Ghali, expressed concern about the current trajecto ry
of the European Union’s trade policy, warning that it could pre-empt the outcome of
negotiations and negatively affect the potential for progress. Highlighting the
interlinkage between the political process and actions at the level of the European
Union, he urged my Personal Envoy to request European Union member States to use
trade constructively as a positive incentive for peace.
4/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

21. From 28 to 30 January 2019, my Personal Envoy visited New York, where he
held meetings with members of the Security Council and other stakeholders. In
accordance with paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 2440 (2018), my
Personal Envoy briefed the Security Council on 29 January 2019 on the initial round table meeting and his plans for the way forward. He explained that a lack of trust was
the core problem in the search for a solution and called on the parties to demonstrate
respect for each other and a willingness to compromise. Only by planting this “seed
of durability” early in the process would an eventual solution be enduring. He
received broad support for his efforts across the membership of the Security Council.
22. On 10 February 2019, I met the Secretary-General of Frente POLISARIO on the
margins of the thirty-second ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union
in Addis Ababa. During the meeting, I reiterated my intention to relaunch the
negotiations and asked for the support of the parties. Mr. Ghali expressed his full
support for my Personal Envoy and his mission and confirmed the serious intention
of Frente POLISARIO to support the search for a solution.
23. Before the second round-table meeting, my Personal Envoy held consultations
with Morocco, Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania in Febr uary and March
2019. He felt encouraged by their constructive and serious engagement and their
strong commitment to intensifying discussions and establishing a negotiations
process, while also taking note of serious differences of opinion on the future sta tus
of Western Sahara. However, they agreed that the focus of the second round -table
meeting should be on more substantive discussions regarding the future of Western
Sahara, as well as on ways and means to increase trust in the political process and
between the parties.
24. My Personal Envoy convened the second round-table meeting on 21 and
22 March 2019 near Geneva. The second meeting followed the format established in
December 2018, assembling Morocco, Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania
around the table. Delegations engaged courteously and openly, in an atmosphere of
mutual respect.
25. Delegations welcomed the new momentum created by the first round -table
meeting in December. They held in-depth discussions on how to achieve a mutually
acceptable political solution to the question of Western Sahara that was realistic,
practicable, enduring, based on compromise, just, lasting, which would provide for
the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2440 (2018). In that regard, they agreed to continue the discussion
in order to identify elements of convergence. There was consensus that the whole
Maghreb would greatly benefit from a solution to the question of Western Sahara.
Delegations also recognized that the region had a special responsibility to contribute
to a solution.
26. Delegations welcomed the intention of the Personal Envoy to invite them to
meet again in the same format. They agreed that additional trust needed to be built
and committed to continue to engage in the process. The Personal Envoy encouraged
delegations to explore good faith gestures and build more trust.
27. The Office of my Personal Envoy has continued to work closely with other
United Nations entities and partners, including the United Nations Office at Geneva,
UNHCR, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), humanitarian agencies active in the refugee camps near Tindouf and the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

19-05404

5/18

S/2019/282

IV. Activities of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara
A.

Operational activities
28. As at 28 February 2019, the military component of MINURSO consisted of 235
personnel, 45 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 245. From
1 September 2018 to 28 February 2019, MINURSO conducted approximately
395,657 km of ground patrols and 614 hours of air patrols. Cooperation between
MINURSO team site commanders and the parties was generally satisfactory. The
reporting period included monthly visits to approximately 1,025 units, headquarters
and strongpoints and 48 training areas. Military observers also visited 917 subunits
east and west of the berm and monitored more than 320 notified operational activities
by both parties.
29. Owing to security concerns, ground patrolling east of the berm remains
restricted to a 100-km radius from team sites, and no night patrols were conducted on
either side of the berm. The acquisition of a third helicopter in January has allowed
MINURSO to increase its air patrols to fill the gaps in ground patrolling and to
alleviate some of the workload placed on ground patrols. The General Assembly
approved funding in the MINURSO budget for the financial year 2018/19 for the
acquisition of protective bunkers for all team sites east of the berm, which are due to
be delivered by the middle of 2019. These bunkers will contribute significantly to the
existing protection of military observers in those areas, consistent with the
recommendations set out in the report entitled “Improving security of United Nations
peacekeepers: we need to change the way we are doing business ”, of 19 December
2017.
30. In line with the recommendations of the independent review, MINURSO
reviewed its ceasefire monitoring concept of operations, which will reduce the
number of predictable and repetitive ground patrols while increasing the number of
air patrols. This change, currently under way, was enabled by the deployment in
January of an additional helicopter, backed by a thorough review of the Mission ’s air
operations to identify how to increase the quality and consistency of aerial
observation outputs. In January, the Mission began a three -month test period aimed
at optimizing the increased capacity for air patrols, including improved use of cost effective technology, obtaining a more comprehensive aerial observation of the
Territory focused on those areas that are not easily reachable by ground patrols. The
Mission also identified eight high-priority areas on either side of the berm in which
violations have recently been discovered or may be occurring and that will be subject
to increased scrutiny.
31. MINURSO maintained sustained dialogue with both parties on addressing
alleged and actual violations of military agreement No. 1, in a context that remains
marked by their mutually exclusive positions, that is, they consider any actions by the
other party inside the Territory to be illicit, as well as the continued lack of direct
dialogue between the respective military forces. While the Mission’s role in
maintaining the ceasefire has not been overtly challenged, there were several
instances during the reporting period in which the Mission’s determination that a
violation had taken place was not respected by one party or the other.
32. As described in my previous report, the Royal Moroccan Army has built a new
sand wall near Mahbas, currently extending 80.26 km north to south at a distance of
8–15 km from and parallel to the existing berm. T his is a significant violation of
military agreement No. 1. As urged by MINURSO, work has now stopped on the wall,
and observation posts along its length have been abandoned by the Royal Moroccan

6/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

Army (S/2018/889, paras. 34 and 35). However, the wall is still in operation, with
four unarmed soldiers posted at each of the four gates, even though MINURSO had
warned that such a wall would be in violation of military agreement No. 1. The Royal
Moroccan Army continues to dispute the MINURSO assessment (ibid., para. 35) and
did not follow up on its call to de-operationalize the wall.
33. A second strengthening of the defensive position of Morocco at the berm was
noted near Awsard, at a location where maintenance works at the berm had been
approved by MINURSO on 12 December 2018. An inspection by MINURSO military
observers on 2 February revealed the construction of a second sand wall parallel to
the existing one, approximately 15 m from the existing wall, 30 km long, 3 m high
and 6 m wide, with a ditch running parallel to it. As this constitutes a significant
enlargement, rather than the maintenance that is provided for in military agreement
No. 1, it was declared a violation on 20 February. The Royal Moroccan Army arg ues
that the new wall is needed to protect the berm from floods and winds, as well as
smugglers – a claim that is not material to the rules set out in military agreement
No. 1.
34. During the reporting period, MINURSO recorded 16 additional new Royal
Moroccan Army observation posts in the restricted area, at approximately 15 km from
the berm in Bir Gandouz, in the southern part of the Territory. This brings the total
number of new posts discovered in the area to date to 29. Thirty-eight new Royal
Moroccan Army observation posts were also found in two separate areas near Oum
Dreyga, also in the restricted area. The violations working group declared each of
these posts a violation of military agreement No. 1.
35. These violations have been repeatedly brought to the attention of the Royal
Moroccan Army and, on 16 January, the MINURSO Force Commander raised them
again with the Commander of the Southern Sector of the Royal Moroccan Army,
Major General Belkhir El Farouk. The Force Commander reiterated the Mission ’s
demand that the Mahbas sand wall and the new observation posts in Bir Gandouz and
Oum Dreyga be dismantled, restoring the status quo ante. He also insisted that any
plans to build new observation posts be abandoned. The Major General reiterated the
argument that these installations had no military tactical or operational purposes and
were required only to prevent drug smuggling and other criminal activities.
MINURSO again explained that regardless of their intended purpose, these military
installations constituted violations of military agreement No. 1. Efforts by my Special
Representative to persuade Morocco to remove these violations have so far not borne
fruit.
36. Following a sustained intervention by my Special Representative, a military
presence of Frente POLISARIO at “waypoint 6”, located inside the buffer strip,
16.6 km east of the Guerguerat road, was moved to a location just outside the buffer
strip. This military presence consisted of two tents, one or two vehicles and between
two and six people. The Mission continues to monitor closely the situation in
Guerguerat through frequent aerial and ground patrols.
37. Between 3 and 6 January, Frente POLISARIO conducted a military exercise at
an established training facility inside the area with limited r estrictions near Mehaires.
This exercise had been duly notified to MINURSO under the terms of article 3.3 of
military agreement No. 1. In line with established practice, MINURSO military
observers were present at the location and observed the exercise thro ughout its
duration. No violation was observed on this occasion. I nonetheless reiterate the
importance of ensuring that no action, in particular of a military nature, be conducted
that could risk creating tensions.
38. MINURSO regularly monitors a number of new buildings constructed by Frente
POLISARIO in various locations east of the berm to ensure their compliance with
19-05404

7/18

S/2019/282

military agreement No. 1 and paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2440 (2018).
One logistics hub consisting of 10 new buildings near Bir Lahlou, which had already
been declared a violation in 2017, has now been included in the list of long -standing
violations. Eight new buildings near Mehaires, used by the military forces of F rente
POLISARIO, were declared violations on 3 October. Frente POLISARIO has been
asked to remove them, but has not followed up on that request. The Mission continues
to urge the Frente POLISARIO leadership to address these violations and ensure that
any other new buildings are in compliance with military agreement No. 1 and
paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2440 (2018).
39. In keeping with warnings issued by MINURSO, no work has been condu cted by
Frente POLISARIO to establish the new military observation posts near Bir Lahlou
that were proposed in 2018 (S/2018/889, para. 38).
40. Over the course of the past year, Morocco has provided MINURSO and the
Secretariat with various satellite images of alleged construction and military activities
east of the berm, which, they suggest, may be in violation of military agreement No. 1
or paragraphs 7 or 8 of Security Council resolution 2414 (2018). MINURSO has
assessed all of these allegations. Some of them had previously been recorded as
violations by the Mission. In addition, on the basis of these images, two new
violations were identified and declared, pertaining to two sites in Mehaires: a logistics
unit and a cluster of still-unoccupied buildings (see para. 38 above).
41. While individual new observation posts established by either the Royal
Moroccan Army or the armed forces of Frente POLISARIO in themselves do not
constitute major changes to the balance of forces on the ground, especially where they
are temporary in nature or manned with troops relocated from recognized positions,
they nonetheless constitute violations of military agreement No . 1. They are also
significant as potential sources of tension and further mistrust between the parties,
especially when created in large numbers.
42. In the reporting period, MINURSO recorded five freedom-of-movement
violations committed by the Royal Moroccan Army and six by the military forces of
Frente POLISARIO. MINURSO continues to address each such violation with the
parties to ensure that they are not repeated.
43. The above general violations are in addition to the previously reported long standing violations. These include 10 long-standing violations by the Royal Moroccan
Army and four long-standing violations by the armed forces of Frente POLISARIO
(including the establishment of a logistics hub near Bir Lahlou in 2017, as described
in paragraph 38 above).

B.

Mine action
44. Landmines and other explosive remnants of war continue to pose a threat to
MINURSO personnel and logistical convoys. As at 28 February 2019, 81 known
cluster strike areas and 26 known minefields remained to be addressed east of the
berm. In September 2018, most of the staff of the Mission’s United Nations Mine
Action Service team were relocated back to Laayoune, in order to best access the
current operations, while a small presence was maintained in Tindouf.
45. East of the berm, MINURSO, through the Mine Action Service, conducted
survey and clearance of 2,881,436 m 2 of land contaminated by landmines and
explosive remnants of war, releasing 33 medium- and high-priority cluster strike areas
and one minefield. A total of 24,500 m 2 (equivalent to 5.9 km) of Mission patrol and
logistic routes have been verified east of the berm, enabling the movements of
MINURSO military observers. A total of 376 items of explosive remnants of war were

8/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

destroyed, consisting of 331 submunitions, 30 anti-tank mines and 15 other
unexploded ordnance. Frente POLISARIO destroyed its last stockpile of 2,469 mines
(2,465 anti-personnel mines and four anti-tank mines) on 6 January 2019, in
compliance with the Geneva Call Deed of Commitment for Adherence to a Total Ban
on Anti-Personnel Mines and for Cooperation in Mine Action, which it signed in
2005.
46. Operations east of the berm were monitored through 28 quality assurance
assessments by the MINURSO Mine Action Service team. In addition, MINURSO,
through the Mine Action Service, conducted landmine safety training for 95 newly
arrived civilian and military personnel of MINURSO, as well as landmine safety
refresher training sessions for eight personnel. During the reporting period, landmines
and explosive remnants of war caused three civilian injuries and one civilian death,
as recorded in the Information Management System for Mine Action.
47. MINURSO, through its local partner east of the berm, the Sahrawi Mine Action
Coordination Office, remains in contact with Frente POLISARIO on matters related
to mine action to better ascertain the impact of landmines and other explosive
remnants of war in Western Sahara. MINURSO, through the Mine Action Service,
also continues to provide technical assistance to the Office in the areas of operations,
programme management, data management, administration and finance.
48. Since October 2018, west of the berm, the Royal Moroccan Army has reported
two civilian deaths due to an accident related to landmines and explosive remnants of
war, as well as one injury to military personnel and one to a civilian. The Royal
Moroccan Army reported the clearance of more than 126 million m 2 of land west of
the berm and the destruction of 679 items, consisting of 614 items of unexploded
ordnance, 53 anti-personnel mines and 12 anti-vehicle mines.

C.

Security
49. The overall security environment in Western Sahara remains relatively stable,
although there have been increased reports of smuggling and other illegal activities
on both sides of the berm. The risk of terrorist attacks against MINURSO remains a
concern owing to the prevalence of malicious actors in the surrounding region. There
have been no new direct or explicit threats against the Mission since 2017, but the
reported arrest by Morocco of one terrorist suspect in Laayoune in January and of
another terrorist suspect by Frente POLISARIO in the refugee camps in December
are indicators that terrorist armed groups may continue to view Western Sahara as a
target. No significant security incidents were reported in the refugee camps during
the reporting period. Algeria and Frente POLISARIO continued to provide security
to the premises of the United Nations and international non -governmental
organizations and to staff in Tindouf and the refugee camps, respectively. There has
been an increase in migration and people trafficking to Europe through Western
Sahara. The unauthorized entry of three individuals involved in illicit gold mining
activities into the Mission’s team site in Mijek, east of the berm, on 17 October,
illustrates the risks to the Mission of such illegal activities. On that occasion, the
matter was quickly resolved through good cooperation between MINURSO and
Frente POLISARIO, but MINURSO has since reviewed its own security procedures
for all team sites.
50. Morocco and Frente POLISARIO retain primary responsibility for the safety
and security of United Nations personnel, assets and resources west and east of the
berm, respectively, and MINURSO continues to have confidence in the commitment
and capability of both parties. MINURSO also completed the 2019 security risk
management process in mid-February, and additional security measures provided for

19-05404

9/18

S/2019/282

in the budget for 2018/19 are being implemented. Situational awareness west of the
berm continues to be hampered by lack of access to interlocutors.

D.

Substantive civilian activities
51. MINURSO provided regular reports and analysis to the Secretariat and to my
Personal Envoy on developments in and affecting Western Sahara and the peace
process. The Mission’s liaison office in Tindouf closely followed developments in
and around the refugee camps, making an important contribution to that analysis. The
Mission’s joint civilian and military analysis structure continuously assessed
developments on the ground and coordinated advice to the Mission leadership to
facilitate engagement with the parties, in order to calm tensions and prevent conflict.
MINURSO received regular visits by representatives of Member States in Laayoune
and in Tindouf, and my Special Representative has maintained the practice of briefing
Member States, in either Rabat or New York, several times a year.
52. Relations between MINURSO and the parties continue to be good despite
disagreements on a number of issues. Meetings between the MINURSO and Frent e
POLISARIO leadership have not resumed in Rabouni, Algeria, as had been the long standing practice. Regular communication and daily working-level contact are
maintained through the Mission’s liaison office in Tindouf and various electronic
means. Visits by my Special Representative to the refugee camps and contact with
civil society and other relevant interlocutors in the Tindouf area remain unhindered.
53. As an interim measure, my Special Representative meets the Frente
POLISARIO coordinator outside the Mission area when the need arises. Such a
meeting took place on 28 February. That approach is important for maintaining
effective communications and a good working relationship in the furtherance of the
MINURSO mandate and directly facilitates the Mission’s role in preventing conflict.
However, it remains an interim measure, and my earlier call for a return to the
established practice of meeting in Rabouni remains unaddressed. Morocco has
indicated that it objects to both the Frente POLISARIO stance and the interim
solution.

E.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
54. As reported previously (S/2018/889, paras. 55–57), the diverging interpretations
by the parties of the MINURSO mandate continue to pose a major challenge to the
Mission’s operations, which frequently lead to vocal and systematic criticism of its
activities.
55. One result of such interpretations is the Mission’s lack of access to local
interlocutors west of the berm, which continues to limit its ability to form an
independent assessment of the situation in Western Sahara, whether for analytical or
security purposes, and thereby fulfil its mandated task of assisting my Personal
Envoy. These restrictions have tightened during the reporting period, despite the
request of my Personal Envoy for the assistance of my Special Representative in
maintaining contacts with some local interlocutors. This request resulted in Morocco
again adamantly objecting, claiming that such contacts are incompatible with the
Mission’s mandate.
56. The perception of the Mission’s impartiality also remains negatively affected by
the long-standing imposition by Morocco of the use of Moroccan vehicle number
plates on MINURSO vehicles west of the berm (ibid., para. 56), contrary to the
agreement in principle reached with the Government of Morocco in 2015.

10/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

57. The threat posed by terrorist groups and organized crime in the Sahel continue
to pose major security concerns, especially in the uninhabited desert expanse east of
the berm, in particular with respect to the Mission’s ground patrols and resupply
convoys. MINURSO has full confidence in the commitment of Frente POLISAR IO
to protecting MINURSO static team sites, but the nature of the extremist threat from
other points in the Sahel remains a concern.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
58. The question of individuals who are still unaccounted for, in relation to past
hostilities, remains a major humanitarian concern. The International Committee of
the Red Cross continues, as a neutral intermediary, to seek avenues with the parties
on this issue.

B.

Assistance to the protection of Western Saharan refugees
59. UNHCR continued to provide international protection and, together with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food Programme (WFP),
delivered humanitarian assistance to Sahrawi refugees living in the five camps near
Tindouf.
60. Malnutrition and anaemia prevalence remained public health concerns. UNHCR
and WFP continued to work closely together on the treatment and prevention of
anaemia, stunting and malnutrition among young children, girls, and pregnant and
lactating women. WFP provided mid-morning snacks to more than 40,000 boys and
girls in primary schools and kindergartens to encourage attendance and retention. To
contribute to resilience and improve food security, WFP scaled up its h ydroponic
projects to produce fresh animal fodder and launched a fish farm project in 2019,
while UNHCR continued to support bakeries. UNHCR and WFP will jointly carry out
a nutrition survey in 2019 to obtain a current nutritional profile of the Sahrawi re fugee
population and develop recommendations to improve the population ’s nutritional
status.
61. The UNHCR-led inter-agency vulnerability assessment to identify needs by
sector remains ongoing. WFP completed a separate assessment to measure food
insecurity among the refugee population, finding that refugees rely heavily on food
assistance and that only 12 per cent of the Sahrawi camp population is food secure.
In addition, 58 per cent of refugees are vulnerable to food insecurity and 30 per cent
are food insecure. WFP continues to cover the refugees’ basic food and nutrition needs
through monthly distributions.
62. UNICEF is also present in the camps and provides support to maternal and child
health programmes, including the expanded programme of immunization, child
protection and primary education activities, as well as the rehabilitation of water,
sanitation and hygiene facilities in schools and hygiene promotion activities.
63. The main challenge for humanitarian actors remained the funding shor tfall.
UNHCR is struggling to meet international standards in its life -saving activities in
the areas of protection, shelter, water and sanitation, health, nutrition, education,
energy, provision of non-food items and livelihoods. None of the targets for 2 018
were achieved in these sectors. Dispensaries and hospitals are in urgent need of
rehabilitation, and the distribution of hygiene kits to women and girls of reproductive
age was insufficient to meet needs. New water sources are urgently required as the

19-05404

11/18

S/2019/282

population receives on average only about 12 litres of drinking water per person per
day – well below the minimum standard of 20 litres per person per day.
64. Last year, the humanitarian community launched a multi-agency/multi-partner
appeal for $137 million for the period 2018–2019, but the three United Nations
agencies have received only 59 per cent of their combined overall needs. UNICEF
was the lowest funded, at only 30 per cent, while WFP had received 100 per cent of
its needs at the end of 2018, and UNHCR had secured 40 per cent.

C.

Confidence-building measures
65. The confidence-building measures, pursuant to Security Council resolution
1282 (1999) and subsequent resolutions, to allow family links between Sahrawi
refugees in the Tindouf camps and their communities of origin in the Territory of
Western Sahara remain on hold. In his briefing to the Security Council on 29 January
2019, my Personal Envoy underlined the need to build trust bet ween the parties. In
this context, he proposed a resumption of family visits under the auspices of UNHCR
and received support for this initiative.

D. Human rights
66. OHCHR is concerned by the continued pattern of restrictions on the rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association in Western Sahara. During
the reporting period, 1 OHCHR continued to receive reports of harassment, arbitrary
arrests, confiscation of equipment and excessive surveillance of journalists, bloggers
and human rights defenders covering human rights violations in the Territory.
67. Access to Western Sahara remained limited for some people. Information
received by OHCHR indicated that at least 15 persons had been expelled from or
denied access to the Territory of Western Sahara by the Moroccan authorities during
the period under review, including human rights defenders, researchers, lawyers and
representatives of international non-governmental organizations.
68. Torture and ill-treatment of Sahrawi prisoners in Morocco continued to be
reported. OHCHR received several communications from lawyers and/or family
members of the Gdeim Izik group of prisoners, alleging that several members of the
group had been subjected to torture, prolonged solitary confinement, medical neglect
and denial of family visits and access to independent monitoring mechanisms.
According to sources, in the reporting period, at least four of the prisoners had begun,
or continued, hunger strikes that lasted from 48 hours to more than 30 days. Some of
those prisoners had consequently developed critical health conditions.

VI. African Union
69. In a letter to my Personal Envoy dated 1 March 2019, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission assured the United Nations of its support and inform ed
my Personal Envoy that the African mechanism established by the Assembly of the
African Union at its session held in July 2018 in Nouakchott had been unable to
convene its inaugural meeting in the margins of the thirty-second ordinary session of
__________________
1

12/18

Gaps in reporting on the situation of human rights in Western Sahara persist owing to the lack of
access of OHCHR to the Territory. In its resolution 2440 (2018), the Security Council
encouraged enhanced cooperation with OHCHR, including through the facilitation of visits to the
region.
19-05404

S/2019/282

the Assembly as planned, and that consultations were under way to convene the
inaugural meeting as soon as possible.

VII. Financial aspects
70. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/301 of 5 July 2018, appropriated the
amount of $52.4 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019. My proposed budget in the amount of $56.4 million (exclusive
of budgeted voluntary contributions in kind) for the maintenance of the Mission for
the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020 has been submitted to the Assembly for
its consideration during the second part of its resumed seventy-third session. Should
the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of MINURSO beyond 30 April
2019, the cost of maintaining the Mission would be limited to the amounts approved
by the General Assembly.
71. As at 19 March 2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINURSO amounted to $46.0 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,102.6 million.
72. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 October
2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned major equipment and
self-sustainment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2017, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
73. A solution to the conflict is possible. Finding a just, lasting and mu tually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara, however, will require strong political will not just from the parties
and the neighbouring States, but also from the international community. I therefore
call on Security Council members, friends of Western Sahara and other relevant actors
to encourage Morocco and Frente POLISARIO to seize the current window of
opportunity presented and continue to engage in good faith and without preconditions
in the round-table process launched by my Personal Envoy.
74. A core problem in the search for a solution to the protracted conflict is a lack of
trust on all sides in the others’ willingness to engage seriously and fairly in the
process. Building trust will take time, but the parties and the neighbours, as well as
the international community, can contribute to a process that nurtures this trust. I urge
the parties to actively make gestures of good faith that demonstrate their willingness
to make progress. With the destruction of its last remaining stockpile of landmines,
Frente POLISARIO has already taken a commendable first step in that regard.
75. The second round table demonstrated that all delegations are aware that many
people are placing their hope in the political process, in particular those whose lives
are directly affected by the conflict. The costs of the conflict over Western Sahara, in
terms of human suffering, lack of prospects for the youth, and security risks, are far
too high to be accepted. I therefore welcome the agreement by delegations to continue
this process and to convene again in the round-table format, and call on the parties to
continue to search for a compromise.
76. I urge the parties to respect and promote human rights, includi ng in addressing
outstanding human rights issues and enhancing cooperation with OHCHR and the
United Nations human rights mechanisms, and to facilitate their follow -up missions.
Independent, impartial, comprehensive and sustained monitoring of the human ri ghts
situation is necessary to ensure the protection of all people in Western Sahara.
19-05404

13/18

S/2019/282

77. Since the inception of MINURSO in 1991 no exchange of fire between the
parties has taken place, and this is a testament to the value of the Mission ’s daily,
active conflict-prevention interventions and early-warning role. These efforts have
been successful in de-escalating tensions, in resolving alleged or potential violations
of the military agreements and in maintaining the parties ’ confidence in the ceasefire
arrangements.
78. The constraints placed upon MINURSO in accessing interlocutors to support
the Personal Envoy, to better advise the Council and to inform the Mission ’s own
security awareness are an obstacle to its effective functioning and security planning.
I urge Morocco to remove these constraints and allow the Mission free access to local
interlocutors.
79. As stated in paragraph 53 above, my Special Representative met the Frente
POLISARIO coordinator outside the Mission area as an interim measure. By
facilitating effective communication, such meetings are useful to enable the Mission
to effectively discharge its mandate and contribute to its preventive role. I nonetheless
strongly reiterate my request to resume meetings with the senior MINURSO
leadership in Rabouni and urge Frente POLISARIO to return to the long -established
practice.
80. I urge the parties to maintain their productive dialogue with MINURSO and to
cooperate with it to find satisfactory resolutions to outstanding violations, both long standing and recent, as referred to in the section on operational activities in the present
report, and in line with the provisions of military agreement No. 1 and other
agreements related to the ceasefire, in the established framework and in full respect
for its impartiality and independence. Maintaining peaceful and stable conditions on
the ground is essential to providing a propitious climate for the political process.
81. I remain concerned about the security and safety of the Mission ’s unarmed
military observers in Western Sahara, in particular east of the berm, where, despite a
track record of protection by Frente POLISARIO, they remain vulnerable to threats
by criminal and terrorist groups. I thank both parties for their continued commitment
to the protection of MINURSO personnel and facilities, and the Security Council for
its ongoing support for the Mission’s efforts to strengthen the security of its facilities,
and I call for that support to be continued.
82. I would like to thank the Mission’s troop-contributing countries for their
contributions to increasing the number of women among the military observers. This
has already had a notable positive impact upon the Mission and supports my efforts
to pursue gender parity in the United Nations. I strongly e ncourage them to continue
in this positive direction.
83. MINURSO remains a core element of the United Nations effort to reach a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution to the conflict in Western Sahara
that will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. The
presence of the United Nations in Western Sahara is essential and actively prevents
conflict to maintain peace and stability in support of the peace process. The Mission
is also the main and often sole source of impartial information and advice to me, the
Security Council, the Secretariat and my Personal Envoy about developments in the
Territory. I therefore recommend that the Council extend the mandate of MINURSO.
Its efforts remain critical to maintaining the stable, peaceful and propitious climate
necessary to achieve progress in the peace process led by my Personal Envoy.
84. I thank my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, Horst Köhler, for his continuing
efforts. I also thank my Special Representative for Western Sahara and Head of
MINURSO, Colin Stewart, for his dedicated leadership of MINURSO. I would like
to express my gratitude to Major General Wang Xiaojun, who recently completed his
14/18

19-05404

S/2019/282

tour of duty as Force Commander, and welcome Major General Zia Ur Rehman of
Pakistan into this role. Finally, I thank the men and women of MINURSO for their
continued commitment, under difficult and challenging circumstances, to fulfilling
the Mission’s mandate.

19-05404

15/18

S/2019/282

Annex I
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Contributions as at 1 March 2019
Military
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

–

–

3

Austria

5

–

–

5

Bangladesh

8

20

–

28

Brazil

9

–

–

9

Bhutan

1

–

–

1

China

13

–

–

13

Côte d’Ivoire

2

–

–

2

Croatia

7

–

–

7

Djibouti

1

–

–

1

Ecuador

4

–

–

4

Egypt

22

–

–

22

El Salvador

2

–

–

2

Finland

–

–

0

0

France

2

–

–

2

Germany

3

–

–

3

Ghana

7

7

–

14

Guinea

5

–

–

5

Honduras

11

–

–

11

Hungary

7

–

–

7

India

2

–

–

2

Indonesia

4

–

–

4

Ireland

3

–

–

3

Italy

2

–

–

2

Jordan

2

–

–

2

Kazakhstan

5

–

–

5

Malawi

2

–

–

2

Malaysia

10

–

–

10

Mexico

4

–

–

4

Mongolia

4

–

–

4

Montenegro

1

–

–

1

Nepal

8

–

–

8

Nigeria

6

–

–

6

Pakistan

13

–

–

13

Poland

2

–

–

2

Portugal

–

–

0

0

Republic of Korea

4

–

–

4

Russian Federation

16

–

–

16

Sri Lanka

4

–

–

4

Country

16/18

Police

19-05404

S/2019/282
Military

Police

Country

Military observers

a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Sweden

1

–

–

1

Switzerland

1

–

–

1

Togo

2

–

–

2

208

27

0

235 c

Total
a

Authorized strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, in cluding the Force
Commander.

b

19-05404

17/18

S/2019/282

Annex II
Map

18/18

19-05404
