S/PV.8538

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8538th meeting

Tuesday, 4 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2019/430)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-15982 (E)
*1915982*

S/PV.8538

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani,
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, for his service
as President of the Council for the month of May. I
am sure I speak for all the members of the Council in
expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador Djani
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2019/430)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/430, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA).
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8421), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) has made noticeable progress with regard to
the reform process. Following the finalization of the
reform documents in January, the ECCAS Council of
Ministers is expected to convene on 21 June to validate
2/20

04/06/2019

these documents. It is our hope that the Assembly of
ECCAS Heads of State and Government will endorse
the documents before the end of this year. This reform
process should contribute to the transformation of
ECCAS into a more effective organization for regional
integration, conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as peacebuilding. UNOCA remains committed
to helping to enhance these capacities, building on the
valuable expertise already available. The reform should
also provide the organization with a more adequate
mandate and tools, as well as the means to carry out
such a mandate. I appeal to ECCAS member States to
enhance their support to this process so as to ensure
its timely completion and the launch of a reformed
ECCAS for the benefit of regional peace, stability
and integration.
To date, the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa
(UNSAC) remains the primary platform where ECCAS
member States meet regularly to discuss peace and
security in Central Africa and recommend actions to
address threats to regional stability. I have just arrived
from Kinshasa, where the Committee held its fortyeighth ministerial meeting on 31 May, which focused
on the political and security situation in Central
Africa. Members of UNSAC took note of the holding
of elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
on 30 December 2018, which enabled the country to
experience a peaceful alternation of power. They also
welcomed the signing of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
and expressed their support for efforts to advocate the
complete lifting of the arms embargo. They took note
of the efforts of the Government of Cameroon to find
a lasting solution to the crisis in the North-West and
South-West regions, and encouraged the Government
to pursue dialogue to that end. Following a closed
session on the financing of regional institutions and
cross-border transhumance, the members of UNSAC,
inter alia, first, invited the ECCAS general secretariat
to conclude the process of drafting a community
regulation on pastoralism and transhumance; secondly,
called for the holding of a high-level conference on this
issue; thirdly, encouraged ECCAS member States to
participate in meetings dedicated to the reform of the
organization; and fourthly, emphasized the importance
of setting up mechanisms to ensure the regular payment
of financial contributions.
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

Recurrent and often deadly clashes between
pastoralists and farmers in several countries continue
to be a source of serious concern and a threat to regional
security and integration. Recent intercommunal
tensions in eastern Chad, opposing nomadic herders
and sedentary farmers, as well as the attacks against
villages in the Central African Republic on 21 May,
remind us of the urgent need to address the issue of
pastoralism and transhumance. I am pleased that this
is receiving increasing attention in Central Africa, and
I welcome the conclusions of the workshop organized
on 27 and 28 May in Kinshasa, which finalized a draft
regulation instrument on pastoralism and transhumance.
UNOCA will continue to support the efforts of ECCAS
in this area and to promote, together with UNOWAS,
cooperation and the exchange of good practices between
Central, East and West Africa on the issue, given the
interregional dimension of the phenomenon.
(spoke in French)
Boko Haram has intensified its attacks on Cameroon
and Chad since late 2018, killing nearly 100 civilians
and members of the defence and security forces. Despite
the commendable efforts of the affected countries and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the terrorist group
continues to pose a security threat to Central Africa and
beyond. This situation calls for enhanced cooperation
and better sharing of experiences and lessons learned
between the affected countries and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, as well as greater and more sustained
international assistance to defeat Boko Haram, address
the humanitarian needs of the affected populations and
tackle the root causes of the conflict.
The regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery
and resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad Basin
affected by Boko Haram activities, adopted in August
2018, therefore represents a source of hope for the
people living in those zones. I continue to work hand
in hand with Mr. Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWAS to
raise awareness among partners of the need to remain
committed to the fight against Boko Haram. I take this
opportunity to call once again on the States concerned
to intensify their efforts for the implementation of the
regional strategy at the national level, and I call on
international partners to support these efforts.
I note that the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
continues to pose a threat to peace and security in
Central Africa, particularly in the Central African

S/PV. 8538

Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I encourage the Governments of the subregion and
the members of the Security Council to support the
efforts of the African Union Commission to establish
alternative security mechanisms for the elimination of
the LRA, in the framework of regional cooperation and
the African Standby Force.
Regarding the situation in the North-West and
South-West regions of Cameroon, we note several
high-level visits to the country and a series of public
statements from key partners, who all expressed their
concerns on the issues of protection and called for
an inclusive and sincere dialogue. On 9 May, Prime
Minister Joseph Dion Ngute announced that President
Paul Biya was ready to engage in dialogue on all issues,
except those relating to separation and secession, in
order to find a lasting solution to the crisis. This is an
encouraging step in the right direction. In a statement
on the sociopolitical situation in Cameroon, published
on 28 May, the Government recalled the efforts made to
date to manage the humanitarian situation and engage
in dialogue with all stakeholders. He also underscored
his commitment to cooperating with members of the
Human Rights Council, other Member States, United
Nations agencies and other bilateral actors.
I recall the statement made by the Secretary-General
on the importance of upholding the unity and territorial
integrity of Cameroon. It is also important to stress that
the search for solutions to the crisis must be guided by
the Government. Conducting inclusive dialogue is the
best way to preserve the stability of the country, which
is vital to the entire subregion. I therefore encourage
the Cameroonian authorities to continue their dialogue
efforts and to advance the process of decentralization.
I reiterate the availability of the United Nations to
work with Cameroon in this and other key tasks, such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
peacebuilding, through the Peacebuilding Fund, among
other sources of funding.
Despite these positive developments, the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate, with frequent
clashes between secessionist armed groups and
national defence and security forces. Civilians remain
the main victims of the conflict. Many have lost their
lives, while about 530,000 are internally displaced
in the North-West, South-West and Littoral regions,
and more than 30,000 have taken refuge in Nigeria.
Affected populations are in urgent need of assistance,
while humanitarian access in the North-West and

19-159823/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

South-West regions remains a challenge due to security
concerns. In addition, Cameroon is hosting 278,000
refugees from the Central African Republic and
104,000 Nigerian refugees in the far northern region.
I commend the provision of humanitarian assistance
by the Government and note that only 13 per cent of
the United Nations humanitarian response plan has
been funded to date. I call on international partners to
consider financial assistance to enable the provision
of all the humanitarian assistance that vulnerable
populations greatly need.
While the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic raises several challenges, it
remains an effective instrument for contributing to the
achievement of lasting peace in the country. It is crucial
that the subregion and the States members of ECCAS
play their part in the success of the agreement. To this
end, I welcome the reactivation of the joint commission
between Cameroon and the Central African Republic
in Bangui last month. I encourage the Central African
Republic and other neighbouring States to reactivate
their bilateral joint commissions, which should
facilitate discussions on border management and
common security challenges.
I welcome the announcement of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) on 9 May that its mission had
completed discussions with the Republic of the Congo
and had reached an agreement, ad referendum, that
could be supported by a programme under the Extended
Credit Facility. This favourable development comes
after two years of negotiations.
In Gabon, the IMF recently noted the stabilization
of the macroeconomic situation. In the meantime,
President Ali Bongo Ondimba is recovering in Libreville
from his health problems. Since May, he has received
visits from Presidents Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé of
Togo, Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire and Macky
Sall of Senegal, as well as the Secretary General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, Louise
Mushikiwabo. Other Heads of State are expected in the
coming days.
I note the efforts of the Chadian authorities to hold
parliamentary elections before end of the year, and I
call on all national and international actors to contribute
to the organization of credible, inclusive and peaceful
elections within the envisaged deadlines.
4/20

04/06/2019

In the face of all these challenges, UNOCA remains
firmly committed to regional capacity-building in
the areas of crisis prevention and crisis and conflict
management, including support for ECCAS and its
member States. We are confident that the findings of
the ongoing UNOCA strategic review will contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of the Office and its role as
a key United Nations tool for preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding, in close cooperation with the relevant
United Nations entities. We will continue to make
every effort to improve coherence and coordination
between these entities, in particular in matters of peace
and security. I thank the Council for its attention and
continued support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Fall for
what he has had to say and for his efforts.
We very much welcome the continued support
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) to tackle the underlying root causes
of conflict in the region, and we believe that national,
regional and international cooperation remains key to
resolving those challenges. With that in mind, I was
pleased to hear and read about the support that Special
Representative Fall has been giving to the States
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and to its secretariat as they
develop their own action plan for reform. I and my
colleagues certainly look forward to being updated on
that as it approaches finalization and implementation
over the rest of the year. I thank Mr. Fall for what he has
done in that regard.
The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is an
example of how the United Nations, African Union and
national efforts can deliver progress towards peace.
In that context, the meeting of the Central African
Republic-Cameroon bilateral joint commission in
Bangui on 6 and 7 May was very welcome. We encourage
neighbouring Governments to support implementation
of the agreement.
The United Kingdom is a long-standing friend
and partner of Cameroon. We very much appreciate
Cameroon’s generosity towards refugees from the Lake
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

Chad Basin and the Central African Republic. We work
with Cameroon on tackling the threat from Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in West Africa. Nevertheless,
we very much share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/430) and we all
discussed those concerns at our Arria Formula meeting
on 13 May, when we heard testimony from those on the
ground, the humanitarian agencies and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the worsening
humanitarian situation in Cameroon, which is rapidly
reaching a crisis point. I recall that the Anglophone crisis
has driven more than 560,000 Cameroonians from their
homes, including 32,000 refugees into Nigeria. Some
4.3 million people, including some 2.3 million children,
are in need of humanitarian assistance. It is the trend
that is particularly concerning. As we learned from our
humanitarian briefers on 13 May, there has been a huge
increase in those numbers over the past year. We are
dealing with a situation that is deteriorating rapidly.
There are also reports of human rights violations
and abuses by both the security forces of Cameroon
and armed separatists and the denial of humanitarian
access, which are cause for real concern. We are deeply
troubled by reports of the targeting of health facilities
and health-care workers, which must stop. We remind all
parties that any deliberate targeting of health facilities
or health-care workers is a violation of international
humanitarian law. We very much welcome the visit
by Michele Bachelet, High Commissioner for Human
Rights. It is now important that access be achieved for
her human rights officials to the affected regions.
There is a real risk of a long-term, intractable
conflict in Cameroon, which could have a negative
impact on fragile regional stability, with implications
for wider international peace and security. We
underline the importance of Cameroon’s unity and
territorial integrity and we believe that our African
partners have an important role to play in supporting
a sustainable solution to the crisis, including through
ECCAS and African Union leadership. We continue
to urge the Government of Cameroon to establish a
credible, inclusive and purposeful political dialogue.
There has been a number of welcome announcements
by the Government of Cameroon, but we have to see
those turn into reality on the ground. The Peacebuilding
Fund provides a real opportunity for the Government
of Cameroon to get expert support for its proposals
and initiatives.

S/PV. 8538

As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
the shrinking space for political opposition, civil
society and free and independent media is a concern
with respect not only to Cameroon but also to Chad,
the Central African Republic and the Republic of the
Congo. We urge the Governments of those countries to
take constructive steps to ensure the protection of civil
space and civil and political rights, given that they are
the fundamental building blocks of long-term stability.
The United Kingdom also remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian and security situation in the
wider Lake Chad basin, caused by the conflict with and
actions of Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West
Africa. We utterly condemn the violence wreaked by
those groups on civilian populations and recognize the
sacrifices made by the armed forces of the countries of
the Lake Chad basin in the fight against terrorism. The
United Kingdom remains committed to its support for
efforts to tackle that crisis. It is right that a coordinated,
coherent response should be led first and foremost by
the Governments of the affected countries themselves,
but with support from regional partners, the United
Nations and the international community, including, of
course, the United Kingdom.
I very much welcome the joint visits that Special
Representative Fall has been undertaking with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas, to the
countries of the region. I very much look forward to the
Council receiving their joint report once they have been
to all those countries. I think that that would be a good
opportunity for us then to come back to the issue and
discuss it among ourselves.
Finally, let me say that we remain very concerned
about the current Ebola outbreak in north-eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is crucial that
the international community provide the necessary
technical and financial support to the response led by
the Congolese Government and the United Nations.
We very much welcome the recent appointment of a
senior United Nations Emergency Ebola Response
Coordinator, based in Butembo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate Ambassador Djani and his team on a very
successful presidency and their great achievements.
At the same time, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of June. I am sure

19-159825/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

that you will lead the work of the Council with great
skill, smooth diplomacy and your vast experience.
(spoke in Arabic)
I wish you all the best.
(spoke in English)
First, I would like to thank Special Representative
Mr. François Louncény Fall for his comprehensive
briefing and efforts in the region.
I would like to focus my statement on three
critical issues: first, the security situation; secondly,
humanitarian aspects and human rights challenges;
and, thirdly, the role of regional organizations.
The security situation in the region remains fragile.
As electoral processes remain an important factor for
stability in Central Africa, we commend some positive
developments towards the consolidation of democratic
governance. We underscore that if such consolidation
is to be sustainable, women should engage their
experience and competencies in any peace dialogue and
negotiations taking place in the region. Nevertheless, we
further encourage the authorities of the countries of the
region to continue building trust among all stakeholders
and to enable inclusive dialogue as a precondition for
the establishment of a stable and constructive political
environment. In that context, we praise the important
work carried out by the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) in terms of good offices,
mediation and preventive diplomacy.
At the same time, Poland condemns the persistent
acts of violence committed by armed and terrorist groups
in the Lake Chad basin, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
continue to destabilize the whole region. We emphasize
that further the support of international partners to
the Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad
basin and the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of Lord’s Resistance Army is necessary.
Poland is concerned about the fact that institutional
fragility, poverty and environmental degradation,
exacerbated by climate change, continue to contribute
to humanitarian crises and economic downturn. We are
also deeply worried about reports regarding human rights
violations, including killings, forced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, restrictions on the
freedom of association, expression and movement, as
well as sexual and gender-based violence. Poland is
6/20

04/06/2019

particularly concerned about the situation in Cameroon
and Burundi in that regard. We call upon the authorities
of those countries to take immediate steps to prevent
further human rights violations and abuses and to
ensure respect for fundamental freedoms, including the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
for all citizens.
Poland highly appreciates all the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the region, especially the recent
visit of Commissioner Bachelet to Yaoundé. We call
on the Cameroonian Government to allow the Office
to conduct a human rights assessment mission and
urge the authorities of the countries of the region
to cooperate with all United Nations human rights
mechanisms. Furthermore, we reiterate the obligations
of all stakeholders on the ground to fully comply with
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We also emphasize the
importance of allowing full access for humanitarian
workers to vulnerable communities.
Poland recognizes the strategic role of regional
organizations in reducing tensions on the ground. We
hope that the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and other subregional institutions
will show even greater determination in supporting
peace processes in the region. In that context, Poland
recognizes the leading role of UNOCA in enhancing
the coordination and coherence of measures taken, as
well as in fostering synergies among all United Nations
entities in the Central Africa.
I would like to conclude by expressing our full
support to the Special Representative Fall.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, Mr. President, to wish Eid Mubarak to
you and your team and all those celebrating today. I
would also like to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of June, throughout which you can count on
France’s full support.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
François Louncény Fall for his briefing and for his
work at the helm of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). The situation
in Central Africa continues to be marked by political
situations that are often volatile, fragile post-electoral
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

circumstances and persisting abuses by Boko Haram,
as well as violence related to transhumance and the
predatory activities of certain armed groups.
In this context, the action taken by the Special
Representative demonstrates the full added value
of a regional approach to better understanding the
dynamics of Central Africa and strengthening the
preventive approach taken by the United Nations
within the region. France therefore assures him of our
full support, both in his missions of good offices and
preventive diplomacy and in his missions to provide
support to regional initiatives, particularly those of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). We hope that the upcoming strategic review
will help to reinforce the work of UNOCA on all fronts.
I would like to underscore three situations that we
believe merit a particular mention today: the Central
African Republic, Cameroon and Boko Haram.
First, regarding the Central African Republic,
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic on
6 February in Bangui laid the prospects for an end to
the crisis and for lasting peace in the Central African
Republic. It is therefore essential that the Central
African parties implement the agreement in good
faith and in a timely manner. The recent violence by
the Return, Reclamation and Rehabilitation group in
the Paoua region, leaving more than 50 civilians dead,
must be particularly condemned. This constitutes a
serious violation of the commitments made by that
armed group, especially given it is a signatory to the
peace agreement.
In this context, stopping the violence committed
by such groups, as well as disarming and demobilizing
them, in addition to the progressive restoration of State
authority throughout the country, must be a priority
in the implementation of the peace agreement. The
Government must also initiate the process of adopting
a law on decentralization and move to establish a truth,
justice, reconciliation and reparations commission.
The decentralization of transitional justice ensures that
local administration is brought closer to the population
and rendered more effective. This will also serve as a
response to the demand for justice expressed by the
people of the Central African Republic.
If the implementation of the peace agreement is to be
successful, it is vital that the international community
be fully engaged in a coordinated manner in the political

S/PV. 8538

and financial contexts. As such, the African Union,
ECCAS and the countries of the region, as guarantors
of the agreement, have a particularly important role to
play. We therefore encourage the African Union and
ECCAS to pursue their efforts, in close cooperation
with the United Nations, and encourage the countries
of the region to engage even further.
I now turn to the situation in Cameroon, on
which we align ourselves fully with the assessment
of the Special Representative. As we have stated on
previous occasions, France is incredibly concerned
about the deterioration of the situation in the NorthWest and South-West regions of Cameroon. The human
casualties have been heavy, the humanitarian situation
is increasingly difficult and attacks on humanitarian
and medical personnel, health-care infrastructure and
schools are on the rise. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights and
the guarantee of humanitarian access throughout the
country are, nevertheless, non-negotiable obligations
that must be prioritized above all else.
In this context, France is pursuing its efforts to
encourage the Cameroonian authorities to launch an
inclusive political dialogue, to implement measures
to reduce tensions and to entrench decentralization.
France also calls on all stakeholders to end the violence,
ensure the restoration of the rule of law and respect
the territorial integrity of Cameroon, which cannot
questioned. To echo the point the Special Representative
has just made, we believe that similar messages
conveyed by the African Union and the region would
be most useful in this regard. Moreover, we consider
the recent visit of the Prime Minister to the North-West
and South-West regions, his statements pertaining to
the launching of dialogue and information on initial
contacts with the parties concerned to be positive signs.
These announcements must now be implemented as
soon as possible.
Regarding my final point, concerning Boko Haram,
we remain concerned about the group’s activities in the
Lake Chad basin region, despite the robust response
of the countries of the region. Only the restoration
of security will allow for the redeployment of basic
services, the resumption of economic activity and
longer-term development actions. France will therefore
continue to support the Multinational Joint Task Force
in its fight against terrorism. The reintegration of
former combatants, reconciliation and the protection

19-159827/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

of women and youth are also vital to sustainably
stabilizing the region.
United Nations regional offices such as UNOCA,
are essential to enhancing the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations conflict prevention efforts.
France will therefore continue to support the critical
development of United Nations activities, in a spirit
of strengthened partnership with African regional and
subregional organizations.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by wishing you, Mr. President, all
the best for the presidency of the Security Council,
which falls to your country for the month of June. I also
congratulate Ambassador Djani and his entire team on
the high quality of the Indonesian presidency, which led
the work of the Council with transparency and fairness
during the month of May.
I would also like to thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for
his enlightening briefing on the sociopolitical and
economic situation in Central Africa and the Lake
Chad basin region, as well as the activities of UNOCA.
Côte d’Ivoire is satisfied to note the holding, in a
generally peaceful environment, of elections in several
countries of Central Africa. This relative success,
however, cannot mask the persistence of multiple
political and security challenges that are impacting the
humanitarian situation in the region. Tensions caused by
demands for natural resources, in addition to poverty,
insecurity and the challenges of reconstruction, are all
factors that exacerbate the security and humanitarian
situation in a region so full of potential.
That is why my country welcomed the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic on 6 February, while noting
with concern the lack of eagerness demonstrated by
armed groups to translate the concrete commitments to
which they have freely subscribed into concrete actions.
In that regard, my country condemns the violence
perpetrated by the armed groups that has resulted in
the killing of more than 50 civilians in the north-west
of the country in recent weeks. We also wish to express
our profound indignation at the continuing attacks on
schools, hospitals and humanitarian personnel.
8/20

04/06/2019

In the face of these extremely serious facts, my
delegation believes that the protection of civilians is of
extreme urgency. We call for the full implementation
of the peace agreement, including the provisions
for the establishment of joint special security units;
the implementation of a national programme of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation; and upholding State authority throughout
the national territory. In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire
commends the efforts of President Faustin Touadera
and expresses its full support following the launch of
the activities of the Khartoum agreement follow-up
committee on 15 May.
It is important that we underscore and welcome
the support role of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as the strengthening of cooperation
among the States of the subregion, notably through the
creation of joint cooperation commissions, which serve
as framework to develop solutions to the challenges
political, security and humanitarian issues they share.
My delegation therefore welcomes the re-establishment
of the Cameroon-Central African Republic joint
commission on 6 May, and hopes that it will enable both
countries to consider and find sustainable responses to
their common challenges.
Turning to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire joins the rest of the international
community in duly appreciating the stable sociopolitical
environment that has been established following
the presidential, legislative and local elections and
the appointment of the Prime Minister. We remain
convinced that the Congolese Government and people
have the ability to address the sociopolitical, security
and humanitarian challenges before them.
My country therefore urges all Congolese political
actors to work together to ensure that the prevailing
calm endures over the long term and to promote national
reconciliation, which is a guarantee of lasting peace.
In that vein, my country encourages the Congolese
Government to pursue its efforts, in conjunction
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
multilateral partners, to resolve the thorny issue of the
Ebola epidemic.
With regard to Cameroon, we wish to echo the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
welcoming the recent milestones reached by that
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

brotherly country’s Government towards a lasting
and inclusive agreement to the crisis with a view to
maintaining its territorial integrity and national unity.
On the situation in Burundi, my delegation calls
on all stakeholders in the crisis to prioritize dialogue
to reach consensus solutions to all political and social
challenges. We remain convinced that the international
community, and the African Union and the Community
of East African States in particular, can play a
constructive role in the current situation. We therefore
urge them to continue their efforts to find pressing
solutions to humanitarian issues and organize the
peaceful holding of elections in 2020.
Côte d’Ivoire also recalls the concerns repeatedly
expressed by the Security Council on the security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin, where
armed terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram, and crossborder criminal networks are operating. My country
believes that the security approach taken by the States of
the region, through the Multinational Joint Task Force,
remains appropriate. It must be therefore supported by
efforts for economic and social development and the
fight against the effects of climate change.
Moreover, we note that despite the reduction in
its operational capacity, the actions of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, including kidnappings, looting and
killings, remain a threat to the safety and security of
civilians, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Central African Republic. In that
regard, we welcome the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to maintain the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
My country is convinced that, despite the ongoing
manifold challenges in Central Africa, UNOCA
remains a valuable tool for preventive diplomacy
and coordination among the various United Nations
agencies, the contribution of which to regional peace
and stability is essential. That is why the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General enjoys Côte
d’Ivoire’s ongoing support for his tireless and highly
admirable commitment. We encourage him to continue
to lead through his cooperation with the States of
Central Africa in order to create a political, security
and humanitarian subregional environment that is
conducive to peace and development.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to wish you,

S/PV. 8538

Mr. President, and your team every success in presiding
over the Security Council. You can count on our full
support. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General François Louncény Fall for
his briefing and substantial work, as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/430).
The work of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) and its biannual reports
are of an undeniable value because of their regional
and thematic focus. The Council is regularly informed
about the region or some of its member countries, but
our biannual debates, such as today’s, allow us to better
understand the major developments and trends affecting
the region as a whole, be it in terms of human rights
or the humanitarian situation, the growing problem of
transhumance management or the scourge of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
The report also shows the extent to which certain
security challenges and threats, because of their crossborder nature, make regional analysis not only desirable
but also necessary. Issues initially perceived as local or
national often require regional or subregional solutions,
either to prevent and deal with armed groups, such as
the Lord’s Resistance Army or Boko Haram, which
continue to operate in some countries in the region, or
to consolidate and safeguard early gains, such as the
recent Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic.
Another issue that needs to be addressed is the
situation in Cameroon. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns regarding the humanitarian,
security and human rights situation, whose negative
impact on the region is well known. We also endorse
the solutions recommended in the report. Dialogue
must prevail, humanitarian access must be guaranteed
and international humanitarian law must be respected
by all parties to the conflict. Given the comprehensive
nature of the crisis, we all must respond to it at the level
of the subregion, the region and the United Nations, as
well as at the level of Member States and humanitarian,
faith-based and civil society actors.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa is a key instrument for conflict prevention and
early warning. That function guides the good offices of
the Special Representative. In that regard, the Office
supports inclusive, transparent and credible elections
as essential factors for regional stability.

19-159829/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

In a few weeks’ time, the Council will discuss a
strategic review of UNOCA. The challenge will be
to maximize the role of the Office in prevention, as I
mentioned, while minimizing overlap with other United
Nations activities in the region. We see that strategic
review as a unique opportunity for the United Nations
and the Council to deepen our means of action in early
warning and response mechanisms.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to begin by congratulating Kuwait on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. China will fully support your work,
Mr. President. I also wish to thank Indonesia for its
extraordinary work during its presidency in May.
I would like to thank Mr. Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), for his briefing.
Progress has recently been made in the political
processes of Central African countries. The Government
of the Central African Republic has signed the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation with
armed groups and many countries have successfully
held presidential or parliamentary elections. New
Governments and parliaments have been formed.
The process of regional integration has continued
to advance, and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community has adopted a common policy
on emigration, immigration and border security.
Central African countries and regional organizations
have demonstrated greater willingness and ability to
maintain peace and stability and to promote common
development. China welcomes those developments.

04/06/2019

good offices to promote peaceful dialogue. Moreover,
the international community should closely follow
the impact of the situation in other parts of Africa on
the Central African region and adopt an integrated
approach to a joint response.
Secondly, we should help countries to enhance
capacity-building. The international community should
heed and respect the views of the countries concerned,
work towards enhancing the ability of countries of
the region to solve their problems independently and
provide support that is tailored to their needs in the
areas of poverty reduction, sustainable development,
the improvement of the humanitarian situation and
the combat against cross-border arms smuggling and
drug trafficking.
Thirdly, we should continue to support countries of
the region in maintaining security and stability. China
commends the efforts of countries of the region to
combat the LRA and other armed groups and terrorist
organizations and supports the African Union (AU)
in its ongoing implementation of relevant regional
cooperation initiatives. We hope that the international
community will strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region and the AU in that regard.

At the same time, factors such as conflict, poverty
and disease continue to constrain stability and
development in Central African countries. The Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea continue to threaten the countries of the region.
The international community should pay greater
attention to the situation in the region and step up its
support for the countries there.

China supports Central African countries in
bolstering their capacity to fight piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. Special Representative Fall and UNOCA have
been closely engaged with regional and subregional
organizations, carried out preventive diplomacy
and good offices and promoted political dialogue in
Central African countries in order to settle differences
peaceably. China acknowledges those efforts. We
support the greater role being played by the United
Nations to achieve lasting peace in Central Africa
and hope that UNOCA will continue to implement
its mandate, as authorized by the Council, fully heed
and respect the views of the countries concerned and
strengthen coordination and coherence among the
United Nations, regional organizations and relevant
countries to forge the synergy necessary to maintain
regional stability.

First, we should encourage the countries of Central
Africa to continue to resolve their differences through
political dialogue. The Council and the international
community should play a constructive role in the
political settlement of relevant issues in the region and,
on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and leadership
of the countries concerned, conduct mediation and

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the issues in
the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
are not on the Council’s agenda. The situation there does
not pose a threat to international or regional peace and
security. The international community should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cameroon, acknowledge and support the recent

10/20

19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

efforts of the Government of Cameroon to engage in
dialogue and improve the humanitarian situation,
among others.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall for his very detailed briefing.
We commend the progress achieved with respect
to the holding of legislative elections in Chad, the
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the signing of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. We hope that the pending political transitions
will be carried out peacefully. We congratulate all
actors that made possible the rapprochement between
the parties in these conflicts. We hope that these
peaceful processes will have a multiplier effect in
the search for resolutions to the various conflicts in
the region. In that regard, we urge all stakeholders to
honour their commitments to the full implementation
of the agreements, with a view to bringing peace to
their countries and the region.
The political situation in Central Africa nevertheless
continues to be characterized by instability and tensions
caused by electoral processes, as well as by security
and human rights issues. We regret that the security
situation in some parts of the region remains precarious
due to the activity of armed groups, ethnic conflicts
and intercommunal violence between pastoralists and
farmers. Boko Haram continues to bring instability,
pain and death to civilians and members of the military
in Chad and in Cameroon.
The Dominican Republic condemns the violation
of human rights, kidnappings and attacks against
civilians perpetrated by the Lord’s Resistance Army,
and welcomes the decision of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to maintain the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army. We cannot imagine stability
and development in the Central African region until
the armed groups are deprived of their means of
subsistence. A multidimensional stability plan must
be supplemented with national and regional plans
in the short and long terms. Those initiatives must
enjoy the support of the international community and
should be focused on an open process of dialogue and
a strengthened regional cooperation strategy within the
framework of the Peacebuilding Fund and the resources
that are crucial to disarmament, demobilization and

S/PV. 8538

reintegration programmes. Those activities should
be aimed at enabling combatants who are willing
to abandon arms to find a means of subsistence and
have an opportunity to be reintegrated into society,
while protecting civilians and pursuing sustainable
development in the region.
It is necessary to expand the presence of the State
and to provide the assistance necessary for the improved
training and equipping of the security forces. In that
regard, we welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) with the secretariat of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
jointly support the implementation of the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, their Ammunitions and Components.
We also welcome the willingness of States to cooperate
in efforts to regulate transhumance at the subregional
level, in particular through the elaboration of a
regulatory framework on pastoralism under ECCAS.
The effects of climate change, which have taken
the form of more frequent and larger-scale droughts
and floods, are a challenge for Central Africa and
a continued source of great concern. Coupled with
food insecurity caused largely by adverse weather
conditions and the loss of crops and livestock, they
cause high levels of hunger and malnutrition, thereby
subjecting millions of people to extreme hardship. That
is why we believe that UNOCA could play a key role in
building regional climate resilience aimed at mitigating
the adverse effects of climate change. Those effects,
together with the humanitarian consequences of many
years of conflict and the prevalence of armed groups
and their terrible impact on the civilian population,
have undermined institutional, social and economic
development in Central Africa. Given the alarming
number of people whose sole means of survival is
humanitarian assistance, we must restate the need to
guarantee safe, timely and unhindered access to muchneeded assistance to the most vulnerable populations,
including millions of internally displaced persons, in
particular women.
With regard to Cameroon and regional organizations,
mediation and dialogue between the parties, including
civil society, should be intensified in order to build the
confidence and the political will necessary to build a
sustainable peace. The active participation of such

19-1598211/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

organizations as the African Union is a vital tool for
reaching an inclusive peaceful solution to the conflict.
Their leadership is essential for generating trust and
the willingness of the parties to engage in a substantial
dialogue for peace.
In conclusion, we commend the work done by
Mr. François Fall in his efforts aimed at promoting a
peaceful solution to the crisis in the region through
political dialogue, as well as UNOCA and the Economic
Community of Central African States for adopting a
joint action plan for 2019. We urge all Central African
countries to expand the democratic space and take
concrete steps to improve the processes of dialogue with
the various political and civil society actors, with a view
to addressing the common problems that will allow a
greater use of their human, social and natural resources
and providing greater opportunities for socioeconomic
development to each country in the region.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish an Eid Mubarak
to you, Mr. President, and to the entire Kuwaiti team.
We assure you, Sir, of our support during your tenure
at the helm of the Security Council, following the very
impressive Indonesian presidency in May.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
Mr. François Louncény Fall, and his team for the report
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the Regional Office (S/2019/430).
South Africa recognizes the important role played
by UNOCA in the promotion of peace and security in
Central Africa. We therefore commend the efforts of
Mr. Fall in discharging the Regional Office’s mandate,
particularly in terms of promoting stability in the region
and in preventing or mitigating election-related crises.
South Africa welcomes the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the formation of an inclusive
Government in that country. We further express the
view that all parties should take this opportunity to
implement the peace agreement so as to extricate the
Central African Republic from its cycle of continued
conflict. In this respect, it is of vital importance for the
stakeholders in the Central African Republic to put the
interests of the people and country first, above all other
considerations, and work together towards bringing
stability, peace, reconciliation and development to
the country.
12/20

04/06/2019

It is our conviction that elections are one of the
most positive signs of the consolidation of democracy
on the African continent. South Africa therefore
commends the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for holding its national elections in a relatively calm
atmosphere, which resulted in the peaceful transfer of
power in that country. We will assist the Congolese
people and Government as they take on their new
democratic project.
However, we express our concern over the attempted
coup in Gabon in January. Our continent should strive
towards eliminating unconstitutional changes of
Government, which requires greater support for security
sector reform and post-conflict institution-building. We
therefore urge UNOCA to continue to assist countries
in the region in the preparation and conduct of elections
by creating conditions more conducive to peaceful,
inclusive and credible elections. In a related context,
we wish President Bongo Ondimba a speedy recovery.
South Africa is encouraged by the improving
security situation in the Pool department and in the
Republic of the Congo in general as well as the easing
of social tensions in Chad. Although we remain
concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Cameroon, we are encouraged by the efforts
undertaken by the country’s authorities to stabilize
the situation. We call upon all parties to refrain from
any actions that could lead to its further deterioration.
We are especially encouraged by the Prime Minister’s
positive announcement on 9 May during his visit to
the affected region. These encouraging steps should
be consolidated.
We condemn the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and national security personnel by terrorist and
armed groups in the region. We are equally concerned
about the increase in piracy and armed robbery of ships
in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome the progress made
in efforts to combat poaching and illicit trafficking
in wildlife and natural resources as evidenced by the
interceptions and arrests made by the Gabonese and
Cameroonian authorities in terms of the illegal trade in
Kevazingo wood, pangolin scales and elephant tusks.
South Africa notes with concern the number of
people who are in need of humanitarian assistance in
the region. We thank humanitarian partners and urge
them to continue providing fundamental humanitarian
assistance to all populations in need. We urge
Governments to facilitate access for the delivery of
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

humanitarian assistance. We encourage the peaceful
resolution of disputes and inclusive dialogue where it
is required in the region, for example, in addressing the
growing number of conflicts related to pastoralism and
transhumance in the subregion, among other issues.
South Africa notes the cross-cutting nature of
issues in the region. In this regard, we commend the
efforts to enhance the coherence and coordination of the
United Nations action in the region as evidenced by the
close coordination among, inter alia, the African Union
(AU), UNOCA, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel. Among other things, this
will contribute to stronger responses in assisting the
Lake Chad Basin Commission in the context of fighting
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
maritime security and conflicts between farmers
and herders.
South Africa remains concerned about the security
threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore reaffirm the decision of the
AU Peace and Security Council of 20 September 2018,
to maintain the AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
pending the development of a strategy to progressively
phase out the Initiative without leaving any security
vacuum that the LRA could use to renew and intensify
its destabilization activities in the affected areas.
In conclusion, it should be recalled that the Security
Council, at its meeting on 10 August 2018 (see S/PV.8328),
requested the Secretary-General to undertake a review
of the mandate of UNOCA (S/PRST/2018/17). South
Africa looks forward to receiving the outcomes
emanating from the Secretary-General’s strategic
review of the scope of UNOCA’s mandate and activities
by 1 August, with a view to strengthening the role of
this political office in the region. We will continue to
support Special Representative Fall and his joint efforts
with Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Kuwait’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I would also like to wish you, Sir,
an Eid Mubarak. We also wish to extend our thanks to
Indonesia for its presidency during the month of May.
I would like to start where my South Africa left
off, namely, by praising the work of the United Nations

S/PV. 8538

Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall.
We see him very much as a catalyst, in particular for
regional cooperation. Many of my colleagues — notably,
the representatives of France and Côte d’Ivoire — have
emphasized the importance of regional cooperation
because the problems that we face can be resolved only
through such cooperation.
I also see Special Representative Fall as a catalyst
for bringing together the various United Nations actors
in a coherent way. I therefore welcome what he said
about cooperation with Mr. Chambas. I also see him
as a catalyst for the transformation of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
into a more effective organization and praise what
he has been doing in that regard. There are plans for
ECCAS to be more effective. We really hope that that
will become a reality because ECCAS is needed as
a regional organization that can look at the conflict
between herders and farmers that has been described
and has been exacerbated by climate change, which has
a significant impact on the region. I can only subscribe
to what our colleague from the Dominican Republic
just said on the issue.
We see the Special Representative as a catalyst
for all the efforts with regard to disarmament and
security sector reform in the region and in enabling
the Peacebuilding Fund to become more engaged there.
The Peacebuilding Fund is ready for that. We highlight
the role of the Special Representative in furthering the
participation of women in the various processes, which
our Polish colleague mentioned. If I may suggest, in
the next report of the Secretary-General there could
perhaps be a section on the role that women play in the
various organizations that UNOCA works with and the
different processes that it follows.
I would also like to reiterate what my South African
colleague said with regard to the cooperation between
UNOCA and the African Union (AU) and the role that
the AU plays. I would add — I think my South African
colleague did not mention it — the cooperation with the
European Union, which I believe to be very important.
With regard to the situation in the Central African
Republic, I can only echo what my French colleague
said earlier, namely, that we all hope that the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation remains in
place. However, we are very alarmed about the attacks
against civilians, which we condemn.

19-1598213/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

The humanitarian situation is dire in countries
across the region — in the Central African Republic,
the Lake Chad region, Cameroon, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi. Germany has
pledged $100 million this year. It is important that
humanitarian workers have access, and perhaps there
is something that the Special Representative can do to
that end.
Lastly, let me turn briefly to the situation in
Cameroon. Our United Kingdom colleague mentioned
the Arria Formula meeting that we held a couple of
weeks ago, where the most important issues were
discussed. I think that it was a very significant meeting
that highlighted the conflicts and at which there
was very good civil society representation. There
is a need for a peaceful resolution and dialogue. The
humanitarian situation, the effects of climate change
and the terrorist activities all have an impact. There are
reports of human rights violations. Political dialogue is
needed. We appreciate that fact that the Prime Minister
has offered to enter into a dialogue with the Anglophone
communities. I welcome that offer but it is extremely
important that those words be translated into actions
and deeds.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Kuwait and you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. You can count
on my delegation’s support. We also thank Indonesia,
Ambassador Djani and all his team for the excellent
work during the previous month. We appreciate the
convening of this meeting and thank Mr. François
Louncénу Fall for his briefing.
We would first like to highlight the extensive use
of good offices and the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
bringing together and reaching agreement among the
various stakeholders in support of the various peace
processes under way, as well as its assistance in dealing
with situations in a complex and fragile post-electoral
context in several countries of the region. As part of
those efforts, we commend the commitment of the
Office to ensuring good coordination with regional
organizations such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Economic
Community of Central African States. We believe that
the presence and involvement of those organizations in
all such processes is essential in the current context.
14/20

04/06/2019

We commend the progress made in the subregion,
such as the implementation of the ceasefire agreement
in the Congo, the consolidation of the democratic
process in Sao Tome and Principe, the announcement by
President Tshisekedi of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo concerning the release of all political prisoners
and the political agreement between the Government
of the Central African Republic and the armed groups.
However, that does not preclude the need to continue
to pursue initiatives in all countries of the region
aimed at promoting full respect for human rights as a
prerequisite for building peace on the basis of adopting
confidence-building measures and strengthening
democratic institutions.
We are particularly concerned about the simmering
conflict in the North-West and South-West Regions of
Cameroon, where the escalation of violence also affects
health and education services, contributes to political
tension in the country and hampers the delivery of
humanitarian aid. In that context, unrestricted access
for humanitarian agencies is essential, as is the
promotion of cooperation and the presence of regional
organizations and international human rights bodies in
order to ensure the protection of such rights and the
fight against impunity.
Such a presence is also seen as the best way to
resolve the political, social and security crisis in
Burundi, which can be achieved only through an
inclusive intra-Burundian dialogue.
In addition, we acknowledge the work of UNOCA
in contributing to a determined fight against scourges
that lead to instability, insecurity and violence in the
subregion, such as the illicit trafficking in natural
resources and wildlife and the activities of illegal armed
groups, especially in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Cameroon.
Similarly, strengthening cooperation between
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel in various complementary areas, such as
the fight against Boko Haram, addressing the situation
of transhumance corridors as lawless areas used for
criminal activity and combating maritime piracy, to
name but a few, is particularly noteworthy.
In that regard, we strongly condemn the attacks
carried out by that terrorist group in the Lake Chad
region and in several countries of the subregion, as well
as those perpetrated by the so-called Lord’s Resistance
Army, whose source of financing is linked to trafficking
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

in natural resources such as gold and diamonds.
That reminds us of the link between terrorism and
transnational crime as an area of necessary international
coordination and cooperation.
I conclude by stressing that the international
community must increase its support in the Central
African subregion in order to address the root causes
of conflicts and humanitarian crises, with free and safe
access for humanitarian and human rights agencies as a
minimum prerequisite.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by congratulating
the representative of Indonesia on his successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month of May
and to wish Kuwait an excellent presidency during the
month of June. I would like to assure you, Sir, of the
full support of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
I would like to thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
and his team for informing us in a comprehensive
and illustrative way about UNOCA’s activities, in
compliance with the mandate that established the Office
in order to strengthen the role of the United Nations in
promoting peace and security in Central Africa, as well
as the use of good offices, preventive diplomacy and
mediation for conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, as a member
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), expresses its sincere congratulations and
appreciation for the arduous and dynamic work being
carried out by Mr. Fall as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa. His tireless travels
to the countries of the subregion enable him to keep
abreast of the sociopolitical situations in each country.
In that regard, we encourage Mr. Fall and his team to
continue to pursue their political mission to strengthen
the capacity of regional and subregional organizations
to prevent conflicts in the Central African region and
to push the parties to any dispute whose continuation
might endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security to seek, first and foremost, to settle their
dispute by peaceful means.
Our Government will therefore continue to support
UNOCA as it strives to foster synergies in order to
promote bilateral cooperation among neighbouring

S/PV. 8538

countries and to strengthen cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in the areas of peace,
security and conflict prevention, in particular with
the African Union, ECCAS, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.
With regard to the briefing by the Special
Representative, we welcome the positive developments
recently seen in the region, such as the holding of
peaceful elections and the transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and efforts to
implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for hosting the forty-eighth ministerial meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, which took place
from 27 to 31 May in Kinshasa.
We further welcome the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed between the Government of that
country and 14 armed groups, facilitated by the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, and the current
return to normalcy in Burundi, whereby the country has
adopted a new Constitution, put in place measures for
the holding of elections by 2020 and made considerable
contributions of troops to peacekeeping missions, all
of which exemplify the spirit of reconciliation and
tolerance prevailing in Burundi.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea issued
a communiqué on 8 January in which it strongly
condemned and rejected the attempted coup d’état
and the acts of violence perpetrated in Libreville on
7 January.
We are aware that the humanitarian situation
in Cameroon is aggravated by the influx of refugees
as a result of the situation in some neighbouring
countries and the subregion, including the persistent
criminal activity of non-State actors. In that regard,
we applaud the various measures that have been
adopted by the Cameroonian authorities to address this
humanitarian and security situation, including, among
other measures, the emergency humanitarian plan to
provide assistance to internally displaced persons and
refugees in the country and the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Committee, which is

19-1598215/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

responsible for the integration of former members of
armed groups in the country.
I take this opportunity once again to recall the
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019), which exemplified
the commitment and support of the international
community, through the Security Council, to Africa’s
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and stability.
Achieving the objective of the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative would contribute significantly
to saving successive generations from the scourge of
war and to the African Union’s efforts to ensure an
integrated, peaceful, secure and prosperous Africa.
Building on the same vision, as we approach 2020,
when we will commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the twentyfifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action, the
tenth anniversary of the establishment of UN-Women
and resolution 2457 (2019), aimed at Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020, I call on Member States to
make 2020 a turning point in the women and peace and
security agenda.
In conclusion, we appreciate the measures
implemented by the Governments of the region to
address the humanitarian situation. However, the
numbers of internally displaced persons, refugees and
asylum-seekers in the region is worrisome. Displaced
persons must be able to find sustainable means of
subsistence, and the best solution to that end is to return
to their homes, with due consideration given to their
dignity and rights. Moreover, their plight is aggravated
by the destabilizing activities of armed groups and
the constant attacks on their communities, which
remain exposed to severe climate change, malnutrition
and Ebola, which require the provision of adequate
technical, health and financial assistance.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): Let me
begin by joining my colleagues in congratulating
Kuwait as it assumes its presidency of the Council. I
thank Special Representative Fall for his briefing today
and for the efforts he undertakes, which continue to
play a central role towards strengthening the political,
security and economic conditions of the countries of
Central Africa. In Cameroon in particular, his work to
promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis in the NorthWest and South-West regions is of singular importance.
The United States remains gravely concerned
by the deteriorating humanitarian and human rights
situation in Cameroon. The Office for the Coordination
16/20

04/06/2019

of Humanitarian Affairs estimated in April that
4.3 million people in Cameroon — roughly 17 per cent
of the population — need humanitarian assistance. We
have heard disturbing reports of armed groups and
Cameroonian authorities obstructing humanitarian
aid delivery by establishing road checkpoints, ceasing
supplies, demanding bribes and detaining personnel.
Bureaucratic impediments and movement restrictions
further exacerbate the situation. That must stop now. We
call on all parties to enable unhindered humanitarian
access to deliver life-saving assistance to all those in
need and to respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We welcome the Cameroonian Government’s
development of an emergency humanitarian assistance
plan and coordination centre for the ongoing crisis in the
North-West and South-West regions. However, we must
underscore that for those efforts to be successful they
must adhere to the humanitarian assistance principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
The international community, with the support
of the Cameroonian Government, should continue
implementing a coordinated and robust humanitarian
response. Since the beginning of fiscal year 2018,
the United States Government has contributed over
$87 million to provide humanitarian assistance to host
communities, internally displaced persons and refugees
in Cameroon. That aid is critical, but it is effective only
when we have access to the vulnerable populations.
The human rights abuses and violations in the
affected regions are also worrying. The continued
reports of attacks on civilians, including extrajudicial
killings, are extremely troubling. We urge all the parties
to refrain from such abuses, and the Government of
Cameroon to hold all responsible accountable through
transparent and fair trials. We thank the United Nations
and representatives of civil society for their brave
reporting on the status of human rights, and call for
all the parties to cease actions that could hinder human
rights reporting in the two regions. The Government of
Cameroon’s recent decision to deny entry to a researcher
from an international non-governmental organization
is regrettable.
We are similarly concerned about the increasing
restrictions on political pluralism. In late January, the
Government arrested Maurice Kamto, the leader of
the Cameroon Renaissance Movement, and hundreds
of his followers, following peaceful demonstrations,
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

and on 1 June arrested more than 100 party members
as they attempted to hold a peaceful march. Many of
them remain in pretrial detention on dubious charges.
We call on the Government to move trial proceedings
for political detainees to civilian courts and to respect
fair trial guarantees, in accordance with Cameroon’s
obligations under international law.
We welcome the Prime Minister’s visit to the
North-West and South-West regions to talk about the
ongoing crisis with the parties affected, which we view
as a very positive step. We welcome President Biya’s
instruction to speed up the decentralization mandated
by the 1996 Constitution. The international community
will support the Government of Cameroon in its efforts
to open an inclusive dialogue with the separatists,
and we encourage the Government to consider those
options. Likewise, we strongly urge those supporting
the separatist cause, particularly those living in the
diaspora, to join talks without preconditions. We urge
the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to play an even
stronger role in promoting peace and security in
Cameroon through dialogue. Our colleagues frequently
remind us of the AU’s leadership role in conflict
prevention on the African continent, and we urge AU
leaders to play a constructive role in trying to find a
solution to the current political impasse that is causing
this humanitarian crisis. One way to do that is by
joining ECCAS and the United Nations in joint visits to
engage all Cameroonian actors in supporting dialogue.
Finally, we look forward to the strategic review of
the mandate of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) later this year. We anticipate
further discussions with Special Representative Fall
and his staff in order to ensure that UNOCA’s mandate
is focused on the most pressing challenges in the Central
African region, while coordinating strategically with
other United Nations offices operating there as well.
Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to begin by congratulating you
and your team, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I also want
to assure you of our full support and readiness to work
with you throughout your presidency. We would also
like to thank all the members of the Council for their
support to our delegation during Indonesia’s presidency
last month. And we wish you and all the Members of
the United Nations Eid Mubarak — a happy holiday.

S/PV. 8538

We thank Special Representative Fall for his
briefing and for the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in supporting the
countries of the region.
We have noted from his briefing and from the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2019/430) that the
situation in Central Africa remained volatile and highly
charged by political and security challenges. However,
we cannot overlook the positive progress that has taken
place in the region since the beginning of the year. The
peaceful general elections and transfer of Power in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic are just a few of the highlights.
There is no doubt that the region is currently in the
international spotlight. We have heard over and over
again that multilateral and bilateral efforts to support
the region are being prepared and delivered. We must
collectively seize this momentum in order to assist the
countries of the region in their efforts to address their
various challenges and achieve a better future for their
region. I would like to focus my comments on a number
of points.
First, the root causes of conflict should be
comprehensively addressed. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that inclusive, genuine and credible
electoral processes remain a key factor for the region.
The Governments of the region must regain the trust
of their peoples, especially after years of conflict and
political distrust. Not only that, they must also gain
one another’s trust. Good neighbours create a good
community. And the international community should
work together to provide capacity that will enable the
creation of that trust. In short, trust is important and
partnership is key. Peace and stability remain fragile.
The region is prey to threats from armed groups, the
illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources,
and communicable diseases. The violence committed
by the Lord’s Resistance Army and Boko Haram has
significantly affected the region’s stability. That must
also stop.
Secondly, partnerships between regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
United Nations, are urgently needed. Indonesia believes
in the principle that neighbours know best. As natural
first responders, regional and subregional organizations
play a very important role in enabling the region to
resolve this crisis. We recognize the important efforts
undertaken for the region by the African Union, the

19-1598217/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

Economic Community of Central African States, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community,
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and other regional and subregional
organizations, and we encourage them to continue their
collaboration with the United Nations.
Indonesia also notes the significant importance of
the region for the United Nations, which is apparent from
the number of dedicated United Nations special envoys
and representatives to the region and its countries.
We welcome the efforts to enhance coherence and
coordination between them, including the coordination
and cooperation between UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as the
Special Representative mentioned. This is in line with
the current spirit of reform of the United Nations,
including by breaking the silos between the branches
of the United Nations system. We also urge them to
include United Nations peacekeeping missions on the
ground in their coordination efforts, as well as United
Nations experts mandated by the Security Council.
In conclusion, it is clear that the challenges in the
region persist, and as members of the Security Council,
we are obliged to continue to provide support to the
countries of the region in accordance with our mandate.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to thank our Indonesian
colleagues for their active and productive work in the
month of May, and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency and to wish you
every success and hopefully a more or less calm month
of June, politically speaking.
We are grateful to Mr. François Louncény Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his assessment of the situation in the Central African
subregion. Russia supports the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
as an important tool for implementing preventive
diplomacy. We share the view that the challenges facing
the countries of the subregion are complex ones. In that
context, it is especially important to ensure that the
regions themselves take the leading role in preventing
crises and resolving conflicts. For our part, we are
ready to support their efforts.
We consider the Central African region key to
combating the spread of terrorism on the continent as a
whole. The penetration of radical and terrorist elements
into Central Africa has been accompanied by illegal
18/20

04/06/2019

trafficking in weapons and drugs and income from the
exploitation of minerals. We appreciate all regional
efforts to develop coherent approaches to combating
any manifestations of terrorism, of which the activities
of the regional multilateral armed forces are a good
example. It will be crucial to ensure that it is adequately
funded in order to enable the States of the Lake Chad
basin to continue their joint operations aimed at
pursuing and eliminating militants in transborder areas.
We note that there has been a certain amount of
success in combating Boko Haram, with the support
of the international community. However, Boko
Haram still has fighting potential and is capable
of conducting serious attacks. Its fighters are still
active in Chad, including in the border areas with
the Niger, Nigeria and Cameroon, where extremists
have been attacking civilians, United Nations and
non-governmental organizations’ personnel, and
Chadian military roadblocks.
We are seriously concerned about the substantial
influx into Boko Haram of foreign terrorists, including
fighters from the Islamic State. According to some
estimates, it added around 2,000 new recruits to its
ranks in 2018. We are ready to continue working actively
in various platforms in order to eliminate the terrorist
threat on the African continent. We are focusing in
particular on identifying local terrorists’ sources of
financing for local terrorists and their contacts with
other international radical groups.
Russia is closely monitoring the situation in
the Central African Republic. We support President
Touadera’s efforts to start an inclusive political dialogue,
launch security-sector reform as soon as possible
and build the armed forces’ capacity. The Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, signed on 6 February, represents an
important starting point for a future settlement of the
country’s situation. For our part, we will continue our
firm support to the process of national reconciliation,
coordinating our efforts with everyone involved in the
quest to find pathways to normalizing the situation
without hidden agendas.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is one of the other
factors creating instability in the Central African
region. Regrettably, the armed-robbery attacks on
foreign vessels have continued, and among others
Russian sailors have been taken hostage. We have had
a positive experience in participating in international
19-15982

04/06/2019

Central African region

S/PV. 8538

efforts to fight piracy in the north-western Indian
Ocean as part of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. We hope that experience can be
useful in resolving similar problems in the Gulf of
Guinea, including in the context of possibly expanding
the geographic mandate of the Contact Group to include
the Gulf of Guinea.

the Council in May. Like everyone who has preceded
me today, I would like to thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), for his valuable briefing and
to commend the efforts and activities of the staff of
UNOCA in implementing its mandate.

We are concerned about the continuing activities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). While it has
been marginalized in the past few years thanks to the
successful efforts of armed forces of the region, it is still
plundering and robbing in various areas of the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the States of Central Africa should keep
the fight against the LRA in their sights. We hope that
the concept for eradicating this threat, developed under
the auspices of the Economic Community of Central
African States, will bear fruit.

I will focus on three basic aspects of the issue
under discussion. First, on the security and political
fronts, the Secretary-General’s recent report on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of UNOCA
(S/2019/430) gives a detailed picture of the latest
political, economic, social and security developments
in the region and their impact on peace and security in
Central Africa, as well as of the countries in the region
that are dealing with a number of challenges.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

On the political front, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo witnessed a first peaceful transition of power
on 24 January. In the wake of major efforts by many
stakeholders, the Central African Republic witnessed
the signing in February in its capital, Bangui, of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
between the Government and 14 armed groups, under
the auspices of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and with the support of the African
Union and the United Nations. We look forward to
other political developments in the region, including
local elections in Angola and presidential elections in
Burundi in 2020. We hope that they will be held on time
and include all political parties, with the participation
of international observers and free of violent incidents.
We want to emphasize that the holding of inclusive,
free and credible elections and the implementation of
political processes in any country in Central Africa are
important steps towards ensuring the maintenance of
peace and security that will contribute to the stability
of the whole region. That also includes conducting a
dialogue between Governments and all political parties,
including opposition parties.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate all
Muslims around the world on the occasion of Eid
Al-Fitr Al-Mubarak. We pray that all the peoples of
the world would can continue to celebrate it in safety
and security. I would also like to thank everyone for
their congratulations on Kuwait’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to commend the representative of Indonesia and his
team for their successful and distinctive presidency of

We want to point to the importance of cooperation
between the Governments of the region and regional
and international organizations such as the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and other
relevant active organizations. The aim is to achieve
progress on the political, economic and security fronts,

We are following the development of events in
Cameroon. The problem of the Anglophone provinces is
not new. The division of former colonies without regard
for their religious, linguistic and ethnic differences has
resulted in a number of hotbeds of tension in Africa,
including Cameroon. We urge all the Cameroonian
parties to show maximum restraint. Resolving the
country’s internal problems will be possible only at the
negotiating table through substantive national dialogue,
with respect for human rights and the rule of law.
In conclusion, I want to point out that the
challenges and threats that the Central African region
is facing today are inextricably linked, as are the States
themselves. The destabilization of the situation in one
country is capable of disturbing the entire subregion
and undermining its neighbours’ security, and it is
therefore very important not to cross the line between
prevention and meddling in domestic affairs.

19-1598219/20

S/PV.8538

Central African region

which is a significant challenge facing the countries of
Central Africa.
With regard to the security situation, we are very
concerned about the violence and armed conflicts in
the region that have tragically claimed the lives of many
innocent civilians. It is vital to work to find radical
solutions to such conflicts and to hold the perpetrators
accountable. We also firmly condemn criminal acts,
suicide bombings and recurring armed attacks, as
well as the robberies and kidnappings carried out
by Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army in
the region, all of which are obstacles to progress on
the political, security and development fronts. It is
everyone’s responsibility to address those attacks and
destructive acts through cooperation among the United
Nations, the Security Council, regional and subregional
organizations and all of the countries of the region.
We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
about the deteriorating security and human rights
situations in the North-West and South-West regions of
Cameroon. We urge the Cameroonian Government to
continue cooperating with regional and international
organizations and to redouble its efforts to alleviate
humanitarian suffering, prevent violent acts and armed
conflict and stop the flow of refugees, in line with
its obligations under international humanitarian law.
We stress our respect for Cameroon’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and for
non-interference in its internal affairs. We call on
all parties in Cameroon to cooperate and settle their
differences through dialogue and to ensure unobstructed
humanitarian access to all people in need.

20/20

04/06/2019

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
situation, we deplore the rise in the numbers of people
in need of urgent humanitarian assistance, refugees
and those internally displaced as a result of violence
and spreading epidemics such as cholera and Ebola. We
call once again for cooperation among the countries
of the region and regional organizations in order to
address the various threats and make progress on the
humanitarian front so as to alleviate the suffering of the
peoples of the region.
Thirdly, with regard to cooperation with UNOCA
and other organizations, Central Africa is dealing
with a number of issues, including conflicts related
to transhumance, climate change, armed conflict and
the spread of small arms and light weapons, as well
as economic and social problems, all of which are
challenges that require serious cooperation among the
Governments of the countries of Central Africa and all
the relevant regional and international organizations
if they are to meet the aspirations of the peoples
of the region to security, stability and well-being,
especially considering that the region has a wealth of
natural resources.
In conclusion, I would like to once again
thank Mr. Fall and the staff of UNOCA for their
extraordinary efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

19-15982
