asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6903

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6903rd meeting
Monday, 21 January 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jilani/Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Kim Bong-Hyun
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
United Nations peacekeeping: A multidimensional approach
Letter dated 1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/4)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21043 (E)

*1321043*

S/PV.6903

Pakistan has convened this special debate in view
of the centrality of peacekeeping in the United Nationsled efforts for the maintenance of international peace
and security. United Nations peacekeeping has an
impressive record of achievements in many conflict and
post-conflict situations. Indeed, Blue Helmets around
the globe have become a symbol of the United Nations
global quest for peace.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
United Nations peacekeeping: a multidimensional
approach
Letter dated 1 January 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Pakistan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/4)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the ministers of Security Council
members and other representatives present in the
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Chad, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, the Philippines, Senegal, Slovakia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2013/27, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/4, which contains a letter dated
1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

2

I hope that this meeting will enable us to
have a comprehensive view of United Nations
peacekeeping and its present and future role. Focus
will also be on the increasing nexus and interlinkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding that have
characterized the United Nations success in this field
in recent years. The overall objective is to bring our
collective contribution to making peacekeeping even
more effective and productive.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: We are honoured to have
the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan here to preside over
this important debate, and we thank you, Sir, for this
initiative. Pakistan is the single largest troop contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping. Its personnel are
working courageously every day under the United
Nations blue flag to bring peace to troubled areas.
This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping has
come to be a flagship activity of the United Nations.
Thanks to debates like this one, careful analysis and
adjustments in our work, peacekeeping has kept pace
with the times. Our operations today are more varied
and more complex than ever, and whatever form it
takes, multidimensional peacekeeping remains a highly
cost-effective investment in progress towards lasting
stability. No other international tool is as effective in
combining political, security, rule of law and human
rights efforts. And our missions are integrating their
work with the development efforts of United Nations
country teams.
The draft resolution before the Council today
(S/2013/27) identifies the many contributions that
United Nations missions make towards enhancing
security and building sustainable peace. We continue
to press for progress in the face of challenges. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support are working to further
improve how we plan, manage and support our missions.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

We count on the members of the Council and all
Member States to support this effort. I call on them
to contribute military and police personnel with the
professional skills, training and integrity required to
fully implement their mandates. I also call on Member
States to provide the key military assets and enabling
capabilities we need to operate in ever more challenging
environments. When Member States show the will to
make the right contributions at the right time, we can
deploy more quickly and operate more effectively. And
I repeat my standing appeal for more women to serve in
our operations. I am a proud advocate of gender equality,
and I want to usher in the day when our peacekeeping
operations benefit from the full participation of women,
especially in leadership positions.
We will conduct periodic reviews of our missions
to ensure that we have the right mix of skills and
capabilities to respond to evolving mandates and
changing conditions on the ground. We are improving
how we integrate our efforts across the United Nations
system to maximize the collective impact of our
missions and our country teams. DPKO and the United
Nations Development Programme are coming together
as the joint global focal point for police, justice and
corrections. We are also improving the way we carry
out transitions as missions draw down and ultimately
close, as we did recently in Timor-Leste. We aim to
deploy, work hard, fulfil the mandates that the Security
Council entrusts to us, and leave behind strong
structures to maintain lasting peace.
But we have to do more than integrate the work of
the United Nations system; we have to coordinate with
other international partners. In most cases, regional
organizations, the World Bank, bilateral donors and
countries of the region concerned play a major role. It is
often far more difficult to ensure the coherence of this
broader international support than to integrate our own
United Nations work, but such coherence is critical.
That is why we will continue supporting transition
compacts and other efforts that align international
support behind clear national priorities. I encourage the
Council to work harder for greater coherence across the
international community, including with advice from
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Today’s draft resolution rightly emphasizes that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
for identifying peacebuilding priorities, in consultation
with a broad cross-section of society. Inclusivity and
institution-building are critical to preventing a relapse

13-21043

into conflict. Peacekeeping missions play a vital
role on both of these fronts. They promote national
reconciliation. And peacekeeping missions help support
national institution-building, as we are seeing in South
Sudan, Liberia and Haiti.
We learned especially valuable lessons from
Timor-Leste, where the political commitment of the
Government and close collaboration between United
Nations and the National Police were critical to success.
In too many other cases, however, a lack of political
will and sustained commitment to reform on the part of
national leaders have undermined progress. Too often,
international donors focus on training individuals while
neglecting to build institutions.
Institutions responsible for ensuring security and
rule of law must be strengthened. Otherwise, when
the United Nations reduces its military and police
presence, we risk jeopardizing the gains we have made.
Host States are ultimately responsible for ensuring the
protection of civilians, and effective national institutions
are essential to this effort. Our national counterparts
must take this obligation seriously, as peacekeeping
operations can never act as their surrogate in protecting
the civilians within their borders.
It is important to be honest and clear on this
point. When national leaders and the international
community allow these problems, the local population
suffers. Council members bear a heavy responsibility
to prevent this, including by engaging directly with
host Governments.
I am confident that, together, we can build on
more than two decades of success in multidimensional
peacekeeping. I look forward to hearing Council
members’ views on how to continue adapting this
indispensable tool to better meet the needs of peoples
suffering from the throes and aftermath of conflicts.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
It is a great privilege for me to preside over
today’s open debate. I thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his insightful
briefing. We deeply admire his leadership on United
Nations peacekeeping and his personal commitment
to making United Nations peacekeeping operations
efficient and effective.

3

S/PV.6903

Blue Helmets are recognized and respected all over
the world. They symbolize the United Nations quest for
regional and international peace, security and stability
around the globe. They underline the collective will
and endeavour of all Member States to make the world
peaceful and stable.
United Nations peacekeeping has saved and
protected tens of millions of lives around the globe.
It helps shattered communities and neighbourhoods
rebuild themselves. It replaces strife with harmony.
Brave women and men in the peacekeeping missions
have made tremendous sacrifices in the cause of peace.
More than 3,000 peacekeepers have laid down their
lives to save the world from the scourge of war. Today
we collectively pay homage to them. Today we should
all once again reiterate our commitment to their safety
and security
We are grateful to the members of the Council for
holding this debate on under the theme “United Nations
peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach” during
our presidency. We held wide-ranging consultations,
including with the Secretariat, to ensure that all
stakeholders were on board and all perspectives were
reflected in the preparation of this debate and the draft
resolution (S/2013/27) on a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping. I am glad that today we will adopt a
draft resolution on this subject that has been sponsored
by all 15 members of the Security Council, which will
be the first comprehensive resolution on peacekeeping
after more than 11 years. Our motivation to hold this
debate and present the draft resolution is three-fold.
First, peacekeeping missions are the most effective
tool in the hands of the United Nations to deal with
conflicts.
Secondly, over the decades peacekeeping operations
have evolved from traditional to multidimensional
peacekeeping operations to better correspond to the
requirements of different situations. Their growing
capacity to build peace, in addition to their primary
role of keeping peace, needs to be harnessed.
Thirdly, in the past 52 years Pakistan has
demonstrated strong commitment to peacekeeping and
has served in missions all around the world.
We are grateful to the members of the Council
and to Member States for their warm response to our
proposal.

4

With regard to the debate today and the draft
resolution to be adopted by the Council later, I want to
highlight seven aspects of a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping: first, early response in order to prevent
conflict, address its root causes and stem a relapse into
conflict; second, the nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding — early mission assessment and planning
will ensure coherence and synergy; third, sound
planning and coordination in mandating and deploying
peacekeeping missions through consultations with all
stakeholders, especially troop-contributing countries;
fourth, professional excellence, demonstrated by
ensuring the deployment of trained, committed and
well-equipped peacekeepers; fifth, broader ownership
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities by
strengthening partnerships with national Governments,
regional organizations and development actors; sixth,
inclusive political dialogue for fostering national unity
and reconciliation; and seventh, tailoring missions to
local conditions within the general template.
Pakistan has been a proud participant in
peacekeeping missions. Pakistan has been a leading
military and police contributor to peacekeeping
missions, from Latin America to Africa and from
Europe to Asia. In more than five decades, we have
had the honour of contributing approximately 145,000
troops and of serving in 41 missions in 23 countries.
That has given our peacekeepers valuable experience
in handling diverse and difficult conflict and postconflict situations all over the world. One hundred
and thirty-two of our peacekeepers have given their
lives for peace. That is among the highest number of
casualties suffered by Member States in the service of
the United Nations.
Pakistan’s peacekeeping role is rooted in our abiding
faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Our participation in United Nations
peacekeeping is underpinned by a national consensus
and is an integral part of our foreign policy.
Pakistan is also host to one of the oldest United
Nations peacekeeping missions, namely, the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.
That mission has played an important role in monitoring
peace along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir.
The complex and dynamic nature of contemporary
conflicts demands change in the nature and scope
of peacekeeping missions and a comprehensive and
integrated approach to peacekeeping. Multidimensional
peacekeeping missions are a manifestation of such an
13-21043

S/PV.6903

approach. Accordingly, intricate crises are increasingly
seeing the deployment of multidimensional peacekeeping
missions. In such situations, keeping peace is as
imperative as building it. Such missions achieve the
twin goals of peacekeeping and peacebuilding by
preventing the recurrence of conflict, building local
capacities for sustainable peace and creating space
for development actors and financial institutions. The
enhanced efficiency and cost-effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping efforts are among the benefits of
a multidimensional approach.
Success in Burundi, Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste has demonstrated the value of
multidimensional missions. Yet, there are situations
where challenges are larger than the United Nations
wherewithal. That calls for a more calibrated response.
Shared responsibility and partnerships underpin
United Nations peacekeeping. It is a multilateral
exercise under one United Nations flag.
Continued success in peacekeeping will be ensured
by upholding the legitimacy bestowed on them by the
Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles
of peacekeeping, that is, consent, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or defence of
the mandate.
I am sure that our deliberations today will strengthen
those partnerships and enrich the discourse for a robust
response to the challenges of peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Kelly (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his comments.
Australia welcomes the evolution in the approach
to peacekeeping over the past decade, which has seen a
recognition of the complex, multidimensional issues that
can be associated with such missions. That recognition
has in turn led to a concerted international effort in
providing the guidance, training and capabilities
required to meet those challenges. Given that trend,
it is timely that the Council set out the broad themes
that will help direct our efforts in current and future
missions.

13-21043

The draft resolution (S/2013/27) we will adopt today
serves the important purpose of not only identifying
the broad range of military and civilian capabilities
that are required for peacekeeping missions to achieve
successful peacebuilding outcomes, but also of the need
for the true integration of those efforts. That includes
not only in the ways and means by which different
mission components cooperate and coordinate on the
ground, but in the critical planning and preparation
phases. That has implications for the way that civilian
and military actors conceive of each other and the roles
they play. That includes those organizations that are
not formally part of peacekeeping missions but play a
critical role in moving situations towards stabilization
and development by supporting short- and long-term
economic issues, the rule of law, good governance
and local capacity-building — including funds and
programmes, international financial institutions,
non-governmental organizations, bilateral donors and
civil society.
In that respect we welcome the work within the
Secretariat to enhance integrated mission planning
and execution, including the establishment of
integrated strategic frameworks and the clarification
of roles and responsibilities. That is exemplified by
the important step forward of designating the United
Nations Development Programme and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations as the joint global focal
point for the rule of law. Australia is in the process of
developing its own integrated approach to strategic
frameworks and planning through the establishment of
the Australian Civil Military Centre. We look forward
to sharing experiences as we all strive to evolve towards
true integration.
The draft resolution (S/2013/27) should provide
those engaged in planning missions with a convenient
list of considerations. As has been stressed, all missions
have unique characteristics, but we have had sufficient
experience to tell us that there are generic aspects that
recur time and again in areas such as the establishment
of public security, the management of the displaced,
transitional justice, political transition, disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration, and security sector
reform. Often, transitional justice will include the need
to defuse tensions over land and property disputes and
resource equity. Each situation is unique. The key, then,
will be doing the necessary analysis to tailor responses
to the cultural and specific context.

5

S/PV.6903

Acknowledging the relevance of such issues to a
mission means that proper allowance can be made in
the way a mission is structured and the capabilities
provided. This can help avoid serious compromises to
the standing of a mission. An example would be the
failure to provide the logistic requirements to support
proper management of detainees and the corrections
sector, along with ensuring that due process issues are
catered for.
Of course, all these types of activities must be
guided by the fundamental principle of national
ownership if they are to be sustainable in the long term.
The ultimate aim of peacekeeping missions, as it is with
development, is that they must constantly be focused
on their own redundancy. Missions will often result
in international capabilities being provided to address
critical points of weakness. Such measures must not
create dependency but be focused from the outset on
the means by which transition to national capacity can
be initiated and advanced.
In building national capacity, we have readily
identified the need for inclusive and transparent political
mechanisms and processes. We have increasingly also
realized the imperative of evolving national institutions
and good governance, which can minimize and, it is to be
hoped, eliminate corruption. Nothing is more corrosive
to the progress of peacebuilding. To ensure that this
erosion does not eventuate and that international aid is
deployed to maximum effect, missions must focus on
supporting accountability measures from the outset.
Two areas that we believe are central to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are the protection of
civilians and women, peace and security. The duty of
peacekeepers to protect civilians — whether through
direct activities, such as protecting against conflictrelated sexual violence or working to build local
capacities, such as through the training of the security
sector — are central to the restoration of security and
moving towards a healthy civil society. This is a central
pillar of peacebuilding. We also know that peacebuilding
processes involving the participation of women are
more likely to succeed. Peacekeeping missions can play
a strong role in fostering such participation, including
through the work of gender advisers and role models.
Identifying these multidimensional challenges
generates the requirement to provide the training and
expertise to address them. We need to identify, recruit
and deploy people who have the right skills. For example,
in addressing security sector reform, military and police
6

trainers and mentors must be properly equipped for this
role, including in aptitude for the context. Mechanisms
such as standing and rostered capacities can support
the rapid deployment of specialists to support early
planning or to fill critical gaps. We welcome efforts
to improve the deployment of civilians with the right
skillsets — including, importantly, from the global
South — through the civilian capacities initiative.
Predeployment and in-mission training are critical
to ensuring that all components — military, police
and civilian — understand what the others are doing
in the field. We encourage ongoing efforts to develop
and implement peacekeeping training in a coordinated
and complementary manner. We as Member States,
our training institutes and the Secretariat need to work
together to achieve this.
Finally, as one who has worn the blue beret himself,
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the service
of the dedicated men and women deployed on peace
operations and to honour the sacrifice of those who
have given their lives in this noble calling.
Mr. Kim Bong-hyun (Republic of Korea): It is
my distinct honour and privilege to attend this open
debate and to address one of the most important issues
in the work of the Security Council. Today’s thematic
debate, under the agenda item “United Nations
peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach”, is timely
and appropriate, since maintaining international peace
and security nowadays requires more integrated and
comprehensive approaches to peacekeeping, postconflict peacebuilding, and development.
The Republic of Korea warmly welcomes you,
Sir, in presiding over this meeting, and commends
the leadership of the Government of Pakistan for
organizing today’s open debate. My delegation also
extends its high appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his presence and informative briefing.
The scope of United Nations peacekeeping
activities has continually expanded. The mandates of
modern-day peacekeeping missions have become more
diversified and multidimensional to meet the changing
demands on the ground since the first mission in
1948. In this regard, I duly recognize the strengthened
structure of United Nations peacekeeping operations
under the initiative of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
My country, the Republic of Korea, experienced
a devastating war between 1950 and 1953, and has
developed from being the beneficiary of an early
13-21043

S/PV.6903

United Nations military intervention and the recipient
of development assistance to being a contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and a
new donor of development cooperation with many
developing countries. Out of this unique peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding process in my country,
I would like to offer my own perspective on this issue.
Our commitment to these operations is firm, and our
goal of ensuring their relevance for the future is clear.
To succeed, we must build an integrated framework that
can encompass the changing realities of the conflict
and post-conflict landscape.
We can identify important elements to be considered
in making the integrated framework: fragile postconflict situations, potential relapses into conflicts, and
the international development cooperation mechanism.
While peacekeeping mandates in the most traditional
sense are still valid, the modern realm of United
Nations peacekeeping activities should overlap with
that of peacebuilding and development cooperation.
It is therefore timely that the Security Council should
take stock of the instruments of peacekeeping, clarify
its multiple dimensions, and decide on its future.
Having said that, I would like to emphasize the
following.
First, an international development cooperation
mechanism should be considered and incorporated
into multiple dimensions of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations can learn lessons from
the principles and guidelines of the international
development cooperation regime that has been
developed and agreed upon by the United Nations
funds and programmes, agencies and other
development institutions. In particular, development
cooperation strategies for fragile States, which are
now being developed and applied to several States
by the Development Cooperation Directorate of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, can be included in the planning process
of peacekeeping operations. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to closely
cooperate with development actors when it drafts a
peacekeeping operation plan for a specific country.
Secondly, before laying out specific mandates for
a mission, the resources of the United Nations country
team and civilian sector should be taken into account in
order to properly determine the scope of a mission and
the capacities it requires. The available expertise and
capacities of other national and international partners,
13-21043

including regional and subregional organizations,
should also be taken into account. Doing so will help
reduce potential duplication of work and ensure the
continuity of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the
development of the host country. In short, the aim is
to balance long-term goals with the short-term realities
on the ground, harmonizing the two whenever possible.
Thirdly, the significance of national ownership
cannot be overemphasized in sustaining peace, security
and development. The Republic of Korea has learned
the importance of national ownership through its
own experience. Immediately after the war in 1953,
the Korean people, with a strong sense of national
ownership, worked hard to achieve security, peace
and development with United Nations assistance, and
have come a long way during the past half century.
This is why we believe that the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations should be
designed to strengthen the sense of national ownership
of the people affected by conflicts.
Fourthly, it is not practical to apply the same
strategies to all missions. There is no one-size-fits-all
set of peacebuilding priorities that is good for every
peacekeeping mission. Tailored strategic assessment is
crucial in configuring any peacekeeping mission. Their
mandates should therefore be clear and feasible.
Fifthly, the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, under imminent threat of physical
violence must be taken into account in the early phases
of mandate drafting and throughout the life cycle of
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Lastly, women must be included as active
participants at every stage of peacebuilding, peace
agreements and development programmes, including in
decision-making roles. Women are essential partners in
any peaceful society and contribute to the three pillars
of sustainable peace, namely, economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy.
Since joining the United Nations, in 1991, the
Republic of Korea has participated in 19 missions.
Recently, our engineering contingent in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was redeployed
home after having successfully fulfilled its mandate
of recovering and restoring national infrastructure
following the earthquake in Haiti in 2010. In March
we will dispatch another engineering unit to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
implement the mandate to build UNMISS’s capacities

7

S/PV.6903

for early peacebuilding and reconstructing the
horizontal infrastructure in South Sudan. One Korean
infantry battalion with the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon has also successfully conducted its
surveillance and civil-military operations since being
deployed in 2007.
My delegation stands ready to continue our
multifaceted contributions to the noble cause of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with a view to a more
secure and sustainable peace around the globe. The
Security Council has made great strides in streamlining
that process, and its momentum must continue.
We look forward to working within the Council on
multidimensional ways to make, keep and build peace.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Foreign Secretary Jilani, for
presiding over today’s important debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation. Pakistan
has been one of the top contributors of uniformed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the post-Cold War era. The United States is grateful
for its contributions to United Nations peacekeeping,
and we are honoured to participate in this discussion
under its leadership.
Peacekeeping is one of the most important activities
undertaken by the United Nations. It has reduced the
incidence of inter- and intra-State conflict around the
globe. Many countries, from Namibia to El Salvador and
from Mozambique to Timor-Leste, have transitioned
from war to peace, thanks in no small measure to the
assistance they received from multidimensional United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Multidimensional
United Nations peacekeeping has achieved many
successes since the Security Council established the
first such operation, more than 50 years ago, in the
Congo. But United Nations peacekeeping must continue
to evolve to remain relevant in the years to come. I
would like to focus today on some features that the
United States would like to see in new multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, wherever they may be.
First is a diverse mix of troop and police contributors,
drawn certainly from the regions concerned and from
other regions as well. The universal character of United
Nations peacekeeping missions is very important to its
legitimacy. United Nations troops must have the right
training and capabilities to be operationally effective.
To those ends, the Council should be more engaged
early on with the leadership of the Department of

8

Peacekeeping Operations and the Secretary-General
on the force-generation strategy. Force generation is a
political, not a technical, exercise, and must be treated
as such.
Second, mission staffing strategies should rely
on quality over quantity, especially with respect
to leadership and civilian experts. To win a host
population’s confidence, a United Nations mission must
quickly deploy real expertise and skills that the host
country does not itself possess. Ten world-class experts
arriving at the outset of a mission are far better than
100 mediocre generalists trickling in over time. As
multidimensional peacekeeping evolves, the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative on civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict should be fully embraced. Improved staffing
also means accelerating gender balance in missions and
the broader inclusion of women in all mission tasks and
units. We welcome the positive impact that all-female
units have had in Liberia and Haiti, and now in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Côte d’Ivoire,
and we want to see women playing a greater role, in
greater numbers, in activities and leadership across the
spectrum of peacekeeping activities.
Third, more military police and civilian personnel
should receive relevant guidance and training before
arriving at theatres. The Secretariat has made strides
in developing standards, training materials, specialized
guidance and policies on issues ranging from the
protection of civilians to gender and health. Those
resources must be put to good use.
Fourth, mission leadership should prioritize
cooperation throughout the mission. Peacekeeping
operations have grown increasingly complex as
they have been asked to tackle a host of interrelated
challenges in order to address conflict. One of the
strengths of the United Nations is that it can deploy
a truly multidisciplinary response in a way that other
actors cannot; but that is an asset only if the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts, which requires deep
and sustained intra-mission cooperation. Mission
management should design orientation and training
programmes together, and devise truly mission-wide
strategies for key mandated tasks, such as the protection
of civilians. Jointness must become routine and
prioritized, from mission planning to tabletop exercises
to staffing operations and mission analysis centres.
United Nations peacekeeping missions and country
teams, moreover, must work hand in hand, including in

13-21043

S/PV.6903

the design of quick-impact projects and other initiatives
to help generate local goodwill.
Fifth, we would like to see the entire mission
leadership — special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and their deputies, force commanders,
police commissioners and directors of mission
support — taking action to ensure adherence to the
zero-tolerance policy for misconduct. That includes
swiftly investigating allegations of sexual exploitation
or abuse and repatriating offending units.
Sixth, we hope that troops, police and civilian
personnel in United Nations missions will begin
to receive world-class logistics and administrative
support, while the support component’s physical
footprint is light and cost-effective. That is the promise
of the global field support strategy, and it must be
realized for the sake of the operational effectiveness
and fiscal responsibility of the United Nations.
Seventh, the special representatives of the
Secretary-General should promote multidisciplinary
cooperation, not only within the United Nations
system but also among multilateral and bilateral
assistance providers. We hope she — and I say “she”
deliberately — will foster information-sharing among
those actors and help forge a division of labour that
builds on their comparative strengths.
Eighth, peacekeeping can succeed only if there
is genuine peace to support. Peacekeeping missions
can help stabilize and catalyse recovery in countries
emerging from conflict, but the Security Council
must do its part to ensure that the political settlement
underlying the deployment of peacekeepers stays on
track. The commitment of the political leaders of the
host country to work with a mission is indispensable.
Last but not least, multidimensional United Nations
peacekeeping missions need the respect and gratitude of
the host nation. The steps I have just outlined can help
in that regard, as would efforts by mission personnel
to familiarize themselves with local language and
culture and empathize with the local population. But
sometimes respect can be won only when peacekeepers
refuse to turn a blind eye to flagrant transgressions;
when they demonstrate the will and wherewithal to use
force to defend themselves and enforce their mandate;
and when they tell the Security Council plainly what we
need to know, even if it is difficult.
Fortunately, the next operation will not start
from scratch. We have learned much in 50 years of
13-21043

multidimensional peacekeeping, and we have the
progress hard-earned by past and current operations to
build upon.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this morning’s open debate on
United Nations peacekeeping. Pakistan’s outstanding
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping over many
years is appreciated by all Member States.
As our understanding of the relationship between
security and development has strengthened, we have
responded with increasingly complex mandates that
demand more of our peacekeepers. In particular, we have
come to recognize that peacekeepers can themselves
be early peacebuilders. But to be effective, they
require clarity from this Council about their roles and
responsibilities, and they require the right equipment,
training and support to fulfil their mandates.
Peacekeepers play three critical roles to support
peacebuilding. First, they help Governments articulate
their peacebuilding objectives, as in Liberia, where
the United Nations Mission in Liberia has supported
the Government in determining security and justice
priorities in a national development strategy that itself
forms the basis for international support.
Secondly, peacekeepers enable the wider
peacebuilding community to work by providing a
secure environment, such as in South Sudan, where
peacekeepers are working to drive security to a local
level to enable others to help others to extend State
authority.
Thirdly, peacekeepers may implement peacebuilding
tasks themselves, as in Côte d’Ivoire, where
peacekeepers have demonstrated that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) have to be
a joint effort. The United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) may have the unique skills necessary
to disarm and demobilize ex-combatants, but others
must be involved from the outset in designing and
implementing successful reintegration programmes.
Peacekeepers’ efforts to support peacebuilding are
made vulnerable by two factors: first, a lack of political
will and, secondly, a deficit in civilian expertise.
The UNOCI DDR programme is limited by a lack of
proactive political will, and the innovative strategy to
extend State authority adopted by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan has yet to
be truly tested, in part because of a lack of civilian
expertise.
9

S/PV.6903

The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
agreed upon by the Group of Seven Plus, is a commitment
on the part of the international community to supporting
peacebuilding in a coordinated and transparent manner.
But it is also a firm political commitment on the part
of some Members States to achieving sustainable
development and peace. We support that demonstration
of political will.
Since 2009, the Secretary-General has consistently
identified the need for the United Nations to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for critical
peacebuilding tasks, in particular drawing on capacities
from the global South. But recent figures show that
over 20 per cent of civilian rule of law posts in United
Nations missions remain vacant. This shortfall is
unacceptable and we must deal with it.
Specific innovations are being made. Women
protection advisers will increasingly play a critical
role in preventing further horrific incidences of sexual
violence, in protecting vulnerable populations, and
in promoting the participation of women in peace
settlements and political life. My Foreign Minister is
personally committed to supporting such endeavours,
and we warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s call
for greater representation of women in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict and in peacebuilding.
We look forward to discussing his broader proposals
for addressing a shortfall in civilian expertise in the
General Assembly over the coming months.
As conditions change on the ground, peacekeeping
missions will cede their initial comparative advantage
on some tasks to other actors, and the system must
respond accordingly. An integrated response is
particularly important as peacekeeping missions
draw down. To achieve successful transitions from
peacekeeping missions, such as that in Timor-Leste,
we need a well-coordinated United Nations system
that plans strategically from the outset of a mission’s
deployment. We look forward to seeing in the next few
months the emerging policy in this area led by UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous.
Today’s draft resolution (S/2013/27), the first
of its kind on peacekeeping in more than 10 years,
captures how we have reformed peacekeeping to
meet the challenges of effective peacebuilding. It
further underlines the importance of peacekeepers
in containing, managing and resolving conflict in a
manner coordinated with those that will ultimately

10

lead to longer-term reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development, and ensure that national authorities are
placed at the centre of those efforts. The United Kingdom
is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolution.
I would like once again to thank Pakistan for this
initiative, which recognizes how far we have come and
demonstrates the Council’s continued commitment to
peacekeeping as a means, not only to contain conflict,
but also to build peace for all.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to welcome Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, Foreign
Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Guatemala
thanks Pakistan for his excellent preparation for today’s
open debate and for the concept note prepared for the
occasion (S/2013/4, annex). The concept note seeks
to open the discussion on the topic of peacekeeping
operations, one of the most important issues in the
work carried out by the Organization. We believe that,
after more than 10 years since the Security Council’s
adoption of its last resolution on this specific topic,
it is appropriate to analyse and discuss the subject in
the light of recent developments and the status of such
missions.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, and we note that Guatemala endorses the
statement that will be made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Guatemala is a country that has benefitted from
United Nations peacekeeping, especially in the areas
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
after the signing of our peace accords in late 1996.
Subsequently, we begin to participate actively in
peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. In other words, our particular interest in the
topic arises from our dual status as a beneficiary of and
contributor to peacekeeping operations.
Since that time, we have seen the adaptation of
peacekeeping operations to each of the changing and
unique challenges emerging in the field. In that regard,
multidimensional mandates have been adopted to allow
many of those operations to implement key elements for
achieving sustainable peace during their lifespan. We
endorse that approach, as we believe that peacekeeping
operations must in some cases be complemented by
activities that contribute to achieving real improvements
in the living conditions of the affected populations.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

As a corollary, we believe that one of the fundamental
issues for the proper execution of multidimensional
operations is that they must have clear, achievable and
verifiable mandates that are adapted to the particular
situation of each case. For that reason, we consider it
important that, in establishing and reviewing mandates,
the Security Council take into account all the tools at
its disposal, according to the needs of each case and
situation. We also believe that in order to successfully
implement the mandates, one must address the issue
of the gaps that still exist in terms of capabilities,
resources and training through greater coordination
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries. Additionally, we believe
that any periodic evaluation by the Secretariat of any
peacekeeping operation must be shared with troopcontributing countries.
In all peacekeeping operations, each country brings
a unique contribution. The particular contributions that
each troop-contributing country can provide must be
recognized and encouraged. Similarly, it is important
to further improve the triangular cooperation between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries in the decision-making process
and during the implementation of mandates. That would
include consultations on all aspects and in every stage
of peacekeeping operations, particularly when it comes
to adjusting mandates, periodic mission assessments
and changes in the number of troops.
In our view, peacekeeping operations should not
be seen as an outsourcing exercise whereby developed
countries employ the troops of developing countries to
carry out this difficult and dangerous task based on an
estimate of cost per person. Among other things, that
is offensive to all troop-contributing countries and for
all those people who risk their lives for the purposes of
the Organization. For Guatemala, these operations do
not represent a paid service, but rather the fulfillment
of an ideal — to participate under the banner of the
United Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. Therefore, what motivates my country
to participate in peacekeeping operations is the pride
and professionalism of our armed forces, as well as a
sense of commitment to the highest ideals of the United
Nations. For those reasons, Guatemala will continue to
provide peacekeeping operations with personnel with
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity.

13-21043

Finally, we want to emphasize once again the
importance and key role of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations as the only forum with
the mandate to thoroughly review the entire question
of United Nations peacekeeping operations in all its
aspects. While we consider it appropriate and useful to
discuss the topic of peacekeeping operations within the
Security Council, we believe that the Council should
not stumble into an exercise in micromanagement of
specific aspects of those missions.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to commend Pakistan for organizing this
debate on the question of a multidimensional approach
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Your
presence with us here in the Chamber, Secretary Jilani,
to conduct today’s debate illustrates the interest that your
country has always had in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I am also grateful to the Secretary-General
for the very detailed presentation that he has just given
to us on the item under consideration.
One of the major challenges that our world has
always faced pertains to its ability to find speedy and
sustainable solutions to crisis and conflict situations
that emerge to threaten the stability of States and the
well-being of their populations. Initially designed and,
until recently, operating to maintain peace in countries
in conflict, peacekeeping operations have gradually
evolved in order to adapt to the political, social and
economic environment of our time.
Now the evolution of United Nations peacekeeping
missions is such that the organization, planning and
execution of related operations are transcending the
primary normative framework mentioned in Chapters
VI, VII and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping missions, in their multidimensional
design, now rely on a normative framework that brings
together the relative provisions of the Charter and the
international legal instruments for human rights and
international humanitarian law, as well as of regional
and subregional organizations.
The issue is no longer just peacekeeping, but also
peacebuilding. The mandate of peacekeeping missions
has thus evolved to include the development component,
thereby making Blue Helmets artisans of peace and
reconstruction.
The merit of today’s debate is that it highlights the
multidimensional approach of peacekeeping operations
and provides an opportunity to evaluate its effectiveness

11

S/PV.6903

and to propose improvements. Rebuilding a country
after conflict requires a number of competencies to act
in areas as varied as those having to do with security,
the rule of law, good governance, the restoration of
institutions and infrastructure, justice reform and
national capacity-building of the countries concerned.
The multidimensional approach of peacekeeping
operations therefore shows the will of the United
Nations to not limit its missions to achieving only
security space, but also to achieving space for political,
economic and human rights.
We are pleased to note that for a number of years
now the multidimensional approach has been well
integrated into peacekeeping missions, since the
United Nations and its external partners have agreed
to identifiy the activities that are part of peacebuilding.
In countries emerging from armed conflict, the
array of actions to be carried out is quite vast, but the
financial and logistical resources are often lacking.
External support is therefore the sole hope for the
country concerned, not only to re-establish security
and build institutions, but also to resume political and
economic activities, which are the very foundation of
any State.
While recognizing the merits of a multidimensional
approach in peacekeeping operations, my country
believes that, given the specificity of causes and of
the nature of conflicts, it would be desirable not to
lose sight of the fact that there is not just one model
for peacebuilding. Therefore, each mission will need
to take into consideration the specific needs of the
countries concerned through ongoing consultations
with national authorities.
Given that the multidimensional approach involves
simultaneously implementing a number of activities
by different stakeholders intervening in their areas of
specialization, the success of such activities requires
integrated preparation of missions, the establishment of
a strategic framework and mechanisms that will assist
in coordinating them and in setting priorities. That
type of work is primarily up to the United Nations,
in collaboration with regional stakeholders and the
countries concerned.
We are therefore pleased to see that missions have
been given coordinating frameworks and coherence,
which now will need to be regularly assessed and from
which could come relevant recommendations. Along

12

the same lines, we must strengthen partnerships, not
only among bodies of the United Nations but also
between regional and subregional organizations and
the international financial institutions. In that respect,
Togo believes that the Peacebuilding Commission,
given its importance, like the Peacebuilding Support
Office and United Nations bodies, must be able to
establish a partnership to avoid duplication of activities,
achieve complementarity on the ground and provide
an opportunity for the establishment of a model of
sustained and sustainable development.
That is why my country has always supported the
recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and believes
that their implementation will help make more visible
and more permanent the action of the United Nations
by all partners on the ground. Also, we must note the
increasingly important role to be played by political
stakeholders, civil society and defence and security
agencies, whose coordinated action will contribute
to the success of a peacekeeping mission. To make a
peacekeeping operation efficient, we need to focus on
the involvement of all concerned stakeholders from the
outset of the mission in order to keep them all equally
informed and to make sure that the information is
always shared.
Togo appreciate the efforts already made in terms
of training and expertise before deployment on the
ground, both for civilians and security forces. To assist
those efforts and meet international standards in that
area, a training centre for military and police was set up
in Lomé in order to ensure their efficient deployment
in peacekeeping operations. We would also like to note
that, in order to optimize the chances for success in
those actions on the ground, it is important to avoid
any policy of exclusion in the implementation of
those projects. We therefore particularly welcome the
increasingly important place that the United Nations
is granting to women as key stakeholders for the
implementation of projects that assist in re-establishing
peace and security. We believe that it is also vital to
promote the role of ethnic minorities and the media in
promoting sustainable peace.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate the urgent need
to adopt clear mandates for peacekeeping operations
that coherently highlight the goals to be achieved in the
post-conflict period in order to ensure that the country
emerging from a crisis or conflict will not relapse for
lack of substantial international support.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

The protection of civilians and human rights, as
well as security sector reform and building the rule of
law and good governance, should also be given pride
of place in the reconstruction programmes identified
by and with the participation of national political
stakeholders.
However, it is undeniable that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations can be executed only if
missions have considerable means. In spite of the efforts
made, financing remains today the Achilles heel of
peacekeeping operations. The international community
must therefore spare no effort to make the contributions
necessary for ensuring the harmonious implementation
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Pakistan for its initiative in holding today’s open
debate on peacekeeping operations. China welcomes
the presence of Foreign Secretary Jalil Abbas Jilani in
the Council and thanks him for presiding over today’s
meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
Peacekeeping operations are an important means
for the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. In the past six decades, they
have played an irreplaceable role. To address the
changing situation on the ground, the philosophy and
practice of peacekeeping operations have been on
the path of continuous reform and improvement. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations are becoming
increasingly diversified. The Security Council is now
granting to some integrated peacekeeping operations
the function of early-stage peacebuilding, which is
an important feature in the development of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In recent years,
in some post-conflict countries and regions, due to
poor results in national reconciliation, security sector
reform, economic recovery and rebuilding and other
peacebuilding areas, the situation on the ground has
experienced ups and downs and even regression into
complications and turbulence. Properly addressing the
relations between peacebuilding and peacekeeping
is therefore very important. On the subject of how
to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and how to effectively bring into full
play the multidimensional peacekeeping operations, I
would like to make three comments.
First, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
closely related. When formulating the mandate of a

13-21043

peacekeeping operation, priority attention must be
given to the urgent need to consolidate and maintain
peace. Meanwhile, it is important to have a long-term
vision and to consider the reality on the ground so as
to mandate the peacekeeping operation to undertake
early-stage peacebuilding functions. Early involvement
by peacekeeping operations in national reconciliation,
security sector reform, national institution-rebuilding
and economic and social development are conducive to
a good start in peacebuilding and for a solid foundation
for long-term peace and stability. Successful
experiences by some peacekeeping operations in
the area of quick-impact projects can be shared with
others. Peacebuilding functions and mandates in some
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by
the provision of the necessary human and financial
resources.
Secondly, when carrying out peacebuilding
mandates, peacekeeping operations should also follow
the principles guiding United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly, the principle of the consent
of the host country. National institution-rebuilding,
national reconciliation, security sector reform,
elections and economic development all have a bearing
on the independence and sovereignty of the host
country. Peacebuilding mandates must be based on the
full consideration and respect for the will of the host
country and should be aligned with the host country’s
own national development strategy and priority areas.
Peacekeeping operations must formulate exit strategies
and road maps so as to achieve smooth transitions from
peacekeeping to comprehensive peacebuilding.
Thirdly, peacebuilding is an arduous long-term task
and cannot be accomplished by peacekeeping operations
alone. The Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Secretariat should strengthen
their internal coordination and should complement
each other. While carrying out the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding function, peacekeeping operations
should also strengthen their internal coordination.
With regard to the promotion of political processes and
national reconciliation, it is important to bring into
full play the advantages of the countries in the region
and regional organizations. As for economic and social
recovery and development, the United Nations should
surely mobilize the contributions that can be made by
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
other international partners.

13

S/PV.6903

Last but not least, China endorses the draft
resolution to be adopted at today’s meeting (S/2013/27).
We thank Pakistan for the work it has done in the
drafting of and consultations on the draft resolution.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing this debate on one of the pillars of the United
Nations work, namely, peacekeeping. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
Peacekeeping operations have evolved in recent
years. Their level of deployment is unprecedented
today, with 14 operations currently under way, and
the mandates are increasingly broad and complex.
That complexity and diversity of missions make
necessary greater cooperation with States and regional
organizations and stronger synergies between those
involved in peacekeeping and those involved in
peacebuilding.
I would recall France’s profound commitment to
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
France is taking part in 7 of the 14 peacekeeping
operations and contributes to operations mandated
by the Security Council that are managed and led
by the European Union or NATO, or in a national
capacity. Lastly, it actively supports the participation
of African States in peacekeeping operations through a
regional network of national vocational schools, which
provide technical and operational know-how adapted
to the needs of officers of African armies. It is also
participating, along with its European partners, in the
EURO RECAMP programme.
Since the French-British initiative in 2009
on operations follow-up, we have advocated the
strengthening of military expertise, improving
the Council’s cooperation with troop- and
police-contributing countries and better management
of the costs of peacekeeping operations.
While a number of recommendations from the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), which was published more
than 10 years ago, are still valid, I would like to turn
to three pivotal elements in improving peacekeeping
operations: the implementation of strategies for
transition between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
the protection of civilians, and multilingualism.
First, obviously, we must draw up crisis exit
strategies that ensure a lasting return to peace.
Peacekeeping operations are not meant to last forever.

14

We must draw operational conclusions from the lack
of barriers between peacekeeping and peacebuilding so
that each stage of the United Nations presence prepares
for the subsequent stage, in order to anticipate and
forecast exit strategies. It is therefore essential that,
under the leadership of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, peacekeeping operations be
coordinated and that they cooperate closely with the
offices of United Nations country teams so as to find
any possible synergies and to avoid duplication of effort.
We are counting on the Peacebuilding Commission
to provide greater consistency in the activities of the
international community in the exit stages of a conflict.
We must take into account new threats, such as drug
trafficking, human trafficking, organized crime and
corruption, which have the potential to destabilize
fragile countries.
Secondly, the protection of civilians is one of the
main objectives of the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. All the recent Security Council
mandates contain a protection-of-civilians component,
which is the priority in all circumstances. Peacekeepers
must therefore be trained and their behaviour on the
ground must be irreproachable. Peacekeepers must
also provide a safe environment that supports the
resumption of the political process. That requires the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, including for children
affected by the conflict, and of programmes for security
sector reform and the consolidation of the rule of law.
Women are one of the principal pivots in the
transformation of a society. It is therefore vital to
enhance their participation in decision-making. The
integration of women into the police and the army will
make it possible to enhance the fight against sexual
violence and to promote human rights within those
institutions.
I also recall the Secretariat policy to exclude
non-essential contact with individuals who are the
subject of an arrest warrant for war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide.
The third factor is multilingualism. Just over a year
ago, in a similar debate, I underscored this issue and
called upon the Secretariat to reform its approach to
the problem. A year later, I note that nothing has been
done.
It is necessary — I am not just defending the French
language — for United Nations missions to be able to

13-21043

S/PV.6903

communicate with the populations in the countries
where they are. That seems to be a matter of common
sense. However, I see that in reality, the Secretariat’s
recruitment policy takes into account not the need for
peacekeeping forces to be able to communicate with the
populations, but rather their ability to send reports in
English to New York. I am aware that sending a report
in English to New York is important, but it seems that
it should be more important to be able to speak French
with French-speaking populations, who did not have
the good fortune to have been colonized by the British
and therefore do not speak English. That is what I said
18 months ago and that is what I said three years ago,
and the Secretariat has changed nothing.
It is not surprising that recruitment committees,
which are made up of English-speakers, do not assign
priority to a knowledge of French. I can provide an
interesting example of a young woman, who was not
French but was a francophone, who was a candidate for
all peacekeeping operations. Members may well guess
where she was sent. She was sent to Abyei, where, of
course, she must use her French every day. I am just
making that side comment — which is perhaps not the
norm in these surroundings — knowing well that it
will have no effect on the behaviour of the Secretariat,
which will calmly continue to send English speakers
to French-speaking regions. I find that regrettable, but
from time to time we must recognize the limits of the
powers of a permanent representative.
In conclusion, we would like to recall that the
success of any peacekeeping mission is the result of
joint efforts by members of the Council, countries that
contribute financially, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. However, those efforts
will amount to nothing without a solid commitment by
the host country.
Before I conclude, my country would like to
commend the commitment of Blue Helmets of all
nationalities, whose dedication in the service of peace
has cost some of them their lives — as you have
recalled, Mr. President. I am thinking in particular of
the seven Blue Helmets of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire, the five Blue Helmets of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the four pilots of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan who have died over the past six months. France
pays tribute to them — in French.

13-21043

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Pakistan for organizing this open debate on an
issue that Argentina, as a country that has contributed
troops and police to United Nations operations since
1958, deems of particular importance, We currently
have more than 1,000 personnel participating in the
armed and security forces of seven peacekeeping
operations, four of which are multidimensional.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and we welcome the presence here of the
Foreign Secretary of Pakistan.
Argentina’s participation in peace operations
reflects my country’s support for the development
of a transparent and democratic collective security
system in the framework of the United Nations,
based on consolidated multilateral mechanisms and
in the service of compliance with international law.
Peacekeeping operations are an essential instrument
of the Organization in complying with its objective of
maintaining international peace and security, which
we believe must be continually improved upon and
strengthened in the future.
Another fundamental reason for our participation
in peace operations stems from the close ties between
peacekeeping and the promotion and protection of
human rights, in particular through the rebuilding of
institutions and the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law in those countries where increasingly
complex and integrated multidimensional missions are
taking place. We believe that progress in improving
that type of mission with three components — military,
police and civilian — with different but clear and
precise mandates and rules of engagement is one of the
greatest successes of the past decade. We must preserve
that and improve upon it.
We welcome the draft resolution, on which we
worked together with other Council members, and
its request that the Secretary-General take account
of the developments achieved in recent years,
while underlining the broad range of peacekeeping
operations existing now, from traditional operations
dedicated primarily to monitoring ceasefires to new,
multidimensional missions that carry out time-bound
peacebuilding tasks.
Argentina supports peacekeeping operations
taking on a multidimensional character when specific
circumstances justify it, as long as their mandates
include support and assistance for Governments of

15

S/PV.6903

the countries in which missions are operating. Such
support must include such considerations as assistance
and cooperation to strengthen institutions and social
participation, the holding of free and transparent
elections, the establishment of inclusive political
processes, the development of the rule of law, the design
and implementation of effective plans for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform, the effective application of guidelines on the
gender perspective, and measures for the protection
of the civilian population, particularly those under
imminent threat of physical violence, including all
forms of sexual, sexist and gender-based violence.
However, we recognize that the protection of civilians
is a primary responsibility of the host country, as noted
in the draft resolution to be adopted today (S/2013/27),
which also refers to the provisions in this area in
paragraph 16 of resolution 1674 (2006).
Particular attention should be given to the fact
that, as a result of developments over the past decade,
the mandates of new, multidimensional missions can
include — as in the case of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti –references to mission support for
national Governments and local human rights groups
in their efforts to promote and protect human rights,
in particular those of women and children. We believe
that such actions would contribute to ending impunity
and ensuring that those responsible for violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law
are held accountable before justice. Such mandates also
promote the implementation of reliable mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting on human rights situations
in host countries, providing advice and assistance to
national Governments in investigating violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law so as
to ensure that perpetrators do not go unpunished.
I wish to underscore the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court in the context of peacekeeping
operations, in particular as it relates to the issue of
non-essential contacts with individuals subject to
arrest warrants issued by the Court. For Argentina, that
should be part of the cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations, as provided for in the relationship
agreement between them.
Argentina welcomes the fact that the draft resolution
reaffirms the commitment to address the particular
impact of armed conflicts on women and children,
underlining what is contained in resolution 1325 (2000)

16

and all subsequent resolutions. We reiterate the need
for the full, equal and effective participation of women
at all stages of peace processes, not only to achieve
the goal of greater gender equality, but also because
today it is clear that women taking a primary role in
preventing and resolving conflicts and in peacebuilding
guarantees better results.
Argentina understands that the actions included in
the current multidimensional-mission mandates must
be in line with the principle of national responsibility on
the part of the countries where missions are deployed.
Whatever the character of the peace mission in
question, it is crucial that the populations in countries
where missions are deployed have the assurance and
the evidence that the efforts of the Organization are
designed with the aim of improving their situation and
prospects for the future. It is not a question of imposing
solutions but rather contributing so that each society, on
the basis of its own experiences and expectations, may
build the democratic foundations on which to achieve
sustainable development and pave the way towards a
just, stable and lasting peace.
We recognize that peacekeeping operations
increasingly depend on the possibility of deploying
high-level specialized personnel, especially for specific
police and civilian tasks, such as experts in the rule
of law, human rights, and security sector reform. We
underscore that the draft resolution that we will vote on
today calls on national Governments and international
organizations to put to use and increase their capacities
for cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding. We have
noted as a positive trend in this regard the important
potential of innovation in technical cooperation and in
strengthening South-South cooperation.
Aware that peace missions are today the most
visible face of the United Nations, and aware of the new
challenges posed by multidimensional missions, the
Organization and each of its Member States have the
responsibility to step up continuous training for mission
staff in the areas of human rights and international
humanitarian law so that, as in the case of our country,
those who participate in missions can continue to play
an impeccable role in those areas.
Argentina believes that the future of peacekeeping
operations depends on their having clear and adequately
financed mandates. We need to continue relying on
consensus in the General Assembly so that the efforts
of troop- and police-contributing countries are met with

13-21043

S/PV.6903

an analogous commitment from those countries with
greatest financial responsibilities. This is not merely
a budgetary question but a political issue that affects
the work and the credibility of the Organization in an
area as important as peacekeeping, in particular when
we compare the relatively limited budget of $8 billion
available for all peacekeeping operations with the
enormity of worldwide military spending.
Finally, Argentina is pleased to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution. We do so paying tribute to the personnel
of peacekeeping operations who have lost their lives
over the past 65 years, including 26 Argentines, for
their inestimable contribution to peace, development
and the well-being of all of our peoples.
We are convinced that it must be made clear
for global public opinion that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations are not war by another name,
but a strategic instrument in the service of our peoples,
offering assistance and cooperation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence of the Foreign
Secretary of Pakistan, Mr. Jilani, to preside over today’s
open meeting on peacekeeping operations.
United Nations peacekeeping activities are facing
tremendous challenges today. The geography of
conflicts is expanding and their external influence
growing. Destabilization in one country threatens a
spillover of weapons and the movement of fighting and
terrorists into neighbouring States.
Many peacekeeping operations are deployed in
situations where the internal political crises are far
from over and peacekeepers therefore need to take
on functions which States cannot fully perform in the
aftermath of the most heightened phase of a conflict.
The Security Council is reacting to the changing
international situation by giving peacekeeping
operations more comprehensive and multidimensional
mandates. It is our view that they must remain realistic
and achievable in the field and have objectives that, if
met, will help to overcome the causes of the conflict
and to re-establish a firm peace.
In such situations, assistance in the areas of
security sector reform, demobilization, reintegration,
disarmament and demining all are of key importance.
Closely related to that is the need to restore the rule of
law in post-conflict countries.

13-21043

The contribution of the Blue Helmets in dealing
with such challenges can hardly be overestimated,
because when a situation deteriorates they are the first
to arrive, and their presence, knowledge and experience
represents an important component of efforts to
normalize and stabilize the situation.
In the process of drawing down peacekeeping
operations, conditions must be created that are conducive
to long-term political stabilization and socioeconomic
development. In doing so, it is imperative to abide — not
in words but in deeds — by the principles of respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of postconflict States and of the recognition of the national
responsibility for peacebuilding, and priority must be
given to the area of national capacity-building.
Of course, peacekeeping operations cannot fully
take upon themselves the responsibility for long-term
peacebuilding and must coordinate their work with
other important players, the Peacebuilding Commission
and regional organizations, funds and programmes.
In connection with United Nations peacekeeping,
we would like to draw attention to several issues. Each
peacekeeping operation is unique, and its mandate is
determined by the Council for each specific situation.
We deem counterproductive, and in some cases even
dangerous, the broadening interpretation of Council
mandates by both individual States and the Secretariat,
which prepares guidelines and instructions for missions.
In that respect, there should be no generalized approach.
As important as the protection of civilians
is, we believe that it must not overshadow other
important challenges in the context of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We are equally concerned at
the trend towards an arbitrary interpretation of the norms
of international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and their application to the
responsibility to protect. It is unacceptable to use issues
related to the protection of civilians and overall human
rights to achieve political goals, especially as a pretext
for interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.
We call for extreme caution and for discussions on
strengthening mandates and increasing the operational
capability of peacekeepers with respect to the use of
force and intimidation. Peacekeeping operations have
a unique kind of legitimacy, so it would be dangerous
for both United Nations peacekeeping operations and
the United Nations system overall if a situation were

17

S/PV.6903

to arise in which the Blue Helmets transcended their
neutrality and were drawn into an internal political
conflict, providing support to one of the participants.
The safety of peacekeepers must be an absolute
priority. Recently, in South Sudan, the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army shot down a Russian helicopter with
four Russian nationals on board who were working on
contract with the United Nations Mission in that country.
That incident is a tragic reminder of the responsibility
of States where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed to ensure their security and to ensure
favourable conditions so as to enable them to meet
their objectives. The safety of peacekeepers must be
unconditional and a priority in the management of
peacekeeping operations. We are not pleased with the
very slow pace of the investigation of that incident. We
anticipate that the Secretariat and the South Sudanese
authorities will take measures to speed up its careful
investigation and that the perpetrators will be brought
to justice. It is necessary to ensure that such incidents
are not repeated in South Sudan or anywhere else.
Peacekeeping operations will be successful
if their efforts are in line with the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law,
with unfailing observance of the principle of the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
based on the degree of our collective preparedness to
invest in the Organization’s knowledge base, resources
and personnel.
We thank the delegation of Pakistan for the initiative
of holding this meeting today, and we support the draft
resolution (S/2013/27) it has submitted, of which we are
also a sponsor.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council. I also would like to thank
His Excellency Jalil Abbas Jilani, as President of the
Security Council, for having organized this important
debate and for the tremendous role Pakistan has always
played in peacekeeping operations.
Rwanda is a committed contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that we
can continue to share our experience in international
peacekeeping and national peacebuilding, in order to
enrich the debate on the future role of multidimensional
peacekeeping.

18

Rwanda’s commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security is based on our
responsibilities as a contributing member of the
international community and on a moral obligation
shaped by the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi and
the failure of the world to intervene. Our active
participation in peacekeeping missions began in 2004,
in Darfur, with the African Union Mission in the
Sudan, and today Rwanda is the sixth major troop- and
police-contributing country in the United Nations and
the largest troop- and police-contributing country in
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), with a presence in seven other
United Nations missions.
Having embarked upon our own path of
reconciliation and nation-building, my country is of the
firm belief that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
two sides of the same coin and that the nexus between
the two should continually be enhanced as the scope of
mandates continue to expand, along with the tasks of
peacekeepers.
I applaud the draft resolution (S/2013/27),
which Rwanda has co-sponsored. It reiterates
the interdependence between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and encourages progress on a coherent
approach to addressing all stages of the conflict cycle.
Addressing critical peacebuilding priorities will
facilitate the successful undertaking of peacekeeping
mandates and ensure a coherent and effective response
to peacekeeping, stabilization and recovery. It is time
to give peacebuilding a legitimate place in both the
budgets and the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
As peacekeepers endeavour to address the
challenges at hand, they should not seek to take over
security and governance responsibilities; instead, they
should seek to build local capacity to address those
challenges.
In that regard, let me address a few areas of focus
that were outlined in the concept note (S/2013/4, annex)
prepared by Pakistan for this debate, namely, quickimpact projects, training and partnerships.
Now more than ever, the first boots on the ground
need to be able to perform early peacebuilding tasks,
in addition to maintaining the ceasefire and protecting
civilians. In order to ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers can deliver and engage effectively with
their civilian counterparts, a training mechanism in postconflict community development for United Nations

13-21043

S/PV.6903

peacekeeping forces would benefit the peacekeeping
process as a whole, including the peacekeepers and
local populations.
In addition, the unique comparative advantages of
the United Nations in the field of peacekeeping can be
optimized by enlisting troop- and police-contributing
countries with experience or expertise relevant
to the needs of a particular mission, including
appropriate language skills at all levels, in order to
be able to communicate without interpretation with
local authorities and local populations. Moreover,
preparedness, such as stand-by forces with earmarked
trained personnel, is key. Hurriedly collecting troops
from different countries with various levels of training,
ethics and commitment is not the best way to put
together a peacekeeping force.
Furthermore, any previous national experience
with early peacebuilding and capacity-building should
be emphasized in force requirements. In addition to
traditional predeployment training, Rwandan troops
often participate in post-conflict peacebuilding
workshops before deploying to peacekeeping missions
and have first-hand national experience with smallscale community development projects.
For example, improved energy-saving cooking
stoves, which use less firewood than traditional stoves,
were introduced in Rwanda in 2000 in order to preserve
trees and the environment. Now Rwandan peacekeepers
have brought such stoves to Darfur, where women and
young girls live in fear of getting raped every time they
venture outside camps for internally displaced persons
or their villages to collect firewood for cooking. Apart
from saving the lives of women who risk being raped or
killed while collecting firewood, the improved stoves
also allow troops and police who were previously
escorting them to focus on other mandated tasks.
Rwandan peacekeepers have also built classrooms and
clinics, planted trees in Darfur, and led community
clean-up programmes in several Haitian towns that
have since become permanent fixtures.
Quick-impact projects help to lay the foundations
of locally-owned long-term development, capacity- and
institution-building. Products such as the stoves, as
well as the construction of classrooms, clinics, police
stations and basic sanitation infrastructure have had
a positive impact on Rwandan society during postconflict reconstruction. I hope that the budgets for
quick-impact projects continue to increase as they
become integral to peacekeeping operations.
13-21043

It is crucial that partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
especially the African Union, continue to be enhanced
and strategically coordinated. Multilateral partnerships
will help to ensure that troops are deployed to
missions that are endowed with resources matching
their mandates, and to prevent restrictions or caveats
imposed by some troop- and police-contributing
countries on the use of their personnel. The political
backing, concrete support and legitimacy provided by
such groups to United Nations peacekeeping operations
are as important today as they have ever been.
Planning processes should, from the initial stages,
consider early peacebuilding tasks that can and should
be implemented along with a mission’s traditional
mandate. Adequate training, meaningful partnerships
with all stakeholders and early infrastructure projects
owned by the host State are a few of the tools that can
help to pave a road to sustainable peace and security in
areas of the world where that is necessary.
Responding to the call of the Secretary-General
to contribute needed enablers, Rwanda has recently
deployed military utility helicopters to the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
and we hope that our aviation unit will enhance
the Mission’s ability to implement its mandate. We
again reiterate Rwanda’s commitment to supporting
the multidimensional approach to United Nations
peacekeeping, and pay tribute to the women and men
serving in peacekeeping missions, as well as those who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the name of peace.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in
organizing this debate on a multidimensional approach
to United Nations peacekeeping. The debate, held in the
presence of Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani,
Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, underscores his country’s
image as an important troop-contributing country that
is faithful in its commitment to international peace.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries by the representative of Egypt.
The landmark figure of 60 peacekeeping operations
launched by the United Nations since 1948 is more than
symbolic; it represents a new phase in the ability of the
United Nations to undertake the central activity that is
its raison d’être. Peacekeeping has grown and evolved
in an unprecedented manner, due to increasingly grave

19

S/PV.6903

internal and regional crises that threaten international
peace and security.
The growth and diversification of the areas of
peacekeeping intervention have brought profound
changes in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
which now cover a wide range of activities, from
security and support for political processes to
disarmament and demobilization — all tasks that
combine peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Morocco
also welcomes the proactive nature of United Nations
action and its capacity to mobilize human and financial
resources in response to the appeals and aspirations of
the concerned States and their populations in terms of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Experience has amply demonstrated the close
interlinkage between restoring and building peace,
which needs to be organized and structured as soon as
a multidimensional peacekeeping operation has been
established, and must evolve as the mission proceeds.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations require the
complex interoperability of multiple components — in
particular military, police and civilian — interacting
together or in cooperation with other stakeholders
to implement the critical goals of peacebuilding via
their integrated mandates, thereby contributing to the
foundations of sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict.
At the same time, it must be recalled that while
support for the political process, national reconciliation,
economic revitalization and the establishment of the
rule of law are crucial factors, security remains the
key element in determining, in large part, the success
of the others. Nothing will succeed without security
and everything becomes possible when security is
ensured throughout the entire country. In that respect,
early mobilization of adequate resources for capacitybuilding and the financing of such related activities as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration remains
key to the success of any security sector reform.
However, while establishing and building security
is an absolute priority for the vast majority of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, accomplishing
other complementary tasks varies from one situation
to another, based on the challenges, capacities and
progress made in each country. The nature of a conflict,
its origins, the regional environment, and available
capacities and resources are among the factors that
will determine the interaction of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping.
20

It is also clear that such linkage will require
coherent strategies and coordination among the various
multinational and bilateral stakeholders, including
the United Nations system, international financial
institutions, regional or subregional organizations,
and bilateral partners. Internal and inter-agency
coordination are sine qua non to avoid duplication and
ensure the optimal use of available resources, and hence
effective United Nations action.
The basis for the success of any peacekeeping
operation, whatever its scope, lies in such interdependent
factors as whether the mandate established by the
Council is realistic; triangular cooperation among
the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries and the
administration in the planning and implementation
stages of the mandates; and genuine exit strategies
containing measures to ensure sustainable development.
Needless to say, all such activities and strategies
must continue to adhere to the fundamental principles
that define United Nations peacekeeping: consent of
the parties; impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of self-defence; respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned;
and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Those principles are and must remain the essential
condition of all collective peacekeeping activities
and the identification of responsibilities and national
peacebuilding priorities.
In relation to the principle of national ownership,
the participation of all elements of a State is an
essential condition for peacebuilding. It is the
primary responsibility of the Government concerned
to demonstrate the political will to assume its
responsibilities and to define its priorities and strategies
for peacebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict. The
success of such strategies depends on establishing
balanced and sustainable partnerships and resultsbased mutual responsibility, while bearing in mind the
three main pillars of peacekeeping: defining needs,
sustainable support and coordinating long-term action
for actors on the ground.
Ensuring the success of any peacekeeping
operation, whatever its scope, is the task of men and
women who are committed to serving the objectives
of the Organization. The effectiveness of their
commitment depends on their interaction with local
populations. In that regard, I can only join my French
colleague in his appeal for multilingualism. I would

13-21043

S/PV.6903

like to be a little more optimistic in the hope that
there will at last be some follow-up on that clearly
obvious and logical request because it is a question of
the effectiveness of the troops on the ground and the
necessary interaction with populations and troops, in
particular for civilian protection. It also depends on the
United Nations security measures implemented on the
ground to improve the safety and security of all troops,
military police and observers and unarmed personnel.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our firm condemnation of the attacks on the staff
of peacekeeping operations. We pay tribute to all
contributing countries for their commitment. Morocco,
whose Royal Armed Forces have participated for a half
century in multilateral forces in order to secure and
build peace and international security, will continue,
in partnership with the United Nations, to serve the
principles and objectives of the Organization.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important open debate on
peacekeeping. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable contribution to our discussion
on the topic.
The dynamics of the political and security changes
in the world require a high degree of adaptability of
the United Nations timely and effective response
to the interconnected challenges brought about by
those changes. Originally conceived to perform the
traditional task of ceasefire monitoring, peacekeeping
has conceptually and operationally evolved into
a more complex and multidimensional institution
with a number of components. Notwithstanding that
transformation, peacekeeping operations remain an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to maintain
international peace and security.
Coherence among peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development is important. At present, a number
of United Nations peacekeeping operations have
mandates to implement a range of peacebuilding
activities. By preventing the recurrence of violence, by
supporting and enabling critical tasks in certain areas,
and by assisting host countries in developing their postconflict reconstruction strategies, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations establish the necessary
foundations for successive peacebuilding processes.
Azerbaijan believes that the ongoing deliberations
on ways and means of increasing the effectiveness of

13-21043

peacekeeping should further reinforce the centrality
of the underlying elements that form the basis of
peacekeeping. I would like to focus on some of those.
First, the task of assigning peacekeeping and
peacebuilding functions rests with the Security Council,
which defines the nature of peacekeeping operations
and guides their activities. Therefore, the mandates
must be clear, realistic and achievable and must be
tailored and constantly adapted to the realities on the
ground. Also, operations must be fully equipped with
all operational and logistical capabilities necessary to
carry out their mandates.
Secondly, the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force, except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate, must be
observed at all times.
Thirdly, the Governments of countries emerging
from conflict bear primary responsibility for
identifying their needs and for developing post-conflict
development agendas. Therefore, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations should support the efforts
of host countries and coordinate their activities with
national authorities in all spheres.
Fourthly, strengthened cooperation and regular
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, including through interaction among them,
the Security Council and the Secretariat, should be
ensured.
Most important, the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation must explicitly uphold the principles of
political independence, sovereign equality, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Peacekeeping must not be used to sustain the
status quo created as a result of the violation of those
fundamental norms and principles of international
law, or to consolidate illegal situations existing at the
time that hostilities were suspended and to encourage
fait accompli-based solutions. The fact that illegal
situations continue because of political circumstances
does not mean that they are therefore rendered legal.
Law is more important than force. That understanding
and approach must be ensured throughout the whole
cycle of peacekeeping operation.
In some situations of armed conflict the restoration
of the demographic composition of the population,
affected as a result of large-scale ethnic expulsion
and the creation of ethnically cleansed areas, is a
21

S/PV.6903

prerequisite for the legitimacy and sustainability of
peace. It is therefore important that, in such situations,
peacekeepers create the necessary conditions for and
serve as the guarantors of the full, safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their places of origin.

and their citizens. Peacekeepers are therefore called
on to be peacebuilders from the outset by fostering
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict around
the world, and increasingly, by supporting the host
country’s public institutions. Luxembourg welcomes
progress in that direction.

After more than a decade, the Security Council
will adopt, as an outcome of today’s debate, a landmark
resolution on peacekeeping, of which Azerbaijan is
one of the sponsors. I would like to thank Pakistan for
its timely initiative and able leadership in that regard
and to express our appreciation for its outstanding
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are complementary
and deeply linked. They require a holistic, coordinated
and integrated approach that — from the initial planning
stages of a peacekeeping operation through eventual
modifications of the mandate — takes peacebuilding
into sufficient consideration and clearly integrates
its priorities into mandates. As many members of the
Council have said, the Security Council must ensure
that peacekeeping mandates are clear, credible, realistic
and unambiguous.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg warmly thanks Pakistan for convening
this open debate on peacekeeping. We welcome the
exemplary commitment of your country, Mr. President,
which is reflected in the fact that it is one of the leading
United Nations troop-contributing countries. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation.
This debate allows us to have an exchange on all
dimensions of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the challenges and opportunities resulting from the
developments in those operations in the past few years.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.
Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
work of the United Nations. Today, they are more
complex and diverse, working in increasingly difficult
environments and in situations that can suddenly
change. In order to meet that reality and given the
fact that security, development and the rule of law are
intrinsically linked, the great majority of peacekeeping
operations are now multidimensional. As a result, the
mandates of peacekeeping operations may now include,
in particular, strengthening rule-of-law institutions,
security and defence sector reform, the protection
of civilians, particularly children affected by armed
conflict, the protection and promotion of human rights,
combating sexual violence and the support of inclusive
political processes, such as establishing the necessary
security conditions for the provision of humanitarian
assistance.
All of these issues go far beyond any traditional
concept of peacekeeping, reaching for the establishment
of lasting conditions conducive to the health of societies
22

Taking into account the contributions of various
actors, including the Peacebuilding Commission, and
the basic principle of national ownership, no attempt
to integrate peacekeeping and peacebuilding can
succeed unless the roles of the many players are clearly
defined and their work is effectively coordinated.
Such an approach will increase the added value of
every contribution and bolster the effectiveness and
efficiency of every stakeholder. We also believe that
the United Nations should strengthen the pool of civil
capacity, especially by enlisting the expertise of people
from countries that have experience in post-conflict
peacebuilding or democratic transition.
It is clear that no lasting peace can be achieved
unless we address the root causes of a conflict from the
outset. The crises in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa
make that evident every day. In our view, including
all sectors of a population, in particular the most
vulnerable groups, such as women, in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations is the best way to prevent,
in both the short and the long terms, the resurgence
of the frustrations that can reignite a conflict.
Luxembourg has therefore contributed to the efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to increase
women’s participation in political processes, especially
in Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste.
We are pleased that the draft resolution to be adopted
today (S/2013/27) highlights the essential role played in
United Nations missions by advisers for the protection
of the most vulnerable populations, especially children.
Their roles as advocates, facilitators, advisers to heads

13-21043

S/PV.6903

of missions, information officers and monitors are
critical components for the protection of children.

Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Council is right to underline the importance
of deploying qualified and experienced peacekeepers,
with all the necessary skills, including language skills,
and who respect the Organization’s zero-tolerance
policy with respect to misconduct. Sexual exploitation
and abuse must not be tolerated. On the other hand,
every measure should be taken to ensure the safety and
security of deployed personnel. Luxembourg strongly
condemns any attack on United Nations peacekeeping
personnel.

At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s debate on United
Nations peacekeeping, a subject of great interest to
all members of the Non-Aligned Movement. I would
also like to thank the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan
for being here with us to chair this debate and for his
opening remarks.

I conclude by expressing Luxembourg’s deep
gratitude towards all peacekeeping soldiers, police and
civil workers who do indispensable work, often under
very difficult circumstances, in implementing the
mandates entrusted to them by the Council. We honour
the memory of those women and men who have given
their lives executing their duty in the service of the
United Nations and the cause of protecting international
peace and security.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it (S/2013/27). I would like to thank
all Council members for co-sponsoring the draft
resolution, which is now a presidential text. It is a
most fitting tribute to the United Nations and to our
peacekeepers. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2086 (2013).
I wish to request all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with longer statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

13-21043

Egypt and the Non-Aligned Movement welcome
the adoption by consensus of resolution 2086 (2013).
The concept of peacekeeping emerged just a few
years after the United Nation was founded. It has
evolved over the past decades to constitute one of the
most important tools within the collective security
system of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations range from traditional peacekeeping,
focused on maintaining peace between warring parties
and monitoring the cessation of hostilities, to a complex
and multidimensional process that involves conducting
peacebuilding tasks and addressing the root causes of
conflict. Through the years, peacekeepers have truly
become the early peacebuilders.
While recognizing that the mandate of each
peacekeeping mission is specific to the needs and
situation of the country concerned, the nature of
peacekeeping operations and their mandates emanates
from the changing characteristics of conflicts, in
particular the increase in intra- rather than inter-State
conflicts. The triggers of conflict are increasingly
linked to underlying deficits in the capacity of State
institutions to provide security, justice and inclusive
economic development.
In that context, it is imperative to make sure
that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are mutually
reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace and stability.
This will happen only through support for the crucial
transition phase of peacebuilding that follows immediate
post-conflict peacekeeping and precedes long-term
recovery. Recovery should ensure the achievement of
sustainable economic and social development in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict.
The United Nations has been fully cognizant of
these changes in the characteristics of conflicts and
their impact on peacekeeping operations mandates.

23

S/PV.6903

In his introduction to the valuable book entitled From
Global Apartheid to Global Village: Africa and the
United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali mentioned that
the new characteristics of conflict have placed a much
greater demand upon the United Nations and forced the
Organization to respond in a variety of ways.
In recent years, the United Nations has come a
long way in incorporating peacebuilding tasks into the
mandate of multidimensional peacekeeping operations.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations have in
turn made a significant contribution to support for
peacebuilding priority areas, including basic safety and
security, the political process, the provision of basic
services, the restoration of core Government functions
and economic revitalization. Those tasks should be
aligned with the strategies of the host country in order
to ensure national ownership.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
peacekeeping is an important tool at the disposal of
the United Nations for addressing conflict situations.
Yet it should not be a substitute for others, such as
preventive diplomacy and political efforts to resolve
conflicts, particularly at their earliest stages. It
should be resorted to after a thorough assessment of
a conflict situation based on accurate information and
with a clear understanding of the objectives of the
peacekeeping operation, as well as a clear vision for
exit strategies. Enhancing the safety of peacekeeping
operations personnel should also be high on our agenda
when planning and deploying peacekeeping operations.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes that, in
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation or the
extension of the mandate of existing operations, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the main principles governing such operations — the
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, and impartiality — should be strictly
observed. Respect for the principles of sovereign
equality, political independence, the territorial integrity
of all States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction should
also be upheld.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that
peacekeeping concepts, policies and strategies should
be developed through intergovernmental processes
in order to ensure their applicability and consensus
among Member States. The Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms the role of the Special Committee on

24

Peacekeeping Operations as the sole body responsible
for peacekeeping policymaking.
Cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries — and,
by the way, the Non-Aligned Movement includes the top
10 troop-contributing countries among its members — is
an indispensable factor in the success of peacekeeping
operations. The role of the troop-contributing countries,
whose troops are put at risk for the sake of peace, in the
overall process of peacekeeping, and the importance
of their full participation in policy formation and
decision-making in matters pertaining to the strength,
mandate and composition of peacekeeping operations
cannot be overemphasized. Providing all the necessary
financial and logistical support to peacekeeping
operations is crucial to the successful implementation
of their mandates. Peacekeepers should not be asked to
do more with fewer resources. In addition, the issue of
the reimbursement of troop costs should be resolved.
The financing of peacekeeping operations should not
become a burden to troop-contributing countries.
While reaffirming the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, it is imperative to continue to
enhance cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
conflict and post-conflict situations through joint
efforts in the areas of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
existing cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is a model that demonstrates the
potential for cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, as envisaged in Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, the Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
pay tribute to the men and women who are serving
in peacekeeping operations around the world, as well
as to those peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate
price in advancing the cause of peace. The members
of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirm that they will
remain fully committed to supporting United Nations
endeavours in the pursuit of peace and stability around
the world.
Lastly, speaking in my national capacity, I would
like to voice my support for the remarks of Ambassador
Gérard Araud of France regarding multilingualism in
peacekeeping operations, and of course to reaffirm

13-21043

S/PV.6903

that this should include the six languages of the United
Nations, including Arabic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the fact that Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary has chosen
to be present for this debate, and we join Luxembourg
and others in applauding the fact that Pakistan, one of
the principal troop-contributing countries (TCCs) of
the United Nations, is taking the initiative to bring this
debate to the Security Council, thereby demonstrating
why it is so important to have strong TCC representation
on the Council.
It is also very fitting that this debate follows
closely on the December debate on peacebuilding
(S/PV.6897). As New Zealand stressed at that time,
effective peacebuilding activities are vital during the
peacekeeping phase, so we are very pleased to see that
point emphasized so strongly in Pakistan’s concept note
(S/2013/4, annex).
To enable the drawdown of costly peacekeeping
missions, real and effective work is needed to address
the root causes of conflict, and that requires a
genuinely multidimensional approach on the part of the
Council and the United Nations as a whole. Tasks such
as security sector reform, extending the rule of law,
establishing inclusive governance and creating earlyimpact employment and economic opportunities must
all be part of the overall United Nations mandate. But
to be effective, they must also be very well integrated.
If they are not, we will continue to see the dreadful
United Nations silo problems that in the past have
sometimes rendered peacekeeping ineffective. The
multidimensional elements of a mission must therefore
be given the same prominence as is usually accorded
the military presence of the peacekeeping force itself.
The second key requirement is for peacekeeping
missions to be seen to deliver early and tangible benefits
to host country populations, thus helping to build the
mission’s political capital with the host Government
and other stakeholders. We have unfortunately seen too
many instances where host Governments have simply
lost patience with peacekeeping missions.
So how can the Council manage United Nations
peacekeeping missions in a truly multidimensional
manner? Its mandate under the Charter is not
unlimited. It cannot and should not be seeking exclusive
competence over all aspects of a multidimensional
13-21043

mission, but given the intimate connection between
the various causes of conflict, the Council still has a
critically important role to play. That said, its current
practice is not well suited to complex situations where
there are overlapping competencies and responsibilities.
Key stakeholders outside the Council, and not
least host countries, are often marginalized in its
consideration of multidimensional mandates, and we
join Egypt and others in saying that peacekeeping tasks
must be aligned with the strategies of the host country
in order to ensure national ownership. Better interaction
with the relevant peacebuilding configurations is one
potentially very useful step. But that is not always
possible, because most of the missions with Council
mandates are not countries that are on the Peacebuilding
Commission’s agenda. We therefore need to go much
deeper in our search for effective tools for proper
oversight of effective integration.
We suggest that the Council could start with one or
two situations on its agenda where there is at present
no peacebuilding configuration, and could establish
a configuration-type of format of its own, based on a
partnership between the Council, the host State and
others, as appropriate, as well as with the relevant
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme. A less formal configuration
of that character would be a very powerful tool for
better, collective United Nations engagement on the
multifaceted issues that face almost every peacekeeping
task.
The right mix of political inclusivity and
informality could permit the input of the relevant
stakeholders, including host countries, donors, troopcontributing countries and United Nations agencies. It
would also provide a context for more sustained and
effective Council leadership on conflict prevention
and resolution, using, as we have urged in the past, the
Council’s tools under Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Above all, it would help to fulfil the
promise of truly multidimensional and effective United
Nations peacekeeping, which could address the root
causes of conflict, and would be a tangible expression
of the Council’s commitment to Chapter VI and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is what we seek of
all peacekeeping missions, and with the right measures,
that is what can be delivered.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

25

S/PV.6903

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very timely debate and for choosing
so wisely the topic of our discussion. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
As a long-standing advocate of a more integrated
approach to security and development, Brazil sees the
adoption of today’s resolution as a positive step in the
platform for our future work.
Very often, the immediate threats to which we
tend to react are but manifestations of structural
constraints that may make societies prone to violence
and conflict — poverty, the lack of food security, the
absence of opportunities and resources, unresolved
political grievances and unheeded calls for greater
inclusion, equality and dignity.
In that regard, it is essential to have in mind, as
recognized by the Council for over a decade, that
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
closely interrelated and that the quest for peace requires
a comprehensive, concerted and determined approach
that addresses the root causes of conflicts, including
their economic and social dimensions.
The approach requires increased awareness by
the international community regarding the imperative
of integrating measures in favour of sustainable
development, with food security, into strategies aimed
at the promotion of peace and security. The reiteration
of the message was a fundamental objective of the
debate presided over in the Council by the Brazilian
Minister of External Relations, Antonio Patriota, in
February 2011 (see S/PV.6479).
Brazil and many other delegations have long
stressed the need for the Security Council, from the
earliest possible stages of the drafting of peacekeeping
mandates, to look beyond the immediate horizon of
events into the root causes of conflicts. One way to
do that is to incorporate, from the very beginning and
throughout the whole life of a mission, key peacebuilding
objectives into relevant peacekeeping mandates and to
make sure that those priorities are reflected in mission
planning and force generation.
We hope that resolution 2086 (2013), adopted
today, will contribute to further integrating all the
relevant bodies and stakeholders in the endeavour.
We welcome in particular the encouragement for the
Security Council to benefit from the advisory role of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

26

As we recognize the progress achieved in developing
the principles and practices of multidimensional
peacekeeping, we also have to face the challenges to
the implementation of complex mandates. Apart from
integrated mission planning and force generation,
strengthening the civilian component of peacekeeping
missions is essential. Only with the right civilian
capacity can United Nations missions perform tasks
such as supporting State reforms, strengthening rule-oflaw institutions, promoting human rights, assisting
national authorities in articulating peacebuilding
priorities and liaising with political actors in support of
political processes.
We need to provide those capacities in sufficient
numbers and with adequate resources, and we must
ensure that mandates remain consistent with the
reality on the ground. The experience of developing
countries in those areas should be better tapped into.
Peacekeeping activities with an evident peacebuilding
dimension — such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, quick-impact projects and community
violence reduction — must also be adequately supported.
Such activities provide local populations with early
peace dividends, which can greatly contribute to the
sustainability of the peacebuilding process.
Prevention is another important element. Prevention
necessarily brings peacekeeping and peacebuilding
together. To create a protective environment for
civilians, for example, involves a variety of aspects that
must come together, from operational readiness to the
provision of some basic services and from deterrence to
security sector reform.
Lasting and sustainable peace is what every United
Nations peacekeeping mission strives to achieve.
Exit strategies are essential in that regard. They
must be a part of the comprehensive compacts with
national Governments, the people, civil society and
the international community. Exit strategies cannot
become preconceived scripts and formulas.
Those strategies will be more successful when
they are owned by societies as an important instrument
to articulate the gradual and effective assumption of
national responsibilities. We must ensure that, when
a peacekeeping mission leaves, it does not carry away
with it the very ability to mobilize still much needed
efforts and resources.
Multidimensional peacekeeping brings the issue
of human resources to the fore. Brazil values and

13-21043

S/PV.6903

recognizes the contribution of all men and women,
military and civilian, who carry out ever more complex
tasks on the ground. We pay tribute to all who have
given their lives to the cause of peace under the United
Nations flag.
Our experience in Haiti shows that a
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping is also
about making our peacekeepers ever more sensitive
to the demands of those in need. It is about having
peacekeepers who are respected by civilians not for
the weapons they carry, but for the impact they help to
promote on people’s daily lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Crowley (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on this very important
subject underpinning the collective efforts of the States
Members of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Council earlier
today.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Today’s United Nations peacekeepers are mostly
deployed in situations of intra-State conflict, therefore
necessitating both the deployment of formed and
civilian components to deal with the complexity of the
challenges confronting conflict-affected States. The
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping has shown
to be an effective tool to address modern-day conflict
situations. Ten of the current 14 peacekeeping missions
that are configured in that manner bear testimony to
that fact.
The multidimensional peacekeeping approach
has also, over the years, proven to be an international
peacebuilding instrument that has contributed to laying
the foundation for sustainable peace and democratic
governance. United Nations peacekeeping therefore
continues to occupy a central role in the functioning
of the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
forces gives rise to high expectations at the international,

13-21043

regional and national levels, especially among the
civilian population of the host State who are generally
caught in the cross-fire of conflict and who bear the
brunt of the conflicts. It is therefore an understandable
and credible expectation that political support should
translate into concrete outcomes through, inter
alia, technical and financial support, as well as the
anticipated transfer of expertise and resources during
the lifespan of a peacekeeping/peacebuilding mission.
Security Council resolutions that mandate such
peacekeeping missions must not only be realistic,
achievable and well-resourced, but they must be able
to meet those expectations. Consistency and coherence
are imperative in that regard, and the Security Council
must be responsive to the calls of the affected parties to
a dispute or conflict. Selectivity in its responsiveness
must be avoided in order for multidimensional
peacekeeping to be truly effective.
Human rights components, by means of an example,
should not be avoided in some multidimensional
peacekeeping missions for the sake of political
expediency. Such an approach has only proven to
prolong some conflicts. The Security Council must
ensure that its decisions are upheld in promoting
international peace and security and to avoid selective
approaches that end up disappointing populations who
yearn for the realization of their legitimate aspirations.
Peacekeeping missions provide a security umbrella
through the presence of uniformed personnel and
contribute to preserving the political space. As the first
United Nations presence in the field, peacekeepers are
correctly considered as the entry point for peacebuilding,
upon which other stakeholders, including the host
Governments, will build in designing a peacebuilding
architecture. National ownership of that architecture,
however, remains paramount.
Multidimensional peacekeeping missions have the
combined presence of political, military, technical and
other specialized expertise and skill sets. Peacebuilding
components are intrinsic in such peacekeeping
missions, which present a comparative advantage at the
onset of a mission’s deployment.
Peacekeeping missions are enablers that provide
assistance at critical moments in the aftermath of
conflict and bring expertise in the form of security
sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the rule of law, human rights, electoral
assistance and other civilian affairs. Regular and joint

27

S/PV.6903

consultations and assessments by the peacekeeping
mission and the host Government during the security
phase are critical in edging towards or determining the
transition to a peacebuilding phase.
The
Secretary-General’s
2009
report
on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) is instructive in providing a broad
framework that highlights five recurring priorities for
United Nations engagement in peacebuilding. The first
is the delivery of basic safety and security for citizens;
secondly, inclusive political processes; thirdly, the
provision of basic services; fourthly, the restoration
of core Government functions; and, fifthly, economic
revitalization.
In that regard, we have witnessed the value of strong
national ownership and leadership in the formulation
of peacebuilding priorities in the cases of the TimorLeste, Liberia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.
For multidimensional peacekeeping missions to be
truly effective, mandate reviews must be informed by
periodic and focused reviews contained in the reports
of the Secretary-General. The views of all the relevant
stakeholders in the field, including those of the host
country, must be included in such reports. The views of
the troop-contributing countries in that regard, together
with those of the Secretariat and the Security Council,
are imperative. In that way, the host country’s needs can
influence United Nations supply on the peacebuilding
front and on the reconstruction phase.
Finally, my delegation wishes to acknowledge the
contributions made by the thousands of men and women
deployed by our respective countries to serve under the
United Nations flag in dealing with very dangerous and
complex situations around the world. We wish, in that
regard, to pay special homage to those who have fallen
in the cause of the noble endeavour to make the world a
safe and secure place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate, as well
as for your useful concept paper (S/2013/4, annex),
which reflects many of the vital challenges and
accomplishments of United Nations peacekeeping. We
also highly appreciate the remarks of the SecretaryGeneral.

28

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Indonesia concurs with the observation in the
President’s non-paper that modern-day peacekeeping
has progressively evolved and adapted itself to
changing demands and circumstances. We particularly
welcome the note’s focus on the mutually reinforcing
peacekeeping–peacebuilding nexus.
As Blue Helmets are entrusted with more complex
and multidimensional mandates, all peacekeeping
stakeholders, namely, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat and troop-providing and
host countries, should constantly make efforts so that
the missions are supported adequately and meet their
objectives effectively.
We are confident that today’s debate and resolution
2086 (2013), adopted earlier, will further the Council’s
critical work, along with that of stakeholders, on
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping.
As a unique global partnership, United Nations
peacekeeping endures as a tremendously potent and costeffective tool in saving humankind from conflict and
instability. We must do everything that we can to enable
it to maximize its effect. That requires that the various
components of United Nations peacekeeping — military,
police and civilian — work together closely and unite
in a sense of common purpose. That also requires that,
in the face of understandable overlap between the
dynamic boundaries of peacekeeping, peacemaking,
peace-enforcement, peacebuilding and development,
the United Nations and its partners are always ready
with responsive, comprehensive and properly supported
strategies to foster peace with both immediate and
longer-term measures, guided by the needs and
priorities of affected communities.
The wide-ranging nature and scope of the challenge
necessitates that explicitly clear guidelines are provided
to Blue Helmets, with the required equipment, training
and resources. While United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed, in principle, to support the
implementation of a ceasefire or peace agreement,
their active role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding in many cases is inevitable.
In his 2009 report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), the
Secretary-General pointed to the unprecedented

13-21043

S/PV.6903

demands on leadership capacity by the United Nations,
which relate, among other things, to the number, size
and complexity of peacekeeping missions, which
have expanded dramatically in recent years. In that
regard, Indonesia commends the increased focus by
the Council on the peacekeeping/peacebuilding nexus
over the past two years and welcomes the Council’s
various pronouncements on including peacebuilding
elements in peacekeeping mandates, as appropriate,
along with the emphasis on national ownership. We
also support the Council’s commitment to continuing
to improve its reflection on early peacebuilding tasks
related to institution-building. Strengthening core
national capacities is essential to laying foundations for
sustainable development and peace.
The General Assembly has also underscored the
importance of supporting national civilian capacity
development and institution-building, including
through peacekeeping operations in accordance with
their mandates. While peacekeepers undertake many
important peacebuilding and other multidimensional
tasks, we should also utilize the principle of comparative
advantage to achieve best outcomes, in particular with
respect to highly specialized and longer-term tasks.
Certain specialized civilian tasks need civilian experts
with specific experiences and skills.
The approach to multidimensional peacekeeping
should therefore reflect developments that are taking
place under the United Nations civilian capacity
review along with the work being carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission. Other United Nations
entities are also conducting some very useful
programmes on development and peacebuilding, and
we need to promote an integrated and complementary
approach. We strongly support the call by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in its 2012
report on the importance of ensuring coherence
among peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development.
For Indonesia, peacekeeping is an important
element in its foreign policy as well as an integral part of
its constitutional mandate. Indonesia’s participation in
United Nations peacekeeping goes back as far as 1956.
We are currently participating in six United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and our Garuda Contingent
has also been working on critical peacebuildingrelated tasks. We aim to increase our contribution and
participation in United Nations peacekeeping.

13-21043

Finally, let me reiterate that peacekeeping alone
is not sufficient. A comprehensive approach that
addresses root causes, inclusive political processes,
peacemaking, development and strong national
institutions is necessary for sustainable peace. We
should all work together to ensure the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and help to put in place and
bolster a responsive multidimensional framework that
supports peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We welcome the initiative of the Pakistani
presidency to hold today’s open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping. The debate is also an expression
of the traditionally strong commitment of Pakistan
to United Nations peacekeeping. We welcome the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping, focusing
in particular on the important linkages between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as to note
with satisfaction the adoption of resolution 2086 (2013).
Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations and is therefore a crucial tool paving way for
the longer-term stability and development of countries
emerging from a crisis. The important work that
all actors are doing in partnership within the United
Nations represents a tremendous effort that may not
always be given due recognition. Recognizing the
demanding conditions in which peacekeepers carry
out their work, we deeply appreciate the sacrifices
they make. Indeed, I would like to express our deep
appreciation and respect for those who have lost their
lives in line of duty.
The European Union and its member States
make an important contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, and we have a great interest in making
United Nations peacekeeping even more efficient.
Welcoming the increased attention given to the role of

29

S/PV.6903

regional organizations in peacekeeping, the European
Union will continue to look for ways to enhance its
own support for United Nations peacekeeping. As a
recent example, we were pleased to be able to provide
timely and useful support for the rapid setting up of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We stand ready to act in a similar fashion in
the future.
The next session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is approaching, and we have
a keen interest in ensuring that that forum can continue
to provide relevant and meaningful consensus-based
guidance on peacekeeping. We must make the Special
Committee’s report more focused and ensure the timely
implementation of its recommendations. That is all the
more important in the times of austerity, when we need
to optimize the use of scarce resources.
As the Secretary-General has stated, peacekeepers
are peacebuilders, and they must seize the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict.
They are the first to set priorities, they have a unique
mix of capabilities and they have to get it right from the
very start.
The representative of Indonesia referred to the
nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
which has been examined closely in recent years. The
European Union and its member States welcome the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of
Field Support strategy on that topic, and we encourage
the further development and updating of the strategy, as
well as planning and carrying out effective training and
exercises to enhance its implementation.
Recently, the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
addressed the challenge of that nexus as well, by
stressing inclusivity and institution-building, in
which peacekeeping operations have an important
role to play with a view to building more resilient
States and sustainable peace. Institution-building in
the fields of security and justice, for instance, is key
to the capacity of the host State to move on. In that
context, the strengthening of the rule of law should be
an overarching objective.
In a similar vein, the civilian capacity initiative
promotes enhancing the ability of peacekeeping
operations to contribute to that aim by expanding
the pool of relevant civilian experts suitable for
peacekeeping operations in a post-conflict situation.

30

Equally, the United Nations system-wide policy on
transitions demonstrates the close links those different
activities have, with the aim of producing a positive
outcome in post-crisis situations.
All of the recent reports and initiatives I have
mentioned point in the same direction: the key for
ensuring positive sustainable development is to start
as early as possible and in as comprehensive manner
as needed. In view of the longer-term perspective,
a coordinated strategic assessment to ensure an
integrated and coherent approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding and sustainable peace is a crucial
starting point. Concerted action from a wide range of
interested stakeholders is required in order to ensure
mutually reinforcing activities.
Peacekeeping operations need to be planned
and conducted in such a manner as to facilitate
post-conflict peacebuilding and progress towards
sustainable peace and development. Peacekeeping
operations with multidimensional tasks and mandates
should incorporate a peacebuilding perspective. The
implementation of those activities requires close
coordination among peacekeeping operations and
United Nations country teams and developments
actors. Peacekeeping operations have a role to play
in both supporting critical tasks and enabling others,
through providing support for countries, in developing
critical peacebuilding priorities and strategies, creating
an enabling environment in which national and
international actors can undertake their efforts, and
by implementing certain early peacebuilding tasks
themselves.
Taking into account the contribution of various
actors and the key principle of national ownership
and priorities, an integrated approach to early
peacebuilding is successful if every actor is clear as
to their contribution. That will make the comparative
advantage and the added value of each actor clearer.
Despite good progress, there continues to be a need to
identify additional competencies and to further clarify
everyone’s role and responsibility.
Ensuring coordination and coherence is key. That
necessitates system-wide support within the United
Nations. There has certainly been further progress in
that respect, but the efforts to enhance coordination
need to continue, including as regards the Peacebuilding
Commission, where coordination with other United

13-21043

S/PV.6903

Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council,
should be further improved.
Partnerships are increasingly important across the
board. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and their growing link with regional and subregional
organizations and international financial institutions
need to explore partnership opportunities that support
peacekeeping operations in their peacebuilding tasks.
The Peacebuilding Fund is an integral part of the
United Nations peacebuilding structure. It is a nimble
funding mechanism that is also very relevant for the
peacebuilding tasks within peacekeeping operations.
With respect to future models of cooperation, the
civilian capacity initiative provides a good example. As
the report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/645) states, the
initiative will apply across the various responses of the
United Nations system. We encourage the elements of
the United Nations system to continue to work together
in finding optimal ways to be more responsive and
innovative in post-conflict situations.
Countries emerging from a post-conflict situation
continue to run the risk of a recurrence of armed
conflict. Peacekeeping operations have an important
role to play in preventing that. We need to do our utmost
to prevent such a development.
Peacekeeping operations also set the scene for
initiatives in institution-building. It is therefore
important to optimize the way peacekeeping operations
contribute to early peacebuilding and State-building,
guaranteeing a comprehensive start from the beginning
and a smooth transition to greater stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, let
me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
on the important subject of peacekeeping and its crucial
role in building peace in post-conflict situations.
India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed to virtually every
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the past
six decades — more than 100,000 peacekeepers in
all — we have an abiding interest in United Nations
peacekeeping. During our presidency of the Security
Council in August 2011, we organized a debate on
United Nations peacekeeping (see S/PV.6603). Even

13-21043

today, India is one of the largest contributors to major
peacekeeping missions, and we remain committed to
that global enterprise.
I also wish to convey our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his useful briefing on the subject.
Peacekeeping has been a critical activity of the
United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. Its collaborative character infuses it
with a unique legitimacy that defines its strength. The
core values of United Nations peacekeeping explain
its enduring relevance. The principles of consent,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and in defence of the mandate have all outlived
the many transitions that peacekeeping has witnessed,
from the truce-supervision missions of yesteryear
to the multidimensional mandates of today. Today’s
debate on the multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
underscores in ample measure how the nature of
peacekeeping has evolved.
Peacekeeping is often deliberated as a stand-alone
exercise, rather than as a contributory endeavour that
imparts strength to the larger peace enterprise. That
reflects the substance of its currency. In order for peace
to be sustainable, enduring and lasting, it is imperative
that all components of the comprehensive peace
enterprise contribute to achieving peace.
In that regard, I would like to draw the Security
Council’s attention to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/17) issued in August 2011, which called
for meaningful engagement with the troop-contributing
countries and the inclusion of field expertise and
experience in peacebuilding strategies and in the
drafting of mission mandates.
The nature of mandates will continue to shape
the practice of peacekeeping. My delegation has often
spoken strongly in favour of a tiered and inclusive
mandate-making process in order to ensure that
mandates are updated, flexible and in tune with the
realities on the ground. In-depth consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries should be an
integral part of the mandate-generation process. A fair
assessment of mandates, with corresponding resources,
will inject a sense of realism into expectations with
respect to mission objectives and achievements.
Unfortunately, resource allocation has failed to
keep pace with mandate expansion, and peacekeeping

31

S/PV.6903

missions are called upon to do more and more with less
and less. That has added to the operational challenges
faced by peacekeepers. Missions are overstretched due
to shortages of personnel and equipment. The resources
provided need to be commensurate with mandates, and
efficiency measures should not compromise operational
necessities.
A reference was made to the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP).
Suffice it to say that the role of UNMOGIP was
overtaken by the Simla Agreement of 1972, between
India and Pakistan, which was signed by the Heads of
the two Governments and ratified by their respective
Parliaments. In times of austerity, we need to address
the question of whether the resources being spent on
UNMOGIP would not be better utilized elsewhere.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are two sides
of the same coin. Critical peacebuilding tasks such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, the rule of law, basic governance,
institution building and support to the democratic
process are all premised on peacekeepers’ proactive
involvement. Our strategies and approaches therefore
should be geared towards capitalizing on those
strengths. United Nations peacekeeping in fact makes
all of that affordable at a fraction of the cost involved in
similar endeavours elsewhere.
Two thirds of the United Nations field presence is
comprised of uniformed personnel. They respond to a
complex set of challenges in a holistic manner. In that
context, we should synergize the keeping of peace and
the building of peace. Their mutual complementarities
should be harmonized, rather than being zoned as
civilian versus military aspects.
Functional necessities should guide us in developing
programmatic content and budgetary outlines. The
propensity to create new structures, mechanisms and
positions that only add additional bureaucratic layers
need to be discouraged in the current context.

reform process is not the prerogative of a few, but is
representative across the board.
Finally, my delegation is happy that a resolution
(resolution 2086 (2013)) has been adopted today that
will strengthen the peacekeeping framework.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): We welcome Pakistan’s
initiative to hold an open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping and its multidimensional nature.
International peace and security lie at the heart of the
United Nations, and peacekeeping is surely the most
visible instrument of the United Nations in that regard.
It therefore deserves our constant attention.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate Germany’s
longstanding support for United Nations peacekeeping.
It is our goal to strengthen the United Nations system
and the missions on the ground. It is in that spirit that
we call for a fresh look on how to overcome current
gaps and deficiencies. Close cohesion between
mandates and required capacities is crucial for the
success of peacekeeping missions. At the same time, we
believe that an increased use of modern equipment and
technologies is necessary to improve the operational
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to take this opportunity to introduce
before the Council an initiative that Germany,
together with a number of partners, has developed
over recent years. If implemented, the initiative could
make a substantial contribution to realizing truly
multidimensional United Nations peacekeeping. I am
talking about the creation of a group of friends of
United Nations police.

Partnership is peacekeeping’s central pillar. All
stakeholders in the process have a duty to enhance
dialogue and mutual understanding. The triangular
cooperation framework in that regard offers a viable
way to engender and consolidate that partnership.

Sustainable peace can only be achieved through
justice and security and by the re-establishing the
rule of law. The police segment of United Nations
peacekeeping has proven crucial in assisting host
countries in developing critical peacebuilding priorities
and strategies. It is also key in national programmes on
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

The representative character of peacekeeping and
its reform process is the key to its across-the-board
acceptability. It is imperative that the work on that

United Nations police are mastering their
wide-ranging and complex tasks with commitment
and professionalism. They need our support and

32

13-21043

S/PV.6903

appreciation. Our initiative to establish a group of
friends aims at fostering political support for the United
Nations police. We want to strengthen the capacity
and the impact of United Nations police. Such a group
should include all main stakeholders involved in United
Nations police missions and facilitate the informal
exchange of ideas. It shall create a sense of common
purpose and be a place to launch concrete initiatives.
It shall provide a bridge between United Nations
Headquarters in New York and capitals.
The idea of creating a group of friends of United
Nations police was introduced at the October 2012 HighLevel Conference on International Police Peacekeeping
in the 21st Century, held in Berlin, and has since
evolved further. Such a group would be complementary
to the existing Strategic Police Advisory Group in order
to advance sustained political engagement in support of
United Nations police.
We would expect the group of friends to consist
of dedicated Member States that are actively engaged
and interested in developing United Nations police
peacekeeping, as well as partners from the Secretariat.
Other key partners and supporters could be invited to
join. The constitutive meeting of the group of friends is
planned for this spring.
Together, we can further strengthen the role of
United Nations peacekeeping, its capacities and its
impact on the ground. This is a joint endeavour, and the
support of all Member States is key.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, let me
commend the leadership of Pakistan in guiding the
work of the Council in January 2013. I applaud the
hard work of your delegation, Sir, in preparing the
informative concept note before us (S/2013/4). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his statement delivered
this morning.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and we welcome today’s adoption of
resolution 2086 (2013), on peacekeeping.
We subscribe to the views expressed in the concept
note that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
more effective and cost efficient compared to other
similar operations. Several studies, including by the
Rand Corporation, Oxford University economists,

13-21043

the United States Accountability Office and others
testify ot the fact that the United Nations can complete
a mission most effectively with lower costs. In fact, it
can accomplish a mission at around 12 per cent of the
total cost that would be incurred by the United States of
America in a unilateral intervention. As members may
be aware, the total United Nations peacekeeping budget
is less than 0.5 per cent of global military expenditure.
The multidimensional aspect of United Nations
peacekeeping demonstrates its commitment to the
broader membership and ensures neutrality, greater
legitimacy, acceptance and effectiveness. Tats
dimension therefore needs to be maintained in the
future, while the base of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) is expanded.
With
limited
resources,
United
Nations
peacekeeping has demonstrated unparalleled success
in its past operations. Since its inception, the United
Nations has undertaken 67 field missions. Among
many other things, those missions have enabled people
in dozens of countries to participate in free and fair
elections, and helped to disarm more than 400,000
ex-combatants in the past decade alone. Despite the
significant achievements, as the Rand Corporation
mentions, the Organization continues to exhibit
weaknesses in operations, which remain undermanned and under-funded and whose military forces
are often sized not on the basis of actual need. It not
only challenges the achievement of mandates but also
generates potential threats to the safety and security
of peacekeepers. We therefore stress that the mandates
for peacekeeping missions should be clear, specific,
achievable and, most important, adequately funded to
achieve their objectives, while ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers themselves.
Modern peacekeeping mandates go far beyond then
traditional roles of truce supervision. Peacekeepers
nowadays address both inter- and infra-State conflicts.
Missions have become diversified, multidimensional
and more complex, engaging military, police and
civilian personnel. They provide support to safety
and security, political processes, electoral assistance,
inclusive dialogue and reconciliation, conflict
management, basic services, economic revitalization
and core Government functions, among other things. In
other words, they are the principal actors in laying the
foundations for peacebuilding.
As their mandates are enhanced, so are their needs
and requirements. In that context, it is important that
33

S/PV.6903

TCCs are consulted from the very beginning of a
mission until the end of its last stage, especially when
decisions are being taken about its mandate, human
resources and other requirements.
The concept note has highlighted several issues
regarding the integration of peacebuilding tasks in the
context of multidimensional peacekeeping. In response,
my delegation would like to stress the following points.
First, in the context of multidimensional
peacekeeping, the elements of peacebuilding can be
incorporated at an early stage. In doing so, the views
of the host country, the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission, where appropriate, and the lessons learned
and best practices of from TCCs may be requested for
determining mission needs. Special emphasis needs
to be given to determining force requirements, taking
into account their future contribution in peacebuilding
efforts.
Secondly, once the requirement are determined,
TCCs may be requested to form composite units for
deployment, including the military, police and civilian
personnel required to address the multidimensional
needs of integrated missions. That will allow us to tap
the benefits of comparative advantages of experienced
peacekeepers. At the same time, that is likely to bridle
cost overruns associated with hiring external experts.
Similarly, the inclusion of civilian experts in related
areas within the composite unit may bring greater
harmony and coherence among the various actors in
the field as well as cost-effectiveness in the operations.
Thirdly, women represent almost 50 per cent
of our total population. Their rights and roles in
preventing conflict and rebuilding society cannot
be overemphasized. They deserve equal rights in the
context of the peace process and nation-building.
Unfortunately, they become the principal victims of
conflict and, in the recovery process, they are often
neglected. We therefore stress that women should be
included systematically throughout the entire process
in the areas of conflict resolution, mediation and
economic recovery, local Government, the rule of law
and other related areas of nation-building.
Fourthly, the needs of multidimensional missions
are multifaceted. They require trained personnel for
addressing issues related to military and police affairs
as well as issues of civilian engagement. Therefore,
training for peacekeepers should be customized so as
to address all those needs through the inclusion of a

34

unit-based training programme. We are ready to offer
our training facilities in Bangladesh, at the Bangladesh
Institute of Peace Support Operations Training centre.
Finally, United Nations peacekeeping is a collective
endeavour and the pride of the United Nations. Its
success is the outcome of the concerted efforts of all
stakeholders. Its future success will depend on the
forging of such partnerships on the basis of experiences
and lessons learned. We look forward to further
strengthening those partnerships in all areas of our
possible cooperation and contribution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to His Excellency Jalil
Abbas Jilani, Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan, for his leadership in convening today’s
open debate. I would also like to express appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative briefing, which impressed on us the
importance of today’s discussion.
Allow me, before I delve into today’s topic, to echo
the strong condemnation expressed by the Security
Council in its press statement on the terrorist attack in
In Amenas, Algeria, which has affected people of many
nationalities, including some from my own country,
and has resulted in numerous deaths and injuries. We
express our deep sympathy and sincere condolences
for the victims of the attack and to their families. The
perpetrators of such heinous acts must be brought to
justice. Japan believes that terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. I
should like to reiterate Japan’s strong determination to
combat all forms of terrorism.
Mr. President, Japan welcomes your initiative
of introducing a new resolution highlighting
the multidimensional nature of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We agree that it plays a
critical role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, preventing and containing conflicts,
building peace in post-conflict situations and providing
sustainable peace and development. With the purpose
of further improvements and reflection on the issue,
I would like to share the following three observations
with the Council.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

First, I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the history of the Japanese contribution to peacekeeping
operations. In its 20-year history in that respect,
Japan has proactively taken an early peacebuilding
role. In Timor-Leste, Japan delivered engineering,
police capacity- building and electoral support, which
contributed to building a foundation for the country’s
economic development. Last month, that SouthEast Asian nation graduated from the peacekeeping
operation, well on its way to future prosperity. In Haiti,
the Japanese Self-Defense Forces’ engineers proactively
contributed to the country’s national recovery efforts
and planted the seeds for its future development. In
South Sudan, Japanese engineering units are now
supporting nation-building efforts for the youngest
nation in the world. By sharing lessons learned from
its premium experiences as an early peacebuilder,
Japan would like to invigorate the discussion and the
consideration of further improvements related to this
issue.
Secondly, peacekeeping missions have evolved and
at the same time struggled to address the emerging
challenges of the twenty-first century. In the midst of
their evolutionary process, missions are now required
to be capable of meeting specific needs and handling
complex situations for the successful delivery of their
multidimensional functions. To that end, each mission
should be launched and operated based on broader
support from Member States, now more than ever.
The Security Council, the supreme decision-making
authority on the establishment of missions, has remained
without any substantial changes to its composition or
decision-making process for more than six decades.
Japan believes that the time when changes are made
to such decision-making mechanisms is the time when
peacekeeping operations will start to exercise their full
potential to respond to the expectations of a new era.
Thirdly, Japan has also actively engaged in the
discussion of the peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development nexus in the context of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). For example, as the Chair of the
Commission’s working group on lessons learned, Japan
organized a meeting in December to clarify the role
played by the PBC vis-à-vis the Security Council while
the country on the agenda of the PBC is undergoing
a United Nations mission transition. In order for
peacekeeping efforts to generate a long-term impact,
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and other development

13-21043

actors is essential. Japan remains committed to
promoting such interactions.
In closing, Japan would like to express its heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers for their solid
contribution, made through daily hard work, even in
the midst of severe situations on the ground. At the
same time, Japan would like to express its deepest
condolences in connection with those peacekeepers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of
duty, and strongly condemns attacks targeting United
Nations peacekeepers. Japan will do its best to work
towards the achievement of international peace and
security, with full respect for the safety and security
of personnel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): May I
begin, Sir, by congratulating Pakistan on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January and commending the presence here this
morning of Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, Ambassador Khalil, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
This debate provides us with yet another opportunity
to look into an important tool in the architecture for
the maintenance of international peace and security:
peacekeeping operations. Those operations, in a
changing international situation that is increasingly
complex, have had to adapt and now function in a
different way to how they were originally conceived.
Thus, beginning in the late 1980s, the traditional model
was supplanted by an increasingly multidimensional
kind of operation with civilian, military, political, rule
of law, human rights, humanitarian aid, reconstruction,
gender and civilian protection components, among
others. Whatever its nature, a peacekeeping operation
must be undertaken pursuant to the guiding principles
of consent of the parties; impartiality; use of force
only in self-defence or in defending the mandate; and
unswerving compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
The multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
operations requires clear and appropriate guidelines
that bolster the operational dimension and ensure an
appropriate organizational structure, logistical and
35

S/PV.6903

financial resources, and appropriately trained staff.
My delegation believes that the relation between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is clear. They form
two sides of the same process proceeding in parallel.
We consider it essential that the mandates of the various
peacekeeping operations not only have clear, precise
and feasible instructions, but also a strategic vision for
entry, transition and exit that allows appropriate use of
resources to ensure the safety of the members and is
based on a withdrawal strategy.
These increased efforts call for systematic joint
efforts among all actors involved in establishing and
implementing a peacekeeping operation. To succeed,
they must also be undertaken in close coordination
with the national authorities in order to meet local
needs and interests and ensure national ownership of
the process. We endorse those mechanisms that ensure
communications among the Security Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We urge all to establish the mechanisms
necessary to ensure prompt implementation of the
decisions of the Security Council.
We recognize the role played by women in
preventing and resolving conflicts, and appreciate the
inclusion of the gender dimension in mandates. Further
work is necessary in that regard to ensure women’s
full participation in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
security issues. In that context, we also draw attention
to the potential role of regional entities, given their
successful past experiences in Africa.
Active collaboration and communication among the
receiving country, the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States are fundamental to understanding
the reality on the ground and the problems and
expectations of the local population. Coordination
of those factors will ensure improved decisions and
support for the mission. Only insofar as peacekeeping
operations respond to the desires and aspirations of the
local population will it be possible to guarantee the
relevance and continuity of that important international
instrument.
My delegation welcomes resolution 2086 (2013),
unanimously adopted today, which follows the path of
the ideas outlined earlier. Lastly, my delegation pays
tribute to those who have given their lives in pursuit of
the noble cause of peace and peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

36

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia welcomes the
opportunity to speak in this open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping, with a focus on the nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We align
ourselves with the position presented earlier today by
the observer of the European Union. In addition, let me
make a few remarks from the point of view of the Slovak
Republic. We fully support the idea that peacekeepers
are essentially early peace builders and we look forward
to the discussion today on how to strengthen synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
It is important to note that the role played by
United Nations peacekeeping missions has changed
considerably in recent years. That evolution can be seen
in particular in the area of justice and security sector
reform (SSR). Peacekeepers are now asked to take on
a more proactive role and have become peacebuilders.
Early stages focus mainly on the stabilization of SSR
aspects that are often linked to certain peace agreement
clauses. With security restored, as the focus shifts
to peacebuilding it is important to ensure that the
accountability objective of SSR is not forgotten and is
fully taken into account in the country’s reconstruction
and development plan.
Slovakia co-chairs the United Nations Group of
Friends of Security Sector Reform. Let me share some
insights drawn from a series of events on the United
Nations approach to SSR that we organized in December
2012. With the support of the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme, we launched the first set of
United Nations integrated technical guidance notes on
SSR. We also organized a high-level meeting of the
Group of Friends of SSR and an expert-level seminar on
“The United Nations and SSR: towards the next report
of the Secretary-General on SSR”.
Those events provided some key lessons that are
of relevance to today’s debate. Notably, in order to
support effective multidimensional peacekeeping,
there is a need, first, for clarity on strategic priorities
across the peacekeeping and peacebuilding continuum;
secondly, appropriate capacities to match the needs
of peacekeeping missions; and thirdly, effective
partnerships based on coordination, cooperation and
comparative advantages.
The United Nations integrated technical guidance
notes were developed by the United Nations inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force. The guidance
13-21043

S/PV.6903

notes are intended to support field and headquarters
practitioners and deal with issues such as democratic
governance of the security sector, peace processes and
gender responsive security sector reform.
Of particular relevance to today’s debate is the
guidance note on United Nations support to national
security policy and strategy-making processes.
Supporting national processes from the outset of a
peacekeeping mission can help national actors to
articulate a national strategic vision based on clear
priorities that can guide international support through
the evolution from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
National security policymaking can thus help to
enhance the coherence of international efforts in the
area of SSR, support integrated planning within the
United Nations system, and enable the allocation of
resources in line with national strategic priorities.
The high-level meeting of the Group of Friends of
SSR involved presentations from Member States that
had organized regional workshops on the United Nations
approach to SSR. For example, Indonesia and Slovakia
jointly hosted such an event in Jakarta in 2010, entitled
“The Role of the United Nations in Multidimensional
Peacekeeping
Operations
and
Post-Conflict
Peacebuilding: Towards an Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Perspective”. The meeting highlighted
the fact that United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping has essentially become “peacebuilding
with security guarantees”. Against that background,
calls were made for greater complementarity of efforts
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding actors. It was
noted, however, that this depends largely on resource
challenges. There is a need to address issues such as the
separate funding of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and the need to consider the interoperability of various
funding instruments. On the other hand, efforts are
also needed in the area of human resources, notably by
enhancing civilian expertise in peacekeeping, in line
with the civilian capacity initiative.
Getting the right people into the right posts at the
right time is crucial, whether in a civilian, police or
military capacity. Thanks to the observations of the
Senior Advisory Group (in S/2011/85), we know where
gaps are and therefore where to focus our attention to
ensure that field missions are staffed appropriately and
in a timely fashion to deliver on important Security
Council mandates.

SSR is not a separate set of tasks, but rather a
process that impacts on and is influenced by many
others. That means that training peacekeeping
personnel in SSR needs to be fully integrated across
missions, incorporating units responsible for different
areas and dimensions. Joint SSR training should occur
both before deployment and throughout the mandate of
a mission as context and linkages evolve.
Lastly, allow me to say that with the multitude of
actors on the ground providing assistance, coordination
among international and national stakeholders remains
as important as ever. It is worth mentioning that one of
the key recommendations that emerged from the recent
SSR events hosted by Slovakia was the key importance
of strengthening partnerships between the United
Nations and Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and non-State actors involved in SSR.
Partnerships should also entail a greater focus on
providing support to South-South cooperation in the
area of security sector reform and peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
multidimensional peacekeeping. I am pleased to align
this statement with that made earlier today by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Given the emphasis on the evolving nature of
peacekeeping missions in discussions in various United
Nations bodies in recent years, the current discussion
is most pertinent. It is particularly appreciated as
it allows countries with long traditions of United
Nations peacekeeping, such as Fiji, to contribute to
the discussion at the United Nations body tasked with
creating, implementing and overseeing the mandates
of the peacekeeping missions. We stand ever ready to
serve the noble purpose of maintaining international
peace and security.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General on
peacekeeping have highlighted the unprecedented
scale in terms of configuration and demand. Concepts
relating to peacekeeping have evolved, with a more
concerted effort in recent years on the United Nations
community’s responsibility to protect in situations of
conflict affecting international peace and security.
Work by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Services on

13-21043

37

S/PV.6903

peacebuilding strategies for peacekeepers, as well
as the guidance given by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on strategies for complex
peacekeeping operations and on peacebuilding issues,
recognize that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
interlinked stages of a process. That process moves
regions and countries in conflict from being dependent
on the United Nations community for security to taking
control of their own development priorities. That has
been and continues to be the fundamental principle on
which Fiji’s tradition of United Nations peacekeeping
has been based — that we are part of a larger process,
not an isolated mission that is an end unto itself.
What, then, do today’s conflicts require of a
United Nations response? What does multidimensional
peacekeeping require of us? Some 65 years of United
Nations peacekeeping provide a rich store of experience
to learn from, and we must utilize our shared experience
to prepare for the future of multidimensional
peacekeeping.
From our perspective, a clear understanding of each
situation is required, as no two conflict situations are the
same. The roots of the conflict — be they ideological,
economic or deriving from the lack of adequate State
structures to provide for the citizenry — must guide
our responses to it. This requires us to be clear in our
mandates with regard to exit strategies for peacekeeping
missions and transitions to other types of United
Nations presences. Planning for handover to national
authorities at the end of an effort of the international
community, starting with peacekeeping and integrating
peacebuilding efforts, must begin at the time of the
conception of the mission. That said, the integral
role of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders should be
acknowledged and incorporated into the training of all
peacekeepers. Transition must be coordinated with all
stakeholders.
Clear and detailed planning is required to ensure
that the peacekeeping-peacebuilding transition is
seamless in order to avoid any regression into conflict.
That requires the involvement of local communities in
trust-building exercises and the involvement of women
at all levels of society in remaking their communities.
It also involves well-planned and realistic strategies
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, as well as assistance to national
authorities.
Resolution 2086 (2013), adopted in the course
of today’s debate, has the unanimous support of all
38

members of the Security Council. We therefore trust
that it will provide a useful reference point in future
discussions on mandates of peacekeeping missions
and their implementation, as well as guidance for
the peacekeeping community as a whole. I take this
opportunity to assure the Council that Fiji will continue
its proud tradition of United Nations peacekeeping, and
that it expects to continue to play a positive role as
United Nations peacekeeping evolves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Manongi (Tanzania): We commend the
Pakistani presidency for convening this meeting on a
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping.
Over the years, the nature and complexities of
conflicts have demanded an evolution of peacekeeping
into more complex and multidimensional operations.
That requires an ongoing evaluation of their relevance
and efficacy. Peacekeeping has always presented and
will always present challenges. What distinguishes
one approach from another rests on what lessons
are learned from past experiences. In that regard,
one of the enduring lessons learned in the twentieth
century — from Rwanda to Bosnia and Somalia — is
that peacekeeping has to be robust and effective. It is
therefore not surprising that peacekeepers are today
deployed to undertake acutely challenging operations.
Consequently, we subscribe to the view that the
idea of only sending troops into areas where there is a
peace to keep is a nice theory but a quaint idea. It is an
illusion to hope and assume that the mere deployment
of a peace operation will engender requisite peace. The
current situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo reminds us of that truth. To be fair, the United
Nations has made remarkable contributions to stability
in that country. However, much more remains to be
done for the Congolese people, and it is within the reach
of the peacekeeping mission there, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is essential that the Council
remain supportive of a more responsive peace operation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
What we witnessed in Goma last November
illustrates that a robust military presence continues to
be critical in peacekeeping operations in order to deter
potential spoilers and to reinforce missions’ credibility.
In addition, the presence of contingents with the resolve
necessary to undertake complex and often dangerous

13-21043

S/PV.6903

tasks becomes a key determinant of an operation’s
success.
The impunity with which rogue and armed militias
inflict widespread suffering and loss of life and
displace hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians is
a stark reminder of the collective resolve we need to
sustain and continuously muster. We therefore welcome
the Council’s commitment in support of ongoing efforts
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, the Council will find
strong partners in the African Union, as well as in the
membership of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, or, in the case of Mali, the
Economic Community of West African States.
It is only proper that, where feasible and meaningful,
United Nations and regional institutions should share
responsibility for security. Indeed, if cooperation can
engender success, the United Nations should not fear
losing its overall position in such peace operations.
The multiplicity of actors involved, be they political,
humanitarian, military, economic or any positively
supportive elements, need to accept that the collective
achievement of the goals of peace and security will, at
times, require accepting a degree of risks. That may
be especially true of the military components of a
multidimensional peacekeeping effort. It is therefore
imperative that the forces deployed remain capable of
demonstrating the collective will and resolve to deter
and prevent escalation, especially to protect innocent
civilians.
Ultimately, the United Nations must remain
worthy of the image that it has fostered over decades
of peacekeeping, namely, that of a renewed sense of
hope and promise and the chance of a fresh start for
people previously shackled by conflict and a lack of
good governance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Coming
from a country that is highly committed to the United
Nations peacekeeping system, I join the representatives
who spoke before me in congratulating the delegation
of Pakistan on this timely initiative, both in terms of
the debate and resolution 2086 (2013), adopted earlier
this morning.

13-21043

Before entering into the core issue of this debate,
it seems relevant to us to underscore the importance of
those activities that have brought us together today. The
topic goes hand in hand not only with greater interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries, which
we regularly call for, but also with regard to those of us
advocating an improvement in the working methods of
the Security Council. More and better dialogue among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, while not an end in itself,
is essential for the comprehensive interconnection that
the system needs to be a reality and, in particular, the
increasingly effective implementation of mandates. That
is all the more true for multidimensional peacekeeping.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations must
be reliable in order to ensure the lasting transition of
States emerging from conflict. Efforts to build lasting
peace in a country emerging from conflict require the
coordinated action of various actors. Peacekeeping
operations play a crucial role and are essential to
peacebuilding in order to establish the necessary
conditions for other actors to undertake reconstruction
and development tasks in support of national authorities
and to provide direct cooperation in different areas.
At the same time, we should recall that the catalytic
role of peacekeeping personnel in terms of peacebuilding,
in particular in the prompt strengthening of peace,
has been acknowledged by various bodies within and
outside the United Nations system. In that regard, we
believe that strengthening the institutional capacity of
the host country of a peacekeeping operation must be
a priority from the very outset of a multidimensional
mission. That is essential to prevent the resumption of
a conflict. It is also critical to the more complex tasks
of today’s multidimensional missions, such as, for
example, the protection of civilians.
One of the greatest challenges to achieving a
successful exit from multidimensional missions
is to ensure, at the critical time of transition, the
necessary continuity in order to avoid losing such
hard-won achievements. We all more or less agree that
sustained international support must be ensured when
a peacekeeping operation ends and, as usually happens,
responsibilities are transferred to the relevant national
and international actors.
However, ensuring that continuity can be a very
difficult task since the existing mechanisms that come
into play before the drawdown of a peacekeeping

39

S/PV.6903

operation are not inevitably as predictable as those
related to peacekeeping.
In conclusion, we must underscore the significance
of the role of multidimensional peacekeeping operations
in supporting institution-building, dialogue, political
inclusiveness, reconstruction and the establishment of
conditions for the economic and social development
of a country emerging from conflict, through a
coordinated approach that avoids duplication and that
has a sustainable timeframe for transition.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on Pakistan’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I am confident that, under your able
stewardship, the Council will be able to undertake
the task entrusted upon it by the membership in the
most productive and effective manner. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
which gave us an update on the status of the various
peacekeeping missions operating globally.
At this juncture, I also wish to align my statement
with that of the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
made earlier this morning, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Today peacekeeping missions have become
increasingly complex, since the nature and characteristic
of conflicts have changed. Major peacekeeping and
peacebuilding challenges remain and many conflictridden countries continue to experience instability
years after the end of armed conflict, with high
levels of relapse into violence. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon’s statement at the Security Council debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding of December 2012 was apt
when he stated that the reason for relapse, although it
varied among countries, had a common thread, that is, a
deficit of trust in the wake of conflict between different
political parties and social groups, between the State
and society, and between the State and its international
partners (see S/PV.6897).
While we have seen positive progress in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts through the years, it
would be prudent to go back to the basics and to
focus more on strengthening partnerships within and
between peacekeeping missions. We should refocus our
efforts on integrating peacekeeping core capabilities
and we should find ways to improve the transition from
40

peacekeeping to peacebuilding. In that connection,
the various actors in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts cannot continue to work in silos. The Council,
in collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, should
find ways to further integrate and to strengthen
collaboration among those actors, namely, the military
and police components in peacekeeping, civilian actors,
civil society and regional organizations.
In pursuit of an integrated approach, Malaysia
would encourage the participation of Member States
in the online platform CAPMATCH, as established
by the Civilian Capacities Team. CAPMATCH, with
its providers of training and assistance, will be able
to play an important role in support of the successful
transition from conflict to governance. In our view,
such an integrated approach would further facilitate the
transition between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
A successful transition from the peacekeeping
stage to peacebuilding depends very much on building
State institutions during the peacekeeping period. A
failure to work closely and effectively with national
Governments and local actors to ensure the existence of
a sustainable institutional architecture at the end of the
peacekeeping period might bring back instability to the
country concerned. In working towards an effective and
sustainable outcome, the focus should be on enhancing
State institutions, especially those relating to the
judiciary, law and order and economic development. A
potentially stable State needs such institutions to form
the backbone of its democracy. The United Nations plays
a substantial role in ensuring that those institutions are
stable at the end of the peacekeeping mandate.
International assistance through quick-impact
projects can also be useful as a complement to
peacekeeping work done through the United Nations.
International development assistance given in
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission,
including helping to develop civilian capacity
and expertise, can contribute to the successful
implementation of such quick-impact projects, which
benefit local populations directly. Positive outcomes
of such projects encourage local actors to work more
closely with the international community in bringing
sustainable stability to the country concerned, since
they can see the benefit of such collaboration. In that
connection, I would suggest that future mandates for
peacekeeping missions should include a component of
that nature.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Malaysia’s
firm support for the central role of the United Nations,
through the Security Council, in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are mindful of the
daunting task that the United Nations faces in keeping
the peace in regions of conflict. Its peacekeeping
missions can be successful only if close collaboration
between the various actors is given priority. Our task
does not end with the expiry of the mandate. The
United Nations will be remembered fondly by the
local populace only if we can bring long-lasting peace
and subsequent prosperity to their troubled nations.
Together we can succeed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate Pakistan on its initiative in holding
this Security Council open debate on peacekeeping
operations.
Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the States members
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Since the 1990s, multidimensional peacekeeping
operations have been the rule rather than the exception.
With the aim of restoring peace and stability, particularly
in regions with internal conflicts, the nature of the
mandates of such operations has evolved, as has the
complexity of their implementation mechanisms, thus
increasing the challenges the United Nations must
face. Peacekeeping operations have also become the
activities consuming the most resources within the
Organization. The current budget for peacekeeping
operations has reached a record $8 billion.
Extending the mandates of existing operations
and establishing new ones should be done in strict
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs. Similarly, the basic principles adopted
by the General Assembly regarding such operations,
such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence, must also be
respected.
For more efficient deployment of peacekeeping
operations, mandates should have concrete goals and
be clearly defined and able to rely on the resources

13-21043

necessary for their implementation. The Security
Council should ensure that troop-contributing
countries participate fully and effectively in devising,
implementing and renewing mandates, since, for
example, they may be able to provide objective
assessments of the existing realities on the ground.
Those countries should participate as key stakeholders
in the policy- and decision-making processes and the
deployment of operations.
Cuba believes that a phased approach to establishing
mandates would be more effective, and that they
should not be adopted until Member States have made
firm commitments on the contingents to be deployed
and a clear idea of the resources necessary for their
deployment exists. Before an operation is approved and
deployed, it is essential that it have a clear exit strategy.
Peacebuilding activities begun during the early stages
of peacekeeping operations are an important tool for
helping countries emerging from conflict to develop
and strengthen their national sustainable development
strategies. Every peacebuilding strategy should be
based on national experience and planned in a coherent
and integrated manner to enable it to meet the needs of
the country in question, in accordance with the principle
of national ownership and the priorities established by
its authorities.
Establishing new and more complex peacekeeping
operations cannot be a substitute for addressing the root
causes of conflict. Such operations cannot be an end in
themselves, but a temporary measure aimed at creating
a security framework enabling the implementation of a
long-term sustainable economic and social development
strategy. Otherwise, the vicious cycle of new conflicts
and operations with high human and material costs can
never be overcome.
A
significant
number
of
peacekeeping
operations — eight, to be exact — include civilian
protection as part of their mandates. Cuba reiterates
that the primary responsibility for protecting civilians
rests with States. Civilian protection cannot be
used, under any pretext, to promote regime change,
military intervention or any other action contrary to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Guidelines and doctrinal documents drafted by the
Secretariat that may have an impact on the way Member
States engage in peacekeeping operations must be
agreed on beforehand through an intergovernmental
negotiation process.

41

S/PV.6903

It is important to continue to strengthen interaction
among host countries of peacekeeping operations,
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and the
Security Council. The efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and the credibility of the Organization
depend on developing such interaction.
Concerning the Secretariat’s proposal to introduce
modern technologies and to use unmanned aerial
systems as an experiment in some operations, Cuba
considers that, given its implications, this issue should
be thoroughly discussed in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. The potential use of such
technology should in no way affect the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mrs. Adhikari (Nepal): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
Pakistan, on presiding over the Security Council for
the month of January. It is indeed a commendable
initiative of your presidency of the Council to bring this
subject matter to the fore. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his insightful remarks. My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Peacekeeping has constantly evolved into a
major United Nations activity and a vital tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Increased demand placed on the United Nations to
respond to growing and diverse situations is testimony
to the growing confidence reposed in the world body
as a credible multilateral organization responsible for
addressing the critical challenges to international peace
and security.
At present, peacekeeping operations have gone
well beyond their traditional modes of operation.
Supporting peace and security, providing security
guarantees, including the protection of civilians,
and political and peacebuilding support to assist
countries’ transition to peace have been the principal
tasks assigned to peacekeeping missions. Many of
the important tasks pertaining to peacebuilding and
nation-building processes are directly linked with
democracy, governance, human rights, the rule of law
and development.

42

Peacekeeping demands a multidimensional
approach and multiple involvements of stakeholders in
a coherent and coordinated manner. It also requires a
broader, holistic strategy that synergizes peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts to address the interlinked
issues of security and development in a comprehensive
and holistic manner. It is therefore imperative to have
close coordination between the General Assembly and
the Security Council, and the meaningful engagement
and involvement of the troop- and police-contributing
countries for the success of any United Nations mission.
Country leadership and ownership can play a crucial
role in cultivating hope and fostering confidence among
people in conflict-ridden places.
As one of the leaing troop-contributing countries,
Nepal attaches great importance to United Nations
peacekeeping, in line with its foreign policy objectives.
Nepal’s association with United Nations peacekeeping
is consistent and long-standing. Since 1958, Nepal
has continuously contributed peacekeepers for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the aegis of the United Nations. Nepalese peacekeepers
have served in the most challenging missions, and more
than 60 Nepalese peacekeepers have sacrificed their
lives in the line of duty.
Based on the experiences gained along the evolving
track of peacekeeping, from truce monitoring to
peace enforcement and peacebuilding, and looking
at the challenges ahead, my delegation emphasizes
that the following key elements should receive proper
attention if United Nations peacekeeping is to be a
truly successful enterprise, without compromising the
fundamental tenets of inter-State relationships.
The Security Council must be guided by unity
of purpose and mobilize its entire political capital,
based on merit and principle, to ensure that a coherent
strategic framework is in place to achieve the desired
objectives, which must be explicitly articulated.
Peacekeeping should be guided by an integrated
three-pronged strategy. It has to stabilize the security
situation, support the national political process and
ensure economic regeneration. All three pillars need
to be strengthened in a holistic manner from the very
beginning.
A framework for consultation with troopcontributing
and
police-contributing
countries
on the mandating process should be substantive,
institutionalized and structured in terms of content and

13-21043

S/PV.6903

timing. The comprehensive and continuous involvement
of troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
in all stages of United Nations peacekeeping is essential
to make the operations effective and successful.

part of the United Nation’s work — Blue Helmets are
instantly recognized the world over — the Council
would undoubtedly benefit from scheduling such
debates more frequently.

Civilian capacity in diverse fields is in increasing
demand in the new generation of peacekeeping
operations. We should strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations to respond to such demands with an
inclusive approach shared by all. The strong provision
of necessary resources and effective arrangements for
enablers are key to rapid deployment, as well as to the
enhancement of operational capacity.

Ireland is one of the staunchest supporters of
United Nations peacekeeping, with our Defence Forces
participating continuously in United Nations peace
operations since their first deployment 55 years ago. We
are also among the top 10 donors to the Peacebuilding
Fund. We are therefore keenly interested in the evolving
interlinkages between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
I would like today to touch briefly on four points.

Peacekeepers should be given clear guidance
and strong and clear-cut rules of engagement for
the effective implementation of the tasks shared.
It is essential to ensure the due accountability of
all stakeholders to the mandate of the mission. A
pragmatic training strategy is essential to conducting
mission-oriented pre-deployment training for the
troops, police, commanders and staff of all troop- and
police-contributing countries and to ensuring quality
service in the field.

My first point concerns sustainability. Paragraph 1
of resolution 2086 (2013), adopted earlier today, refers
to peacekeeping contributing to “a comprehensive
strategy for durable peace and security”. There are at
least two critical aspects to ensuring such durability
or sustainability. First, peacebuilding tasks must be
undertaken by peacekeepers in a coordinated and
coherent manner within an integrated United Nations
framework. Secondly, they must support national
strategic priorities and planning.

Effective command and leadership in the field
are critical, and in this context my delegation
underscores that troop-contributing countries should
be provided with opportunities in leadership positions
commensurate with their contribution. The morale
and dignity of peacekeepers must be kept high at all
times through appropriate incentive structures. It
is also important that claims in respect of death and
disabilities be expeditiously cleared. Finally, the safety
and security of United Nations peacekeepers must be
given high attention.

The question of how quick-impact projects can
contribute more effectively to peacebuilding is of
relevance here. From the many such projects delivered
over the years by the Irish Defence Forces, we have
learned one key lesson. While maintaining the
flexibility and responsiveness characteristic of these
projects, efforts to better coordinate and integrate
them into broader frameworks greatly enhance their
sustainability, and thereby their impact.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its profound
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping and
assures you, Sir, of its continued participation in United
Nations peacekeeping missions for the sake of a secure
and stable future for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): A written version of
my statement is being circulated, and I will deliver a
slightly abbreviated version so as to respect the time
constraints.
I welcome the initiative that Pakistan has taken
in scheduling this open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping. Indeed, for such a crucial and iconic

13-21043

My second point concerns realism. We must
do more to engender a sense of realism. Oscar
Wilde famously wrote: “I can resist anything except
temptation”. Over time, the temptation before this
Council has been to add, paragraph by paragraph in
mandate resolutions, more and broader objectives. No
one objects to these objectives, but missions — even
modern multidimensional operations — struggle to
deliver them as an entire set, not least because they do
not always receive a proportionate increase in resources
or clear guidance as to what the real priorities are. As a
United Nations community, it is important that we either
match our expectations of missions with resources,
or alternatively we should temper our ambitions. It is
wishful thinking, and even somewhat hypocritical, to
try to have it both ways.

43

S/PV.6903

In standing back and looking at the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities currently undertaken by
the United Nations, we must also ask ourselves whether
we, collectively, are continuing disproportionately to
focus on the symptoms of conflict at the expense of
addressing the root causes. It is a truism that preventing
conflict is far more cost-effective than managing crises,
yet we continue to pour resources into the latter.
Perhaps a paradigm shift is needed. Rather than
saddling peacekeeping missions with more and more
responsibilities, we should instead be thinking about
enhancing political peacebuilding missions, separate
missions, or separate arms within existing missions.
But this is a larger debate for another day.
My third point concerns the role of regional
organizations. Ireland has direct experience of the
positive contribution that regional organizations can
make to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We have
led initiatives to improve cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in relation
to peace operations and have given financial support
to the expansion of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Liaison Office in Brussels. In the written
version of my statement, I set out in some detail
how Ireland is utilizing its current presidency of the
Council of the European Union as an opportunity to
drive efforts to further enhance this European Union/
United Nations cooperation. I also make the point that
more prominence could be given to non-United Nations
partners, including regional organizations, in the
United Nations lessons-learned processes.
The fourth point concerns gender. There is a crucial
element common to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
that is conspicuous by its absence in the concept note
for today’s debate (S/2013/4, annex). Perhaps the single
most transformative step towards ensuring the success
of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders would be the
deployment of more women on missions. If deployed
peacekeeping missions were to reach out to populations
in more traditional societies, the deployment of more
women would act as a multiplier of peacebuilding
potential.
This is a difficult challenge for all troop contributors,
no less for Ireland than for any other Member of the
United Nations. The Irish Defence Forces ensure that
its personnel receive tailored predeployment training
in the human rights of women and minorities, cultural
awareness and codes of conduct and behaviour. We

44

also fund and participate in a gender perspective pilot
programme in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. But there is an important point to be made.
If we are serious about achieving the current targets for
women in peacekeeping, we have to think realistically
about finding the necessary incentives and innovative
ways to advance towards these targets.
I would conclude by acknowledging the sacrifices
made by peacekeepers seeking to sustain and build
peace in some of the most difficult places on Earth. In
the past year, 111 peacekeepers were killed in carrying
out their duty. It is our duty here in New York to ensure
that the work of those who run such risks makes the
maximum possible difference.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Sabyeroop (Thailand): At the outset, I should
like to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate on the topic of United Nations peacekeeping. I
also thank you for the concept paper provided to assist
our discussions today (S/2013/4, annex). I thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks earlier this morning
and would like to align my statement with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Since the first United Nations peacekeeping mission
deployed more than 60 years ago, we have seen time
and time again how critical and pivotal peacekeeping
has been to the maintenance of international peace and
security. And as peacekeeping has evolved to keep up
with the changing landscape of conflict and diplomacy,
we have increasingly realized that modern-day
peacekeeping can and should also play a meaningful
role in the process of conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and
sustainable
development.
Peacekeeping
missions can and must assist in creating an enabling
environment to help countries establish the foundations
of peace, reduce the risk of backsliding into conflict,
and establish conditions for recovery and long-term,
sustainable development.
The international community must continue to
strive in this direction to enable peacekeeping missions
to continue to play and enhance their meaningful role.
We have already seen what has worked in this respect
and where we believe we should focus more of our
efforts.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

First and foremost, peacekeeping missions must
be conducted in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions. They must also
adhere to the three basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, namely, consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. Peacekeeping
operations must also respect the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-intervention in
matters within the domestic jurisdiction of States. My
delegation wishes to stress the importance of providing
clearly defined mandates, a unified line of command,
and an efficient use of existing resources.
Secondly, we see the need to explore further the
concept of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders. As the
resolution adopted today rightly points out,
“while primary responsibility for successful
peacebuilding lies with governments and relevant
national actors, multidimensional peacekeeping
missions bring comparative advantages in early
peacebuilding” (resolution 2086 (2013), para. 9).
My delegation fully supports this point. We must
strive for the early formulation of integrated and
coherent approaches to post-conflict development,
based on host-country priorities, through dialogue
and close cooperation. In this regard, troop- and
police-contributing countries must also be included in
the dialogue at every stage of peacekeeping operations,
particularly at the early stages of mandate drafting,
where we feel that they can contribute experiences and
lessons learned in the field.
My delegation firmly believes that the promotion
and protection of the interconnected issues of peace
and security, development and human rights provide for
long-term solutions, not only for conflict resolution but
also for preventing conflicts from arising altogether.
Guided by these principles, Thailand’s peacekeepers in
Timor-Leste, Haiti, Darfur and the Gulf of Aden have
made it a point to also assist in local and community
development, sharing experiences and best practices
in agriculture, health and water resource management
with local villagers.
Thailand is continually adapting and strengthening
its peacekeeping roles and capacities to best suit current
developments in peacekeeping and field requirements,
in line with the mandate of each United Nations
mission. Presently, we are considering the participation

13-21043

of small numbers of specialized troops — such as army
engineers, medical units and female officer units — in
peacekeeping missions. They are trained to understand
the unique situation of post-conflict populations, to
fully respect different cultures and beliefs and to serve
as consultants, engineers and friends.
(spoke in French)
My delegation also welcomes the reiteration in the
resolution of the importance of the gender dimension in
peacekeeping, in particular with regard to promoting the
participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. We highly appreciate the
Secretary-General’s call for stronger action to meet the
challenges to integrating women at all levels and within
the United Nations structure itself.
For its part, in September 2012 Thailand established
a subcommittee on women and the promotion of peace
and security under the National Committee on the Policy
and Strategy for the Advancement of Women. Thailand
has always attached great importance to supporting
the role and impact of women peacekeepers in the
field. However, through the creation of this national
mechanism and the recently established National
Women’s Development Fund, we have focused greater
attention on formal commitments to empowering Thai
women and on further developing our capacities and
contributions in this regard.
Coherence and coordination at all levels are
critical. Troop- and police-contributing countries
need to understand how to continue to train our own
peacekeepers in the most appropriate manner. It is
therefore critical to enable our peacekeepers in this
way to continue to play increasingly meaningful roles
towards the ultimate goal of helping to create the pillars
and foundations of sustainable development in conflictaffected States.
We wish to see the further strengthening of
cooperation and consultations among troop-contributing
and police-contributing countries, the Council, the
Secretariat and all relevant United Nations agencies
in more open and frequent consultation processes. I
also assure the Council of my delegation’s readiness
to continue to engage in any future deliberations on
peacekeeping missions and activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Ukraine.

45

S/PV.6903

Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate.
The choice of today’s theme came quite naturally
for Pakistan as a top contributor of troops to United
Nations operations. I should like to join previous
speakers in commending the extraordinary role of your
country in this sphere and in praising your delegation
for its comprehensive and thought-provoking concept
note (S/2013/4, annex). Our appreciation also goes to
the Secretary-General for his insight into today’s topic.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made
by observer of the European Union, I find it pertinent to
make a few brief points in my national capacity.
From its inception 65 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has come a long way, evolving and
adapting to the ever-changing environment at every
juncture on this road. What we have now is an
increasingly complex enterprise embracing multiple
dimensions, with peacekeeping missions greatly
varying in nature, scope and size. At the time of the
first United Nations deployment, it could have hardly
been envisaged that peacekeeping would now cover all
five recurring peacebuilding priorities, ranging from
security to economic revitalization.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that
peacebuilding challenges be factored by all stakeholders
into integrated strategic assessment and mission planning
processes in order to ensure a coherence of mutually
reinforcing activities. Equally, peacebuilding mandates
assigned to complex peacekeeping operations — such
as support for security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; national political
processes, electoral assistance and others — have to
be as detailed, credible and achievable as possible, and
must tailor relevant peacekeeping operations to unique
local realities and needs.
In this light, we fully support resolution 2086
(2013), adopted by the Security Council today. It
broadly incorporates Ukraine’s vision of how further to
clarify the evolving nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We particularly welcome the Council’s
commitment to better integrating early peacebuilding
tasks into the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
to making sure that these mandates are matched by
appropriate resources; to further enhancing cooperation
and consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries; and to strengthening United Nations field
security arrangements so as to improve the safety and
security of Blue Helmets. Ukraine believes that the
46

implementation of today’s resolution will contribute to
progress on taking forward a comprehensive strategy
for durable peace and security.
A concept at the heart of today’s debate — that
of multiple dimensions — fully applies to Ukraine’s
contribution to United Nations efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Our share in the
global partnership called United Nations peacekeeping
encompasses military, police, civilian and political
dimensions. The past 20 years have witnessed the
active military, police and civilian engagement of
Ukraine in more than 20 missions under the United
Nations mandate. As of today, my country has
contributed more than 34,000 Blue Helmets to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in every region of their
deployment throughout the world.
Ukraine is committed to further supporting the
United Nations in its peacekeeping endeavour. This
year, at the Secretariat’s request, we are considering
doubling our military aviation unit in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Recognizing the added value
of inter-mission cooperation in terms of military
advantages, cost-effectiveness and the promotion of
regional approaches to regional issues, Ukraine will
further pioneer this innovative form of peacekeeping.
Earlier this month the Ukrainian Parliament
granted approval for the permanent transfer of our
armed helicopters from Liberia to Côte d’Ivoire, to be
used in both countries along and across their border,
in accordance with resolution 2062 (2012). Being also
an active police-contributing country and a committed
actor in the area of peacebuilding, Ukraine plans
to send a formed police unit to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. This step will be a practical followup to Ukraine’s membership in the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the steering group of
its Liberia configuration.
As was pointed out by the President of Ukraine
in his address to the General Assembly in September
2012, our country is
“truly proud of the contribution of the sons
and daughters of Ukraine — servicemen, law
enforcement officers and civilian personnel who
have served and continue to serve the noble ideals
of peace under the United Nations flag” (A/67/PV.9,
p. 15).

13-21043

S/PV.6903

We are resolved to maintain and advance our
multidimensional engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
At the outset, I should like to thank Pakistan
for taking this initiative to hold an open debate on
the multidimensional approach to United Nations
peacekeeping. The Nordic countries share the basic
premises of the concept note distributed ahead of
the meeting (S/2013/4, annex) and fully agree with
the notion that a multidimensional approach is key
to building lasting peace. I will focus my statement
on three main issues related to the topic of today’s
debate: multidimensional operations, coordination and
coherence, and financing.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations provide
the basis for a strong link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, but a multidimensional approach also
puts new demands on the missions. There is a need
to train police and military personnel to operate in
multidimensional settings to ensure that the United
Nations will have the right person in the right place
at the right time. Also, more effort should be directed
at strengthening the peacekeepers’ capacity to create
an enabling environment for peacebuilding activities,
which include such critical areas as security sector
reform, the rule of law and human rights. The global
focal point could be an important contributor to
achieving these objectives.

integration between the United Nations country team
and the peacekeeping mission, especially on planning
and implementing civilian tasks. There should be a
stronger focus on coordination and coherence with
other actors in the field, such as international financial
institutions, regional organizations and bilateral
partners. Finding pragmatic ways to operate in close
coordination, building on each other’s comparative
advantages, is key. The joint ventures in the Liberian
context between the United Nations police and bilateral
partners is a useful example of how this can be done.
Such an integrated approach also allows the Security
Council to achieve its goals without overloading the
peacekeeping missions with tasks others may be better
equipped to carry out in the peacebuilding area. In
this regard, we encourage closer cooperation between
the Council and the country configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Finally, I would like to make a few comments
on financing. Proper resourcing is important. The
elaboration of mandates in the Security Council cannot
be delinked from the debates about budget in other
forums, and this is essential in the context of ensuring a
smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development. In his report for the 2013
session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
(A/67/632), the Secretary-General emphasizes the
need to ensure sustained international support in the
transition phase. The Nordic countries believe that such
support is crucial to reach the relevant end-states.
Let me conclude by stressing that in all these
efforts nothing is more important than the role of
the host country. To reach the desired end-states in
United Nations missions, broad national ownership
is of vital importance. Good political leadership and
accountability are essential for successful outcomes.

In addition to police and military personnel,
missions also require stronger civilian capabilities.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s initiative
to respond to the increasing demands for civilian
personnel. In this context, the creation of CAPMATCH
was a very important step forward. We commend the
Secretariat and the civilian capacities team for making
good progress in getting this new system for mobilizing
civilian capabilities from both the global South and
the global North up and running. Furthermore, we
also encourage the Secretariat to continue its efforts
to improve the gender balance of the mission staff,
including in leadership positions.

Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate around the issues that lie at the very heart of
the Organization, namely, its efforts to establish and
pursue the most efficient way to maintain and rebuild
international peace and security. At the same time,
our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General for his
useful briefing on the subject.

The United Nations must deliver as one, including
in a mission setting where there needs to be a very close

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union earlier in the debate.

13-21043

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.

47

S/PV.6903

However, allow me the opportunity to share a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.
In our view, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
represent but two sides of the same coin, closely
intertwined and deeply interrelated. The durability of
established ceasefires and signed peace agreements
depends to a large extent on the determination and
readiness to rebuild the national fabric and basic
institutions, as well as the ability to address the root
causes of the conflict.
The route that countries emerging from conflict
take at the very beginning of their recovery will
significantly determine their trends and prospects for
future success. My country has contributed its share in
overall peacekeeping efforts. At one point, Croatia was
participating in 15 different peacekeeping operations
simultaneously, and it is ready to continue to play its
part in the future.
While recognizing the primary responsibility
of national authorities in identifying priorities and
strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding, Croatia
strongly supports a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated approach to those efforts. That of course
first of all implies close cooperation between the host
Government and the international community, but at
the same time it entails efficient coordination among
all stakeholders in the process. In that context, Croatia
welcomes endeavours to further clarify the roles and
responsibilities of key actors in this field, in particular
within the United Nations family.
It is useful to bring to mind here the fact that the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) was established
with the aim of supporting countries emerging from
conflict by bringing together all the relevant actors,
marshalling the requisite resources and providing
strategic and concrete recommendations in order to
improve the coordination of peacebuilding efforts
within and outside the United Nations. In addition,
the PBC is there to fill gaps that often exist between
security and reconstruction, through an innovative
yet coordinated, coherent and integrated approach
directed at post-conflict recovery, reconstruction and
institution-building. Institution-building in key areas,
such as the security sector and the rule of law, which
have been identified as conditions sine qua non, is
the most essential prerequisite for any recovery and
sustainable development.

48

In that context, Croatia strongly supports efforts to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian capacities for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and an efficient exchange between the seekers and
providers of services with particular emphasis on
promoting cooperation among countries with similar
needs and experiences.
Croatia welcomes the Council’s commitment to
regularly assess, together with other relevant actors, the
mandate and composition of peacekeeping operations
with a view to making the necessary adjustments,
according to the progress achieved on the ground,
thereby allowing for, on a case-by-case basis, the
reconfiguration, transition or withdrawal of the
operation.
More specifically, in accordance with the outcome
of the Security Council’s and the Peacebuilding
Commission’s thorough deliberations in July 2012,
Croatia strongly supports the calls for more dynamic
relations between the Council and the Commission.
The window of opportunity for that is open wider when
the Council is establishing and renewing the mandates
of United Nations missions, and it should be properly
utilized. We believe that the best practices developed
since the establishment of the Commission should be
used more systematically in the countries on the PBC’s
agenda.
It is clear that the success of operations aimed
at keeping and rebuilding peace requires timely,
sustainable, predictable and flexible resources. Croatia
recognizes the critical part that peacebuilding funding
plays as an early investment towards sustainable peace
and development. In that context, Croatia notes with
appreciation the special roles that the Peacebuilding
Fund and the international financial institutions have
been playing in peacebuilding efforts, particularly in
helping to design poverty-reduction strategies and
economic development policies.
Finally, let me conclude by seconding the call that
we have heard so many times today for the adequate
participation of women at all stages of peacebuilding
efforts and for their full inclusion in decision-making
processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Let me begin by thanking
Pakistan for organizing today’s debate on a matter of

13-21043

S/PV.6903

great importance to peace and security, to the wellbeing and protection of millions of people and, by
extension, to the promotion of democracy and good
governance in many parts of our world.
Kenya has continuously contributed to peacekeeping
with military and police personnel since 1981.
Peacekeeping operations have evolved through
time from the traditional posture of the 1960s to the
complex and multidimensional practice of the twentyfirst century. Since 1948, there have been a total of 67
peacekeeping operations, and 16 are operational today.
The complexity of conflicts today, combined with
global expectations on human rights, gender balance
and cultural sensitivity, has necessitated a thorough
review of peacekeeping mandates and practice in order
to effectively address modern operational needs. The
Secretary-General, in his report on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, published on 12 December
2012, states:
“Operations today are more varied and complex
than ever before, bringing together various
configurations of civilians, troops and police
under a unified leadership. Some missions are
multidimensional, with an evolving mix of military,
police and civilians supporting peacebuilding,
protection of civilians and other transitional tasks”
(A/67/632, para. 2).
That mix requires unique strengths, legitimacy,
burden sharing and the ability to deploy and sustain
troops in the field.
The multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
operations today requires that peacekeepers not only
maintain peace and security but also facilitate political
processes, protect civilians, assist in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
support the organization of elections, protect and
promote human rights and assist in the restoration of
the rule of law. All of those activities combined are
hard to do, but together, if well done, they lay a good
foundation for peacebuilding and democracy.
Africa hosts the largest number of peacekeeping
missions. The peacekeepers in those missions are
faced with complex challenges, as I just mentioned,
that require a unique and specific approach in Africa
to succeed. By definition, therefore, multidimensional
peacekeeping must embrace the role of regional
organizations and entities in a streamlined and
13-21043

synergistic manner in order to increase the chances of
success and the effectiveness of the United Nations.
In South Sudan and the Sudan, peace will remain
elusive unless the gains realized following the signing
of a series of agreements in late 2012 are harnessed,
followed through aggressively and implemented
expeditiously. United Nations peacekeeping has to
play its role to facilitate the peaceful resolution of the
ongoing disputes.
Furthermore, the security situation in Darfur
remains volatile, despite the deployment of the large
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in 2008. Ethnic and tribal conflicts that continue
sporadically, along with clashes between Government
forces and rebels, pose serious threat to peace. The
hybrid peacekeeping mission there is expected to help
resolve those difficulties.
The emergence of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has rekindled sad memories of rebel
groups that controlled the area in early 2000. The
recent action by the M-23 in several towns, including
Goma, should be a wake-up call for all of us as to
the need for an urgent review of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its mandate, as well as of
the concept of operations and the logistics support
package that governs the operational capabilities of the
United Nations force. Peacekeeping cannot be passive
and indifferent to the plight of populations, lest it lose
credibility and do irreparable damage to the reputation
of the United Nations.
Normalcy is returning to West Africa in Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, but the recent
takeover of northern Mali by Al-Qaida and affiliated
Islamist militia and the developments in the Central
African Republic are a tragic reversal. Worse yet,
they inject into the region the added complexity of
asymmetrical warfare. The situation calls for a quick,
decisive and concerted response by the international
community and, more important, a more sophisticated
and specialized counteraction by United Nations
peacekeeping.
In Somalia, the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has made significant
progress in disrupting Al-Shabaab activities. Peace
and constitutional democracy are now beginning to
take root in the wake of AMISOM’s achievements.

49

S/PV.6903

However, resilience and continued engagement will be
the key to sustaining those gains, particularly in helping
the Somali Government to establish governance and
security institutions, as well as justice and rule-of-law
capabilities, among other things.
The reality of modern peacekeeping operations is
that they are expensive, even if cost-effective. Troopcontributing countries spend significant amounts
of money preparing troops, maintaining readiness
and deploying expensive equipment to support given
mandates. Across the spectrum of peacekeeping
operations, the majority of troops are drawn from
developing countries, which in turn expect timely
reimbursement for legitimate expenses incurred
whenever and wherever they commit troops and
equipment.
Whereas it might not be the case in every mission,
allow me to cite the case of Kenya when it deployed
troops and equipment to Somalia in October 2010 and
received Security Council support through resolution
2036 (2012), of February 2012. After more than a year
of full engagement in Somalia, my country has been
reimbursed only a fraction of the millions of dollars
committed by the Council and expended by my country.
Clearly, that is an unacceptable and unsustainable
situation for a country such as Kenya — a developing
country that has great needs for resources to invest for
urgent economic and social development.
It is in that connection that I request the Security
Council and the relevant departments of the Secretariat
to ensure that the logistical needs of troops are addressed
seriously and comprehensively and that timely and full
reimbursement is made without unwarranted delays. It
is only by doing so that the multidimensional approach
necessary for modern peacekeeping can continue
to receive the obligatory support it requires from
developing countries and the commensurate investment
of troop-contributing countries, including under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya’s
commitment to shoulder its responsibilities and to
continue to support United Nations mandates in the
interest of preserving peace and security on Earth.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,

50

since the United Nations peacekeeping operations
are one of the main instruments for the effective
maintenance of peace and security. In the light of
recent events in Africa and in the Middle East, the role
of peacekeeping activities is growing. It is therefore
necessary to discuss the existing approaches and to
outline further tasks.
A multilateral dimension requires that United
Nations peacekeeping activities should effectively
respond to arising conflicts, new political challenges
and threats to peace. Today, we can definitely say that
the potential of United Nations peacekeeping activities
has significantly increased in both quantitative and
qualitative terms. We support the measures aimed
at strengthening the operational potential of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
especially in promoting women to relevant positions
in United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
increasing the number of female police officers to
20 per cent by 2014. Other measures include the
systematic involvement of peacebuilding elements and
implementing better mechanisms in the mobilization
of resources for ensuring peacekeeping operations. It
is also necessary to effectively implement the global
field support strategy in order to improve the quality of
services and to carry out the mandate of the missions.
It is still imperative to support the global
partnership, including strengthening cooperation
among the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the countries sending peacekeepers and their host
States. It is also extremely important that peacekeeping
operations be continued with all possible preventive,
diplomatic and other measures. The experience of
last year’s events proves again that we should strictly
observe the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Accordingly, United Nations
peacekeeping missions should operate firmly within
the framework of the main peacekeeping principles,
namely, the consent of the parties, the non-use of force
except in self-defence and impartiality.
We believe that the modern peacekeeping tasks
and resource deficits require enhancing cooperation
with regional organizations in the framework of their
mandates. In that regard, it is important that DPKO,
along with its traditional partners, the African Union
and the European Union, increase cooperation with
other regional structures, in particular the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

13-21043

S/PV.6903

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in September 2012. That legal
framework will allow for the use of United Nations
experience in the peacebuilding field. We hope that the
working meeting of the CSTO delegation and DPKO
on the implementation of the memorandum, which will
be held this week, will result in elaborating concrete
measures for joint peacekeeping activities.
Today, Kyrgyzstan is represented in peacekeeping
missions in Liberia, South Sudan, Darfur and Haiti. In
recent years, effective cooperation has been established
with DPKO, which provides assistance to Kyrgyzstan in
training, the expeditious processing of the documents
of candidates for peacekeeping missions and expert
assessments of the most pressing peacekeeping
problems.
In our view, more attention should be paid to
improving the legal framework for international
cooperation and to the development of legislation at
the national level. Accordingly, Kyrgyzstan has made
additional efforts for the legal regulation of peacekeeping
activities. On 13 July 2012, the President of Kyrgyzstan
signed legislation on principles and modalities for the
participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in the activities
of maintaining international peace and security. In
October 2012, the Government of Kyrgyzstan approved
regulations on procedures for training military officers
to be deployed in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
To implement the adopted legislation, Kyrgyzstan
is currently considering deploying a military unit in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We greatly
appreciate the readiness of DPKO to render assistance
to Kyrgyzstan as we undertake those efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to confirm that
Kyrgyzstan, as a peaceful country, will continue
to contribute to increasing the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations for the sake of the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
It is my honour to take the floor on behalf of the
15 States members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). I would like, first, to
thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January for its initiative in organizing

13-21043

today’s important debate on peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement at the start of today’s debate.
Finally, ECOWAS welcomes the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2086 (2013) at the start of today’s debate on
peacekeeping operations.
As we all know, the Charter of the United Nations
confers upon the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are one of
the key instruments used to that end, although they are
not specifically mentioned in the Charter. Moreover,
with the changing nature of conflict, from inter-State
to intra-State, peacekeeping missions have had to
adapt to that change, which increasingly places the
protection of civilians at the heart of their mandates.
They are dangerous missions, which have cost the
lives of peacekeepers, in particular in Côte d’Ivoire.
We take this opportunity to hail the memory of fallen
peacekeepers who have died in the line of duty.
In addition, we must acknowledge the appearance
of new non-State actors, radical terrorist groups and
their transborder criminal networks that threaten the
stability of States, particularly in West Africa and
the Sahel. In other words, we are talking about the
complex and changing character of crisis situations
and conflicts that threaten regional and international
peace and security, as is the case in Mali right now. In
the face of such threats, the international community,
in particular the Security Council, must provide
appropriate responses.
When it comes to conflict management in West
Africa, ECOWAS can boast of considerable experience
forged over more than 20 years of engagement in the
settlement of crisis situations, in particular in Liberia in
1990, in Sierra Leone in 1997, in Guinea-Bissau in 1998
and 2012, in Côte d’Ivoire in 2002, and today in Mali.
The ECOWAS Protocol Relating to the Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security in the subregion enables
the immediate deployment of the ECOWAS Standby
Force in the case of crises, following a decision of the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, and above
all with the consent of the legal authorities of the
country concerned.
Those two conditions were satisfied in the case
of the Mali crisis. However, mindful of supporting
its action in Mali on a robust international legitimate
basis, ECOWAS requested the prior authorization of the
51

S/PV.6903

African Union and the United Nations Security Council
before any deployment took place. Resolution 2085
(2012), adopted by the Security Council on 20 December
2012 to authorized the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA), was
obtained at the end of lengthy negotiations that reflected
the full complexity of peacekeeping mandates.
But the recent offensive by terrorist groups in
the south of Mali, which provoked the decisive and
beneficial reaction of France in response to a request
by Mali’s legal authorities, as well as the deadly
hostage-taking situation at the natural gas facility in
Algeria by a radical terrorist group, means that the
United Nations has to attempt to seriously adapt its
capacity to respond more effectively to those types of
crises. In that respect, there is a need to further explore
the possibilities offered by the normative framework
for peacekeeping operations, in particular in the timely
articulation of the provisions of Chapters VI, VII and
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that respect, the analysis (see S/PV.6702)
conducted on 12 January 2012 during the high-level
Security Council debate organized by the South African
presidency on the crucial cooperation in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the African
Union and ECOWAS, in the prevention, management
and resolution of crises in regional theatres, needs, in
our view, to be deepened.
It is often said that the job of the United Nations
is not to wage war; that is true, and we agree. But in
the light of the large-scale massacres of civilians, mass
atrocities and human rights violations, in the light of the
attempts by radical terrorist groups and transnational
criminal networks to destabilize sovereign States, is the
United Nations to stand idly by and passively watch as
crisis situations and violence develop? The experience
of recent events in Mali leads us to hope that, when the
situation requires it, the Security Council will formulate
more robust mandates for the imposition of peace, which
would subsequently evolve into peacekeeping mandates
and, subsequent to that, peacebuilding mandates.
ECOWAS believes that a multidimensional
approach to peacekeeping operations is a positive
development. Their scope is broad and comprehensive.
Their goals are, inter alia, to restore public order
and security, allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance, protect and promote human rights, ensure

52

the protection of civilians in situations of danger, as
well as of women and children, taking into account, in
particular, the situation of child soldiers, support the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants, assist in and facilitate electoral processes,
support security sector and justice reform, and help to
restore administration, the economic sector and the
rule of law.
Peacekeepers therefore play a key role in the
stability of all regions of the African continent. They
need to have clear and viable mandates and the political
support of all members of the Security Council and
the international community. They must have human,
material and financial resources at a predictable
and sufficient level so that those operations can be
successful.
We know that the military spending of the
15 biggest countries of the world in 2010 alone represents
the sum of $1.6 trillion, while the total cumulative
spending of all peacekeeping operations from the first
one in 1948 to 2010 was only $109 billion, or 23 times
less. Recent events involving the actions of terrorists
demonstrate the global nature of the threat of terrorism
as it affects all citizens of all the countries of the world.
That reality cannot be ignored, and therefore requires
enhanced international solidarity to strengthen the
United Nations international collective security system.
In conclusion, in the light of what I have referred to,
I would like to echo what was just said on the financing
of AFISMA and to reiterate the formal request made on
Saturday, 19 January, by President Alassane Ouattara,
Chairman of ECOWAS, at the ECOWAS extraordinary
summit on Mali, held in Abidjan. He called on the
Secretary-General and the Security Council to quickly
adopt the logistical package financed by the United
Nations and to establish a special trust fund to ensure
that the actions of AFISMA are effective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Mugerwa (Uganda): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, and the delegation of Pakistan on ably discharging
the responsibilities of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for organizing
this important debate focused on a multidimensional
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing this
morning.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

This debate is being held at a time when the
nature of United Nations peacekeeping is undergoing
significant changes, with operations becoming
more complex and multidimensional. The nature of
peacekeeping mandates has also changed, as missions
are increasingly deployed under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, are incorporating the
protection of civilians and are requiring more robust
and clearer rules of engagement. At the same time,
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means are
being put to the test by new threats to global peace and
security, including terrorism, piracy and transnational
organized crime. The humanitarian consequences of
violent conflicts for innocent civilian populations,
including women and children, are alarming.
It is therefore essential to continuously focus on
how to improve the capabilities and effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations through a
multidimensional approach, with greater coordination
among all actors in order to ensure coherent and
timely responses. Uganda would like to emphasize the
following four points.
First, it is crucial to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations and those authorized by the
United Nations, such as the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia and, recently, the Africanled International Support Mission in Mali, have clearly
defined mandates, objectives and command structures
and adequate resources based on a realistic assessment
of the situation on the ground. It is our view that each
mission should take into account the needs and priorities
of the country concerned, through consultation with
national authorities and other relevant stakeholders at
the earliest possible stages of mission planning.
Now more than ever, United Nations peacekeeping
operations should also be more adaptable to emerging
challenges, with the requisite resources and capacities.
We therefore stress that the existing shortages in some
missions, including of air assets such as helicopters in
a number of missions, should be urgently addressed
if increasingly complex and multidimensional
peacekeeping operations are to be effectively carried
out. As we have stressed before, the credibility of
the United Nations will be greatly undermined by
ineffective peacekeeping capabilities anywhere around
the world. Unfortunately, I think there are a few
incidents that can be pointed to in that regard.

and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat in
addressing the challenges of peacekeeping in a spirit of
partnership, cooperation and mutual trust.
Thirdly, the challenges of multidimensional
peacekeeping, as we have seen in recent times, clearly
require a collective effort. The ongoing efforts by the
United Nations to strengthen partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations on matters of peace,
security and development are commendable. We call
on the Security Council to continue to support regional
initiatives and to strengthen their capacity to contribute
to efforts to maintain international peace and security.
We have seen the important role and contribution of
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in
peacekeeping and conflict resolution.
Fourthly, as the 2005 World Summit recognized,
development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The chances
for promoting durable peace in conflict or postconflict countries are bolstered through tangible peace
dividends such as the provision of basic services and
an improvement in the standards of living of affected
populations.
Incorporating peacebuilding activities and tasks,
such as support in building national capacities and quickimpact projects, during the early stages of peacekeeping
is therefore critical for success. We also underscore the
need for closer coordination among affected countries,
peacekeeping missions, United Nations country teams
and development actors in laying the foundations for
durable peace, stability and development. In particular,
greater attention needs to be given to building national
capacities and institutions in critical areas such as
security sector reform, law and order, the judiciary and
the civil service, in order to enable a smooth transition
when peacekeeping missions depart.
Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the selfless men
and women who serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions around the world, often in dangerous and
hostile situations, for their dedication and courage.
We remember and honour those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the search for peace and in serving
humankind.

Secondly, we call for enhanced engagement and
cooperation among the Security Council, the troop13-21043

53

S/PV.6903

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the convening of this Security Council
debate on a multidimensional approach to peacekeeping
operations. In many ways, this subject reflects the
interest that your Government, Mr. President, attaches
to this essential mission of the Organization.
Peacekeeping
operations
have
contributed
immeasurably to the work of building viable peace,
from the adoption of resolution 50 (1948), which
established the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in Palestine, to the adoption of resolution
2085 (2012), which authorized the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali.
Therefore, from a simple ceasefire observer force,
peacekeeping operations have evolved and changed,
depending upon the circumstances, into missions
seeking to re-establish, impose or build peace.
Because of those profound changes, it has become
crucial to re-evaluate missions in all their aspects. The
appearance of new threats to international peace and
security — such as terrorism, transnational organized
crime, an increase in the number of internal conflicts,
which provide fertile grounds for human rights
violations, and the terrible effects of poverty — has led
us to rethink the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
and rightly so.
For peacekeeping operations to be successful, all the
parameters that have an impact on the achievement of
lasting peace must be taken into account, as highlighted
in several reports, particularly the report of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change entitled
“A more secure world: our shared responsibility”
(see A/59/565). Over and above the original mandate
of ensuring security in order to help rebuild defence
forces and facilitate humanitarian aid, we must add to
the responsibilities of peacekeeping operations those of
promoting human rights, supporting political processes
until strong institutions that can ensure democracy
and the rule of law are put in place, and supporting
the economic reconstruction of the country, without
forgetting the fight against certain pandemics.
The political process on which the viability of
any peace work depends must remain inclusive and
representative of the various social elements that are
involved in a conflict. We saw a perfect illustration
of that in Timor-Leste, where the United Nations

54

Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) succeeded
in organizing free and transparent presidential and
legislative elections by working effectively with all
parties involved in the crisis. The success of UNMIT
is all the more exemplary because the security sector
reform it undertook, particularly of the police, remains
a perfect illustration of the capacities of the young
Timorese nation to take responsibility for that important
aspect of its future.
I must also highlight the crucial role played by
the protection of human rights and the provision of
humanitarian assistance in maintaining security and
restoring a climate conducive to peace. Human rights
violations, especially of women and children, have
no place in peace processes, which are already so
fragile. The fight against impunity must not therefore
be sacrificed on the altar of national reconciliation.
It should instead contribute to the establishment of a
new society based on respect for human dignity and
the obligation to provide justice to all its members. In
addition, there is the immense and daunting challenge
of economic reconstruction, whose success would allow
for the avoidance of any relapse into hostilities, which
may be sought by those who may feel marginalized by
the restoration of peace.
The review of this multidimensional approach
also gives me an opportunity to welcome the option of
cooperation with subregional organizations to establish
hybrid forces, as well as the concept of inter-mission
cooperation, which allows troops to be shared among
several theatres of operation. That reflects the full extent
and complexity of the deployment of peacekeeping
missions.
Well aware of the various threats to collective
peace and security and convinced of the need for action,
since achieving national sovereignty, my country has
placed peacekeeping at the heart of its foreign policy.
Perpetuating that tradition for the good of world peace,
the Senegalese defence and security forces are currently
contributing 2,113 troops to a number of theatres of
operation, including Darfur, Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and South
Sudan. As the fourteenth largest contributor of troops
to peacekeeping operations and the fourth largest
police-contributor, Senegal reaffirms its commitment
to a world free of the spectre of war and reiterates its
faith in the ideals of peace that are at the foundation of
the Organization.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to thank the
Pakistani presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this timely open debate on a very important
topic and for the opening remarks. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2086 (2013) this morning. We
remain confident that the recommendations and remarks
outlined in this debate will contribute to enhancing the
effectiveness of this important tool and in highlighting
the relevance of a multidimensional approach.
My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
As contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1960, Tunisia attaches great
importance to the United Nations peacekeeping and its
fundamental role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Tunisian troops and, since recently,
police deployed on United Nations missions have
earned high regards thanks to their performance in
difficult conditions and environments.
As the nature of threats to international peace and
security has changed over decades, so have the challenges
facing peacekeeping missions. Conflicts have changed
in nature and are today mostly linked to the incapacity
of State institutions to deliver and perform effectively.
Once limited to protecting boundaries from potential
threats, peacekeeping troops are nowadays deployed
to protect State institutions and civilians. Intra-State
conflicts and the challenge of providing more effective
and sustainable responses have led to an expansion in
the scope and mandates of peacekeeping.
The new responsibilities, which go beyond the
nature of its political and military roles, highlight the
strong link between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and their increased complementarity. It is widely
asserted that they are mutually reinforcing.
Alhough not prevalent at the time that the Charter
of the United Nations was drafted, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding reflect the spirit of collective efforts
enshrined in that Charter. In that spirit, we need
to continue to work on our common vision for postconflict scenarios. We need to carry on in our task of
grasping the linkages between development, peace and
security, and to suggest solutions. Our objective is to
secure smooth transitions to lasting peace, security and
sustainable development.
13-21043

The United Nations must play the central role
in securing a common peacebuilding vision and in
bringing together the various actors, including national
authorities and development actors. Peacekeeping
should be conducted within a coherent, precise and
realistic mandate. In that regard, permanent assessment
and coordination should be continuously undertaken
with the Peacebuilding Commission, regional and
subregional organizations and international funds and
programmes to ensure a coherent passage to a postconflict situation. In that regard, my delegation would
like to reiterate the outstanding role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in providing policy guidance and strategies
in post-conflict peacebuilding activities.
To date, peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
are ever better at taking into account realities on the
ground. In that regard, we would like to put emphasis
on the importance of women’s participation and of
language skills, among other requirements, to ensure
smooth interactions with populations at the grass roots.
Collective efforts require the full participation of
troop-contributing countries in formulating policies
and decision-making to ensure the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. Also, countries that generally face economic
and financial constraints should not bear the burden of
providing troops and financing them. It is extremely
important that the issue of the unresolved reimbursement
of troop costs be addressed as soon as possible.
Tunisia strongly supports the role and relevance
of regional organizations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The African Union in particular
is strengthening its capacities for post-conflict
peacebuilding. That should be strongly supported by
the international community. Peacebuilding actors,
including financial institutions, should play a significant
role in that regard. It is also the responsibility of the
international community as a whole to provide the
required resources. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations last for decades and require the appropriate
level of resources over extended periods.
My delegation would like to stress that Tunisia,
with its vast experience in peacekeeping, spanning
more than 50 years, remains fully committed to actively
contributing to peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
and stands ready to contribute further troops and
expertise, guided by the ideals and purposes of the
United Nations.

55

S/PV.6903

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties to
the conflict, impartiality and the non-use of force.

Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate
to interact and share our vision of peacekeeping and
its noble objectives and to highlight our collective
commitment to the cause of international and
regional peace. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his genuine efforts aimed at
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Security Council
should further strengthen the rule of law and advance
development initiatives by supporting peacebuilding
mechanisms such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
which helps countries emerging from conflict in their
recovery and reintegration efforts aimed at preventing a
relapse into armed conflict and at building a sustainable
peace through effective peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding strategies.

Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
of behalf of the European Union. However, we would
also like to make some remarks in our national capacity.
Since 1948, United Nations peacekeeping has
evolved into a dynamic mechanism for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Today, it plays an
indispensible role in creating conditions for building
lasting peace and development in many conflict-prone
societies.
Armenia believes that the larger objective of
peacefully resolving conflicts and achieving durable
settlements can best be achieved only through a
comprehensive approach, including a considerable
investment in prevention, political facilitation and
mediation within internationally agreed forums. In that
regard, there is a need to reassess the ways in which the
United Nations and other regional organizations engage
in assisting countries emerging from conflict. We must
uphold the principle of “do no harm” and review how
we operate in different situations to ensure that our
actions do not undermine the existing mediation and
negotiation processes.
We share the views expressed by Council members
and other speakers that call for more systematic attention
to the United Nations peacekeeping dimension as
well as to post-conflict peacebuilding, and we believe
that it should be frequently reflected in the Council’s
deliberations.
This open debate offers an opportunity to consider
some of the core issues related to the peacekeeping
agenda, namely, the political dimensions of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the relationship
between security and development.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are also
viewed as vital to building peace in post-conflict
situations through the promotion of compliance
with international norms and the basic principles of

56

It is noteworthy that the Peacebuilding Commission
has shouldered an important task for the United
Nations peacekeeping dimension in defining postconflict strategies, and we are encouraged that previous
reports indicate that it has registered achievements and
satisfactory results in some countries.
It is also important that the programmes adopted
be country-specific, needs-based and target-oriented,
so as to ensure continued adherence from the affected
population and to ensure their success.
Armenia joins previous speakers in reiterating the
need for the equal and effective participation of women
at all stages of the peace process and their involvement
in conflict prevention and resolution and the transition
from conflict to peace. Female peacekeepers act as
role models in the local environment, improving,
inter alia, access and support for local women and
contributing to empowering women in the community.
Such contributions lead to better outcomes for entire
societies.
In conclusion, allow me to pay special tribute to the
tens of thousands of Blue Helmets who over the years
have served the cause of peace under the United Nations
banner. Armenia applauds their professionalism,
dedication and sacrifice, which have been instrumental
in bringing peace, stability and hope to millions of
people affected by conflict worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, may I say how warmly my
delegation welcomes your initiative in convening this
open debate in the Security Council on the theme
“Peacekeeping in the United Nations: a multidimensional
approach”. In today’s world, this is key to understanding

13-21043

S/PV.6903

not only the international context but also the scope
of the collective security endeavour undertaken by
the United Nations, through this principal organ, and
how countries that have moved from conflict towards
peacebuilding, such as El Salvador, can contribute to
such efforts.
We also align ourselves with the statement made
earlier by Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil,
the Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The High-Level Plenary Meeting of United Nations
heads of State and Government held in 2005 was a
major step forward for our Organization in terms of
its conception and strategic vision of the form, content
and deployment of peacekeeping operations, including
lessons learned on the ground from a series of conflicts,
including the one in my country, El Salvador, through
the United Nations Mission in El Salvador.
That qualitative improvement was bolstered by the
decision to establish the Peacebuilding Commission,
a hybrid body in terms of composition, but one with
a very broad strategic vision that creates bridges
and communication channels within countries that
are emerging from conflict and are embarking on a
peacebuilding process, and subsequently, in a dynamic
and dialectical manner, focuses on development as
the only means of addressing the structural causes of
conflict and achieving sustainable development.
In a context of multipolarity, the varied crises
throughout the world, which have a negative impact
on the well-being of peoples and nations, such as the
international economic and financial crisis, which
began in 2008 and whose effects are clear in various
parts of the world; the environmental crisis, at whose
heart lie the devastating effects of climate change and
which is also contributing to increasing the vulnerability
of small countries; the political changes taking place
within medium- and high-income countries in various
parts of the world, which also have major geopolitical
and geostrategic implications at the global level; and
the global impact of phenomena such as international
migration and other complex issues related to the
unlawful trafficking and sale of drugs and arms, as well
as the impact of transnational organized crime — all
of these mean that the multidimensional approach to
peacekeeping is an extremely important tool in the
context of collective security.

13-21043

Moreover, we should give thought to the necessity
and importance of moving forward with reform of
the Security Council. This is an extremely important
issue that ties in directly with the vision and the short-,
medium- and long-term strategic objectives that have
been defined for the deployment of peacekeeping
operations.
In our delegation’s view, the time has come to
consider peacekeeping operations from a broadbased, holistic angle that from the outset includes the
traditional components of peacekeeping operations,
but that is combined with a strategic mandate that
makes it possible to involve, insofar as the situation on
the ground allows, the components of peacebuilding
and sustainable development, including the gender
perspective and the empowerment of women, who
are essential to the achievement of stability, peace,
freedom and the development in countries emerging
from conflict.
Moreover, that vision should have an institutional
expression within the United Nations system, which
should be reflected in a greater interaction and
collaboration between the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly and
the agencies, funds and programmes for development.
Lastly, it is important to stress that the conceptual
evolution of peacekeeping operations, again from a
broad-based, holistic perspective, should contribute
to enhancing collective security in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world, for the
benefit of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to thank the delegation of Pakistan
for having organized today’s debate on United Nations
peacekeeping, and to welcome the participation of
Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan.
The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement delivered by the Egyptian delegation on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
United Nations peacekeeping missions embody
one of the best examples of nations coming together
for peace and security, in keeping with the objectives
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. Today,
United Nations peacekeepers are one of the most
widely recognized elements of the United Nations.

57

S/PV.6903

Over the years, we have seen an evolution in United
Nations peacekeeping, from a traditional role to
a multidimensional one that includes aspects of
peacebuilding and even of peace enforcement.
We strongly believe that the performance and
direction of United Nations peacekeeping operations
should be reviewed at regular intervals to maintain focus
on priorities, the fundamental principles of the United
Nations, the goals of Member States and realities on the
ground. We should not permit peacekeeping missions
to get bogged down under outdated frameworks. We
hope that this open debate will help us to focus on
the evolving relationship between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
As early peacebuilders, peacekeepers can play a
crucial role in the transition phase to prevent a relapse into
conflict by bolstering basic safety and security elements,
providing essential services, institution-building and
economic revitalization. Peacekeeping should not be
treated as a substitute for addressing the root causes of
conflict, as violent armed conflict may originate due
to a range of different reasons. It should be considered
only as an effective tool to create an environment
conducive to addressing the causal issues in a coherent,
well-planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner,
by implementing appropriate political solutions and
development strategies.
Many conflicts are rooted in economic deprivation,
marginalization and a lack of opportunity. If the goals
of peacekeeping are to be realized, those aspects also
need to be addressed.
In their role as early peacebuilders, United Nations
peacekeepers have to be aware of peacebuilding
challenges from the inception of a mission. Peacekeepers
should be deployed only after careful assessment of a
conflict situation. The ultimate goal of peacekeeping
should be to build peace and the national capacities
and institutional capabilities of the affected countries
to enable them to manage their own affairs without
outside interference. Once the basic framework for
peace has been created and a framework established for
addressing the root causes, an exit strategy must exist
for the withdrawal of peacekeepers. There should be
no hasty withdrawal of peacekeepers, as has happened
in some instances. Exit strategies must be developed
carefully, inter alia by keeping in mind the safety of
peacekeepers. A successful transition can be guaranteed

58

only through developing clear, credible and achievable
mandates.
Well-trained and experienced military and police
can play a vital role in peacebuilding. It is important
that the criteria for the selection of peacekeeping troops
remain at the level of their proven and recognized
professionalism and integrity.
The equipment necessary for missions must be
provided from all available sources. We are surprised
that equipment is still an issue.
We pay tribute to the many peacekeepers and
associated staff who have sacrificed their lives in the
line of duty over the years.
Sri Lanka firmly believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be conducted by
respecting fundamental principles. The consent
of the parties, impartiality and sensitivity to local
circumstances are central in that regard. Any
peacekeeping mission must reflect respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States.
The development of peacekeeping policies and
strategies should take place through intergovernmental
processes. Cooperation between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop contributors is integral to
the successful completion of peacekeeping mandates.
We affirm the role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as the central body responsible
for policy development. In our view, despite their
shortcomings, United Nations peacekeeping operations
remain vastly superior — in terms of effectiveness
and efficiency — to other alternatives. Diversified and
multidimensional mandates are key, as they enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We hope that this debate will also focus on
the importance of providing adequate resources to
peacekeeping missions to carry out their mandates.
We stress that resource gaps and issues related to
reimbursement for peacekeepers should be resolved in
a way that does not unduly burden troop-contributing
countries, some of which are in fact subsidizing the
United Nations.
From the planning stage until actual deployment, it
is imperative to have close consultations on and careful
evaluation of the resource gaps. All stakeholders in

13-21043

S/PV.6903

the peacekeeping partnership need to work together to
deliver the best results.

United Nations and in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka is pleased to reiterate
its continued commitment to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We are honoured to have
been able to serve with other Member States in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We continue training and assessment of peacekeepers
in Sri Lanka in an effort to uphold the highest standards
of peacekeeping.

We note that in recent years — especially given the
changing nature of conflicts and the complex demands
of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
national reconstruction — the traditional role of United
Nations peacekeeping, which had hitherto focused
on the strict observance of ceasefires, has given way
to much more complex and multitasked operations.
Today, peacekeeping has become a multidimensional
endeavour in which a variety of objectives are
pursued at the same time. No doubt, that has added
a huge burden to the United Nations and requires
considerable funding to operate successfully. Not only
that, peacekeeping contingents must now include a
variety of actors — from civilian advisers to police and
military personnel — who not only enforce the peace
but also undertake reconstruction, reconciliation and
the restoration of institutions. There is also no doubt
that that informed the wisdom behind the Security
Council’s decision to include peacebuilding as part of
the overall mandate of peacekeeping operations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, my delegation
wishes to express its profound appreciation to your
delegation, Sir, for convening this important debate
on United Nations multidimensional peacekeeping.
We thank your Government for allowing your Foreign
Secretary to preside over this debate. We also thank His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon for providing a briefing
on this important topic.
We have the honour to associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by the Egyptian delegation on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Peacekeeping is not only about separating warring
parties or enforcing a ceasefire; it is also about
strengthening State capacities to provide security and
meet development needs. Peacekeeping, therefore,
along with peacemaking and peacebuilding, is also
an investment in keeping millions of people alive, as
was rightly observed by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in his report entitled “In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all” (A/59/2005).
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
Nigeria shall continue to show an active interest in
all matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to contribute to the endeavours
of the United Nations in that area.
Nigeria’s peacekeeping contingents have served in
many lines and climes since our independence in 1960,
and have brought comfort and security to countless
numbers of innocent civilians in many countries. We
pledge to continue our constructive engagement with
the United Nations in upholding the Charter of the

13-21043

It is our considered view that, as much as it has
become necessary — indeed essential — for the
international community to undertake peacekeeping
operations, it must still be our understanding that
conflicts and wars are unacceptable, and that they
should as much as possible be prevented from breaking
out in the first place. We would like to see the world’s
resources, especially those of the United Nations,
focused on preventing conflicts from breaking out. We
believe that more resources should be dedicated to the
prevention, rather than the amelioration, of conflicts.
We also deem it important that the United Nations
develop full capacities to monitor all global hotspots
likely to degenerate into hostilities, take timely action
to prevent outbreaks. However, since peacekeeping
is still necessary, and indeed an indispensable factor
in the work of the United Nations, we believe that the
following issues should be noted in all such activities.
First is the establishment of interlocking systems
of peacekeeping capacities that will enable the United
Nations and regional organizations, such as the African
Union, to work together. Also, reserve capacities should
be created to be tapped by both the United Nations and
regional partners.
Secondly, we should increase the civilian
components in mandates of all peacekeeping operations,

59

S/PV.6903

in order to enhance post-conflict reconstruction, a
deepening of security sector reform and the rebuilding
of civilian institutions.
Thirdly, we should increase both the monitoring
and oversight capacities of Member States and of the
Secretariat in all peacekeeping operations, to ensure
the observance of the rule of law and the rules of proper
conduct by members of contingents.
Fourthly, we should work to include local peace
resources, such as women’s groups, youth and civil
society organizations, religious leaders, traditional
rulers and other community and grass-roots leaders,
among others, as integral parts of all peacekeeping
operations.
Fifthly, we should provide adequate resources to the
Secretariat to undertake better organized and resultsoriented integrated peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions.
Finally, it is the view of my delegation that
troop-contributing countries with vast experience
should be considered for peacekeeping missions with
peacebuilding tasks in their mandates. The accumulated
expertise gathered in previous operations will make
them prepared to adequately face the challenges and
achieve the desired specific objectives of mandates. In
addition, such troop-contributing countries require little
or no predeployment training on the implementation of
enhanced mandates, thereby saving the United Nations
and the world at large a substantial amount of financial
and material resources.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I will be brief. My
delegation joins other representatives, Mr. President,
in congratulating you on assuming the presidency of
the Council. We also commend you for scheduling this
important debate on United Nations peacekeeping. The
concept paper you circulated, on the theme “United
Nations peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach”
(S/2013/4, annex), has been very helpful in guiding
our deliberations today. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful statement on this
important subject.
While my delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil,
Permanent Representative of Egypt, on behalf of the

60

Non-Aligned Movement, I would like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.
The nature and scope of United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved over the years
since the first deployment, in 1948. That evolution has
come with challenges and complexities. In order to
overcome challenges and meet the changing demands,
the creation of conditions enabling the success of
missions is essential at an early stage. Similarly, the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, must at all times muster the necessary political
will to a send clear message expressing its resolve to
act.
It is our conviction that peace is a cornerstone to the
foundation of sustainable development. It is therefore
essential that it be promoted and that, whenever it is
in danger, efforts be made to maintain and preserve it.
While each operation is unique, hard lessons from past
experiences can serve as guides in new operations to
avoid repeating past mistakes.
While peacekeeping continues to be an essential
means of assisting people in conflict areas suffering
from the scourge of war, strong emphasis should be
placed on prevention and peacebuilding. Once conflict
is resolved, the task of peacebuilding is equally
challenging. It often requires a number of corrective
measures by weighing reconciliation on the scales of
justice. Such efforts require well-trained, disciplined
and motivated personnel.
Regional and subregional organizations are equally
important partners in solving conflicts throughout
the world, as provided for under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore important
to strengthen the early-warning capacity of regional
organizations to monitor and detect potential conflicts
and contain them before they become full-blown.
The contribution of women in peacekeeping
operations requires special acknowledgement. Often,
women in peacekeeping missions serve as a source
of inspiration to women and girls in conflict-ridden
parts of the world. On its part, Namibia has heeded the
Secretary-General’s call by nominating women to serve
in various United Nations peacekeeping missions.
While many conflicts today are between local
actors, external actors must refrain from fuelling
conflicts and instead use their influence to assist in
finding amicable solutions to conflicts. That is why
Namibia believes in respect for the sovereign equality
13-21043

S/PV.6903

of all States. That principle constitutes a pillar of
international law, and indeed serves as the bedrock of
peaceful relations among nations.
Namibia was a beneficiary of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission between April 1989 and March
1990, when the United Nations Transitional Assistance
Group (UNTAG), composed of peacekeepers and
monitors from many parts of the world, assisted in
its transition to independence. Our experience has
demonstrated the importance of national ownership of
peacebuilding and the responsibility to guard it. The
success of UNTAG’s mission also stimulated a sense of
responsibility for Namibia to play its modest role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation wishes to highlight the importance
of enhancing cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
We believe that that will contribute to an inclusive and
informed decision-making process that could positively
impact ongoing peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, let me also take this opportunity to
pay special tribute to the men and women from many
nations, including your own country of Pakistan,
Mr. President, who sacrificed their lives in the line
of duty while trying to bring peace to conflict-ridden
parts of the world. As we speak today, there are still
many peacekeepers on various missions trying their
best to make the world a better and more secure place
for us to live in. It is not an easy task. Yet, in the face
of multiple challenges, they always show an enduring
determination to bring hope to people in despair and
to put a smile on the faces of children in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also commend you on your
initiative to organize this important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent briefing
this morning on the issue under consideration.
Insightful statements have been made today on
the question of the maintenance of our collective
security, which is indeed the basis for the existence of
the Security Council. My delegation associates itself
with the statements made on behalf of those groups
of which my country is a member, in particular that

13-21043

made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by the
representative of Egypt. My statement will therefore be
brief. Allow me first to address various aspects of the
issue of peacekeeping in the light of the development,
many years after the establishment of the United
Nations, of crisis situations that threaten international
peace and security.
Today we cannot talk about durable peacekeeping
without the mobilization of international resources
aimed at dealing with problems of good governance,
internal security and terrorism. Young democracies are
often destabilized by terrorist movements masquerading
as political or armed opposition. Beyond its traditional
mission, the United Nations is called on to support
democratically elected Powers and to strengthen
States’ capacity to avoid the pitfalls that can lead to
the collapse of a fragile peace in those countries. It is
those collapses that may pose threats to regional and
international peace and security. It is clear that such
authorities, often transitional ones, must demonstrate
the political will to settle their internal political and
social crises.
Yes to zero tolerance, but, realistically, we must
recognize that it is no less true that it is essential that
the international community show leniency to those
authorities so as not to complicate even further the often
complex and difficult task in which they are dealing
with opponents more interested in grabbing power in
their country than in peacebuilding and economic and
social development.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are also
often very slow to get going, which clashes with the
need in countries and regions dealing with a threat to
peace and security to act effectively and quickly and
to prevent serious developments, and highlights the
importance of regional and subregional organizations
in preventing conflict and keeping the peace. That was
why, at the beginning of December 2012, faced with
the Central African crisis, President Idriss Deby Itno of
Chad, as Acting President of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), acted promptly
in starting a fundamental and vital dialogue in those
circumstances. It was essential to prevent the fighting
from spreading to the capital, by sending Chadian
forces to intervene between the belligerents and create
the conditions necessary for political dialogue. Still
as a matter of urgency, on 21 December, the President
held an emergency session of the Summit Conference
of Heads of State and Government of ECCAS, which

61

S/PV.6903

approved his initiatives and took important decisions
paving the way for a process of peaceful settlement of
the crisis.
On the question of the crisis in Mali, Chad was
granted emergency authorization by the National
Assembly to send to Mali a significant force of some
2,000 men in the context of resolution 2085 (2012),
which authorized deployment of an African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.
Given the time constraints, my delegation will
refrain from expatiating on Chad’s multifaceted
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Nevertheless, we wish to recall that Chad
has a wealth of experience in lessons learned, due to
the internal crises that we have had to overcome and the
external aggressions we have had to deal with, not to
mention the contributions it has made to peacekeeping
operations in the Central African Republic, Haiti, Côte
d’Ivoire, Syria and Darfur.
Finally, we hope that the international community
will help us to bear the burden of providing protection
for refugees in Chad, whom we have hosted with the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad, as well as, in addition, the costs of deploying
our forces in the Central African Republic and Mali.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Ms. Nyamudeza (Zimbabwe): I join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on a multidimensional approach to United
Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping represents one of
the most visible, difficult and critical roles played by
the United Nations.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
My delegation shares the view that peacekeeping is
an essential tool for overcoming threats to international
peace and security and supporting complex transitions
from conflict to stability. Over the years, Zimbabwe has
demonstrated its strong commitment to peacekeeping
operations by contributing troops, police and observers.
It currently has a presence in several United Nations
missions. My delegation will continue to contribute to
the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, whose mandate is to review all aspects of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

62

My delegation is of the view that the legitimacy of
United Nations peacekeeping operations is essential
for their long-term effectiveness. It is of the utmost
importance that peacekeeping missions be conducted
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In addition,
peacekeeping should adhere to the three basic principles
of peacekeeping operations, that is, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. They must
also respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in States’ domestic
matters. In that regard, it is important to provide clearly
defined mandates, a unified line of command and
efficient use of existing resources.
The complexity and challenges faced by United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and the expectations
they generate, are constantly growing. Nonetheless,
there is now clear recognition that various interlinked
factors must be considered in any peace agenda.
Furthermore, comprehensive actions should be taken
with a view not only to establishing peace but to
ensuring its durable consolidation. My delegation is of
the view that it is therefore necessary to seek solutions
to the root causes of conflicts, since peacekeeping is
no substitute for political action and local conciliation.
It is also important that we improve the effectiveness
of the United Nations in addressing conflict at all
stages, from prevention to settlement and post-conflict
peacebuilding.
United Nations peacekeeping has scored several
successes over the years. However, it faces tremendous
challenges as a result of the growth in both the number
and size of its operations, as well as the complex
and multidimensional nature of their mandates.
Furthermore, the current financial challenges
facing Member States, the differing perspectives on
mandated tasks and, in some instances, the loss of
host Government consent, add to the challenges and
pressures on peacekeeping. It is our firm belief that
United Nations peacekeeping operations must have
the necessary resources — in terms of financing,
equipment and personnel — to enable them to achieve
their set mandates and objectives.
It is clear that partnership is the cornerstone of
success in United Nations peacekeeping. The role of
troop-contributing countries in peacekeeping remains
a top priority. We stress the importance of those

13-21043

S/PV.6903

countries’ full participation in policy formulation
and decision-making in order to achieve the
partnership and effectiveness to which United Nations
peacekeeping aspires. Given the size and dynamism of
peacekeeping operations, it is important to have strong
coordination and communication among troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council, the
Secretariat and host Governments.
Furthermore, it is important to reach consensus
among Member States on developing policies and
ensuring that only approaches that have been adopted
by them collectively will be implemented. It is vital to
avoid changing the mandated tasks of peacekeeping
missions without first consulting with troop
contributors. Additionally, the Security Council must
draft a clear and achievable mandate, based on objective
assessments, without rushing to adopt mandates that
lack a political basis or sufficient resources. It is our
view that unjustified expansions in the capacities of
peacekeeping operations could easily blur the line
between peacekeeping and peace enforcement, or even
jeopardize the impartiality of the mission’s military
component. It is also important to have clear exit
strategies for the various missions.
As reflected in Article 52 of the Charter of the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
play a major role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Security Council’s cooperation
with regional organizations is no longer an option
but a necessity. Such cooperation must be based
on the principles of comparative advantage and
complementarity of roles. Since regional organizations
are closer to the conflicts and might understand the
dynamics best, they can play key roles in the areas of
preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, with the timely support of the Security
Council.
In that regard, Zimbabwe applauds the strengthening
of relations between the African Union and the United
Nations, in particular between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. The cooperation between the two
institutions in peacekeeping operations in the Sudan
and Somalia has produced tangible successes. We
commend that level of cooperation and would like to
see it replicated elsewhere as necessary.
Peacekeeping operations play a crucial role in
helping countries to establish the foundations of peace,

13-21043

reduce the risk of backsliding into conflict and lay the
foundations for recovery and long-term development.
We share the view that there will be no sustainable
peace without efforts to fight hunger, poverty and
inequality.
Zimbabwe supports the enhanced integration of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is therefore important
to formulate an integrated and coherent approach to
post-conflict development that builds upon host-country
priorities and that encourages them to get back on their
feet in a sustainable matter. In that regard, we underline
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation in
developing national capacity and mobilizing resources
for institution-building. It is also vital to strengthen the
coordination between peacekeeping operations and the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, including
its agencies, funds and programmes, while acting in
close cooperation with the national authorities of the
State concerned.
The safety and security of peacekeepers is of
paramount importance. We urge the Secretariat and
Security Council to continue to prioritize the issue.
In conclusion, Zimbabwe stresses the value of
partnerships among all stakeholders to ensure the
overall success of United Nations peacekeeping. Only
the international peace and security of all should be our
guide and goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Ajawin (South Sudan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its profound thanks
and appreciation to Pakistan and the members of
the Security Council for convening this important
debate on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping:
a multidimensional approach”. Equally, I would like
personally to extend my Government’s appreciation
and gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
continuous support to my Government in ensuring that
peace, stability and development are realized in our
nascent State.
Since the independence of the Republic of South
Sudan from the Sudan, on 9 July 2011, our nascent
State has confronted enormous nation-building and
development tasks. In addressing issues pertaining
to nation-building and developmental challenges
facing the country, the Government of South Sudan

63

S/PV.6903

and the United Nations embarked immediately on
a peacebuilding support plan. The plan emanated
from resolution 1996 (2011), which mandated the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
elaborate a peacebuilding support plan. Subsequently,
the Secretary-General produced a report with the idea
of putting in operation paragraph 18 of the resolution,
in which the Secretary-General requested his Special
Representative to work with the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan, the United Nations country
team and bilateral and multilateral partners, including
the World Bank, to produce a plan for United Nations
system support for specific peacebuilding tasks.
The underlying objective of the plan was to
undertake security sector reform, police institutional
development, the rule of law, justice sector support,
human rights, capacity-building, early recovery, the
formulation of national policies related to key issues
of State-building, development and establishing a
conducive environment for economic development that
would be consistent with national priorities, with a view
to contributing to producing a common framework for
monitoring progress in those areas. Some measurable
progress has been achieved one year after UNMISS
began operations in South Sudan. Nevertheless, much
remains to be done, especially in the following areas.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians, in
the past year my country witnessed an unwarranted and
unprovoked attack by the Government of the Republic
of the Sudan, in particular aerial bombardment and
other border incursions. Those aggressions led to many
civilian casualties, especially among innocent women
and children. Although the duty of civilian protection
is one of the Government’s priorities, my Government
would like to see a more robust mechanism put in place
by UNMISS to protect vulnerable civilians from aerial
bombardment.
Secondly, with regard to communication and
coordination with the Government, my Government
understands that communication and coordination
with UNMISS is of critical importance, especially in
achieving the objectives set out in the mandate. The
issue of the movement of UNMISS personnel across
the country is critical. The lack of such communication
with the Government and security organs sometimes
results in potentially dangerous situations.
Allow my delegation to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to the Government of the

64

Russian Federation and to the families of the crew
involved in the helicopter incident that took place in
Jonglei on 21 December 2012. We assure them that the
Government of South Sudan is carrying out a fair and
credible investigation into the incident. We await its
findings.
Thirdly, concerning the issue of infrastructure,
UNMISS has managed to achieved some progress
in infrastructure development. Nevertheless, my
Government believes that it is equally important that
the Mission achieve more in the area of infrastructure
development, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects, with UNMISS operational sites at the country
level, such as police facilities and community centres.
Given the impassibility of roads in South Sudan, we
encourage UNMISS to construct more accessible roads
at the national, state, and local Government levels.
Fourthly, with regard to the rule of law, the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan appreciates
the work of UNMISS, especially in the areas pertaining
to the rule of law. However, to achieve greater success
and measurable progress in that area, UNMISS should
consider, first, the need for greater support and capacitybuilding for judges and legal advisers and, secondly,
the fact that our police forces need to be certified for
international recognition so as to be able to participate
in regional coordination events.
In conclusion, the experience of UNMISS in South
Sudan has been an enriching one and will continue to
be so. It has enormously helped our Government to
overcome many of the teething problems associated
with a country’s emergence from the post-conflict
stage. To improve the effectiveness of UNMISS under
its Chapter VII mandate, it would be prudent for the
Security Council and the Government of South Sudan
to continue building on what has been achieved so
far, while working on the gaps and challenges that the
Government has identified with regard to the operation
of the Mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. I would also like to thank you for
organizing today’s important debate, as well as to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. Montenegro
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2086 (2013).

13-21043

S/PV.6903

My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would,
however, like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Following the trend of change in the nature of
conflict and in the dynamics of global security, as
well as the more demanding conditions in which
peacekeepers operate, the concept of peacekeeping
has been evolving and, as a result, we have seen a
shift from traditional to modern and more complex
peacekeeping, with a truly multidimensional character.
With their diversified mandates and vast array of tasks,
peacekeeping operations carry out crucial work in
countries emerging from conflict in order to pave the
way for post-conflict peacebuilding, the prevention of
the recurrence of armed conflict, and a move towards
sustainable peace and development.
What is needed to meet that challenging objective
and build more resilient States is a strategic and
coordinated vision and planning, within the framework
of an integrated and coherent overall approach that
effectively and efficiently incorporates and combines
many different aspects of mutually enforcing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, starting at
the earliest initiation stages. Significant progress has
been made so far in developing the nexus between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Incorporating
a peacebuilding perspective in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, thereby contributing to
supporting priority peacebuilding areas, has come
a long way. We should continue to build on it, in
accordance with the relevant strategy of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Services and while following the priorities of host
countries in order to ensure national ownership.
The involvement, active engagement and, most
important, close cooperation and collaboration of a wide
range of the stakeholders involved is of the utmost priority
in ensuring complementarity and comprehensiveness in
the pursuit of lasting peace and stability. Of particular
importance in that context is the need to promote the
work to more clearly define and identify everyone’s role
and responsibility so that the contribution of every actor
is optimized. Close partnerships and the system-wide
cohesion of United Nations bodies and other elements
of the larger United Nations system and its growing
connection with regional, subregional and other
international organizations represent an irreplaceable
tool for the success of peacekeeping operations in their

13-21043

peacebuilding tasks. It is equally important that we aim
for the enhancement of integration and coordination
between host Governments and international partners.
Institution-building and capacity development
in peacekeeping mandates, in particular in the fields
of justice, security and enforcement, are critical
components of peacebuilding that enable host countries
to effectively tackle post-conflict situations and
challenges, especially in the area of the rule of law. In
that vein, the civilian capacities initiative represents
a good and useful example of enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and its Member States
to expand the pool of relevant civilian experts in
peacekeeping operations to support the immediate
capacity-development needs of countries emerging
from conflict.
I also want to underline that women have to
be included as active participants in peacekeeping
missions and in all peacebuilding activities, including
in decision-making roles, because we know that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes involving
the participation of women have a better chance to
succeed. The protection of civilians, especially women
and children, is another area that I believe is central for
the restoration of security and, as such, has to be taken
into account throughout the lifecycle of a peacekeeping
operation.
Montenegro greatly appreciates the importance
and role of United Nations peacekeeping as a flagship
activity of the Organization and a vital instrument in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Although it is a small country with limited capacities,
Montenegro is firmly commited and determined to
contribute actively and constructively to the noble
cause of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with a
view to securing sustainable peace around the globe.
My country continuously enhances its participation
and contribution in that regard and will make further
contributions in line with international efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
express our appreciation for the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, Foreign Secretary of
Pakistan, as he presided over the debate this morning. I
commend your efforts, Mr. President, as the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, as well as those of your
able team, in preparing the comprehensive concept note

65

S/PV.6903

(S/2013/4, annex) and in the adoption of resolution 2086
(2013), both of which highlight the issues and challenges
that need more attention. The convening of today’s
debate and the adoption of the resolution are a clear
reflection of the longstanding exemplary commitment
of Pakistan to United Nations peacekeeping efforts
throughout the world. I would also like to also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Peacekeeping operations play a critical role in
supporting a country in providing a better future for
all its inhabitants. Such operations may have different
functions, depending on the unique circumstances
of each host country. Security is a precondition for
development, and development generates more security.
Therefore, although assisting a country in creating a
physically more secure environment is one of its primary
tasks, supporting national peacebuilding efforts
should lie at the heart of peacekeeping operations. We
therefore welcome the concept of peacekeepers being
early peacebuilders.
Over the past year or so, the Secretariat and the
Security Council have spent considerable time and
energy in developing a new conceptual framework for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. Thanks to
those efforts, we now have a better and more thorough
understanding of those issues. In particular, the
clarification of the nexus between peacebuilding and
peacekeeping was highly useful and important.
Peacemaking should also be added to that nexus.
We believe that it is essential to use all three tools within
a coherent, integrated and strategic framework, in order
to achieve sustainability. Turkey placed particular
emphasis on those issues during its membership of the
Council in 2009-2010, including by holding a summitlevel meeting in September 2010 (see S/PV.6390), and
an informal retreat for the members of the Council in
Istanbul, in June 2010, on this subject. Together with
Finland and the Group of Friends of Mediation, we
are currently working on how to further the concept
of mediation in all stages of conflicts, including in the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding phases.
Now that we have a better conceptual framework
and a better understanding of the interlinkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the next step should
be to concentrate on translating that framework into
concrete action, both in the Security Council and in
the field. In that regard, producing clear and achievable
mandates and adjusting them as needed to reflect
changing circumstances is necessary for successful
66

outcomes. Actively supporting national authorities
in building their capacities is essential, particularly
when we take into account the fact that peacebuilding
is primarily a national responsibility. Accordingly, we
welcome the civilian capacities initiative.
Furthermore, as peacekeeping missions are
economic forces in their own right, it is important to
further strengthen their link with local economies.
Indeed, that is a peacebuilding measure in itself. On the
other hand, we have to be realistic and recognize the
fact that there is considerable local resentment, reaction
and opposition to peacekeeping missions. One of the
priorities of any peacekeeping mission should be to win
the hearts and minds of local populations, which can
primarily be achieved by demonstrating the path to a
better future. In that regard, carefully addressing root
causes is to the benefit of the international community
at large.
Ensuring coordination and coherence within the
United Nations, including through the exchange of
information and consultation among the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
is clearly a prerequisite not only for a more effective
outcome in New York, but on the ground as well.
Partnerships are equally important. Actors with
similar peacekeeping and peacebuilding capabilities,
especially regional and subregional organizations,
should be supported. Such streamlining could also be
viewed as a sound investment in a time of austerity.
In addition, there is also a need for more regionally
coordinated approaches. The involvement of regional
stakeholders will increase the chances of success
and the sustainability of peacebuilding efforts, even
after the peacekeeping missions have completed their
mandates.
The peacebuilding element of peacekeeping
operations is also important during the transition and
withdrawal phases. We must ensure that transition
from a peacekeeping setting will not lead to a loss
of interest in and support for the relevant country.
Ironically, many peacebuilding tasks are needed even
more after the withdrawal stage. Therefore, when
peacekeeping contingents are being scaled down, the
level of support for peacebuilding tasks should not
dwindle. If the conditions for preventing a relapse are
not properly established and sustained, it will ultimately
be impossible to avoid duplication or the wasting of
precious human and material resources.

13-21043

S/PV.6903

Last but not least, let me also underline the
importance of mainstreaming women’s participation
in all stages of the peace process. We welcome the
increasing awareness within the United Nations
system and among Member States of the importance
of removing the constraints on such participation,
and look forward to seeing further enhancement in
the role of women in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding endeavours.
Before concluding, I wish to pay homage to the men
and women serving as Blue Helmets, and to express our
condolences for the peacekeepers who have sacrificed
their lives in the line of duty.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I would like to offer you my heartfelt congratulations
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for having organized
today’s open debate on peacekeeping operations. I
would like to pay particular tribute to you for having
been kind enough to preside over today’s debate
yourself. The contribution of the Secretary-General to
today’s debate was a very edifying contribution as well.
Peacekeeping operations are a crucial aspect
of the work of the United Nations in exercising its
responsibilities. The international community has made
much progress in adapting that precious instrument to
changing challenges and threats to international peace
and security. At the current stage of its development, the
main issues facing peacekeeping remain how to balance
mandates for missions and the resources available to
them with the challenges they face, and how to ensure
complementarity between conventional peacekeeping
activities and assistance measures designed to allow
host countries of peacekeeping operations to swiftly
reach a level of stability and normality. The forces
deployed would thereby be able to withdraw at the right
time, and the transition towards development in the
context of autonomous governance could begin.
On the first point, it is important to continue to
consider the possibility of providing peacekeeping
operations with robust mandates and high-tech
equipment, enabling them to address situations that
require such measures. Such situations are increasingly
encountered in the theatre of operations, in particular
when there is a need to protect civilians from imminent
violence and to monitor and enforce embargoes.

13-21043

On the second point, it is important to harmonize
security measures with efforts to rebuild and strengthen
national institutions, which are the main vehicles for
peacebuilding. In order to be sustainable, those national
institutions must be founded on a fair division of power
among the different parts of society, and they must be
inclusive. The configuration of peacekeeping operations
should respond to the nature of the challenges faced.
The relative clout of their various component should
depend on the challenges faced in the various stages, as
the situation on the ground returns to normal.
The definition of strategic priorities and the followup to their implementation should be undertaken in a
coordinated manner through ongoing dialogue between
the authorities of the country and the relevant head of
the mission or Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in order to enable full national ownership of
the normalization process. The development of the
nature and orientation of the mission must take into
consideration the actions most necessary at each stage.
The relevant decisions should be taken in conjunction
with the national authorities.
The comparative advantages of peacekeeping
operations should be harnessed to increase
the effectiveness of measures taken and their
implementation. Such effectiveness depends on the
ability of the mission to transfer the necessary knowhow and expertise to national structures to enable
them to fully play their role in the functioning of
the State apparatuse. However, the manner in which
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures for former combatants are carried out is also
important in this respect, as is the manner in which the
basis for economic recovery is laid out. The procurement
policies of peacekeeping operations should contribute
to that recovery.
On another note, a degree of continuity should be
ensured in the work of the international community in
terms of the leadership of the mission. The completion
of military operations should involve the departure of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
who led the mission in the first phase of its activities.
That departure should enable the Deputy Special
Representative to be promoted to head of the mission
to manage the peacebuilding phase. The key role of
the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral is to prepare reforms in the context of longterm peacebuilding by identifying the problems and
challenges to be faced and assisting the country in

67

S/PV.6903

developing a strategic work plan drafted in conjunction
with the country’s authorities and various stakeholders.
If possible, some structural reforms should be launched
while the international force is still on the ground in
order to maximize synergies.
Quick-impact projects would be very useful in
all phases of the normalization process, not only to
win hearts and minds by providing immediate peace
dividends, but also to create the appropriate context in
which to undertake dialogue on long-term measures
for post-conflict recovery. Soldiers deployed in the
force should be made available for basic infrastructure
projects. This would enable them to ensure the provision
of essential social services.
However, the most important point to be aware
of is the need to harmonize efforts for stabilization
and peacebuilding, and to ensure that the necessary
civil skills are made available to that end as soon as
possible. In this regard, the CAPMATCH arrangement
established by the Secretary-General is of real interest
in terms of building the capacity of peacekeeping
operations because it enables, inter alia, the sharing
of experience with countries that have been through
similar experiences.
In conclusion, I underscore the need for cooperation
between Member States in order to enhance the ability
of least developed countries to contribute effectively
to peacekeeping operations by providing them with
equipment that meets United Nations standards. In
that respect, I commend our partnerships with France,
Belgium and the United States, which have allowed our
country to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
I would be remiss not to mention the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
in particular in terms of deploying peacekeeping
operations. The question of the financing of operations
initiated by the African Union and its regional economic
communities is on the table. It needs to be resolved in
order to shore up complementarities in the collective
security system established by the Charter of the United
Nations to address threats to international peace and
security. That is particularly relevant when there is
a need for strenuous combat action, which the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations do not allow the
United Nations to undertake.
I would also like to endorse the appeal made
by the Ambassador of France for more respect for

68

multilingualism in the deployment of peacekeeping
operations, in particular in French-speaking countries.
The President: There are no more names on the list
of speakers.
I shall now make an additional statement in my
capacity as the representative of Pakistan.
A reference was made earlier today with regard to
the United Nations Military Observer Group in India
and Pakistan (UNMOGIP). No bilateral agreement
between India and Pakistan has overtaken or affected
the role or legality of UNMOGIP. The United Nations
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
continues to monitor the ceasefire in accordance with
the resolutions of the Security Council. Its mandate is
therefore fully valid, relevant and operative.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India to
make a further statement.
Mr. Gupta (India): I am constrained to take the
floor and put forward a statement of facts in response
to your comments, Sir, concerning the United Nations
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP).
UNMOGIP’s role was to supervise the ceasefire
line established in Jammu and Kashmir as a result of
the Karachi Agreement of 1949. That ceasefire line
no longer exists, and a new ceasefire line came into
existence on 17 December 1971. Following a similar
agreement of 1972 between India and Pakistan, signed
by the Heads of the two Governments and ratified by
their respective Parliaments, the two countries resolved
to settle their differences by peaceful means through
bilateral negotiations. The agreement also stipulated
that the line of control resulting from the ceasefire
line of 17 December 1971 shall be respected by both
sides. Subsequently, the line of control was delineated
in Jammu and Kashmir pursuant to that agreement and
with approval of both Governments. Thus, UNMOGIP’s
role has been overtaken by those developments.
The President: I shall now make an additional
statement in my national capacity.
I have just one brief remark to make. The fact is
that both India and Pakistan are hosting the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP).

13-21043

S/PV.6903

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Council.
I would like to thank all speakers for their
valuable contributions in today’s debate. We have had
a comprehensive and enriching discussion that brought
out the challenges and opportunities that exist in the
domain of peacekeeping. We have a vital interest in
the continued effectiveness and success of United
Nations peacekeeping. I hope that today’s debate and

13-21043

its outcome will go a long way towards promoting
that common objective. This morning, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2086 (2013)
on a multidimensional approach to peacekeeping. The
resolution was sponsored by all 15 members of the
Security Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

69
