UNITED NATIONS'

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1788’”

MEETING:

31 JULY 1974

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda11788) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
(0) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(cl Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348);
(4 Letter dated ‘28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11389);
Letter
dated 30 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
(e)
of the Security Council (S/11398) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*......

1

S/PV. 1788

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
otith~document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which informatton about ir’is!given.
: The /resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted’in
1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
r Qecisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
1’?!.W4retroactiveiy to FC$iUtiCfIIS
.- i: :‘.A adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-EIGHT

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 July 1974, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Javier Pl?REZ de CUGLLAR

@I Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent

(Peru).

Representative
of Cyprus to the United &Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
6-1 Letter dated 20 Jury 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 13448);
(4 Letter dated28Juty 1974 from the Acting Permanent
Representative
of the Unfon of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11389);
(e) Letter dated 30 JuIy 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/11398)

The representatives of the following States;
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Casta Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon
and United States of America.
Present:

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l788)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1335);
(cl Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the - President of the
Security Council (S/l 1348);
(4 Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
Permanent Representative
of the Union of
Soviet SociaKst Republics to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11389)

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [1779th-1781st meetings], I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania,
India and Mauritius to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
2.
In

At the invitation of ihe President,
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayunnis
(Greece) tobk p/aces at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In view of the Iimited number of places available at
the Council tatile, I propose to invite the representatbes of Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to come to the Council table when it is
their turn to address the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 6 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Job,
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Dutcu fRomania), Mr. Jaipul (India)
and Mr. Rumphul (Mauritius)
took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I propose that a new sub-item e, entitled “Letter
dated 30 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council [S/11398], be
added to the provisional .agenda. If there are no
objections, I shall take it that the Council adopts the
revised agenda.
The agenda, as revised,

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like to inform members that the draft
resolution in document S/11399 has been withdrawn.

was adopted.

5.

The situation in. Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 Juty 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/11334);

I call on the Secretary-General.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As members of
the Council are aware, at 5 p.m. New York time on
30 July,.that is, yesterday, I received a communica1

tion from Mr. Callaghan, the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United
Kingdom, on behalf of the three Foreign Ministers
who had been negotiating at Geneva, communicating
to me the text of the Declaration and statement which
have been agreed to by the Foreign Ministers of
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom [S/11398].
I am sure the members of the Council will wish to
give their urgent consideration to that document. I
hope that the agreement reached at Geneva on the
cease-fire will be a first step towards the full
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974). Members
of the Council will note that the Declaration envisages
certain tasks for the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
In particular,
the
Declaration
calls for action in consultation
with
UNFICYP
to determine the size and character of the
security zone, which will be entered by no forces
other than those of UNFICYP.
Other important
functions are also foreseen for UNFICYP.

can continue
implemented.

and resolution

353 (1974) can be fully

11. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
As a result of conversations and consultations,
a
document containing
a draft resolution
is being
circulated [S/21400]. The text of that draft reads
as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Recalling its resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, 353 (1974) of 20 July 1974 and 354 (1974) of
23 July 1974,

“Noting
that all States ‘have declared
respect for the sovereignty,
independence
territorial integrity of Cyprus,

their
and

“Taking note of the Secretary-General’s
statement
made at the 1788th meeting of the Security Council,

7. I wish to inform the Council that I have requested
my Special Representative and the Force Commander
of UNFICYP
to give me a preliminary assessment
of the practical implications of the Declaration as far
as UNFICYP is concerned. I shall report to the Council
on the practical consequences involved.

“Requests the Secretary-General
to take appropriate action in the light of his statement.”

12. I call upon the representative

of Greece.

13. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): While we now
have the Geneva agreement, it finally came before
us in the form of a Declaration and a statement of
the three Foreign Ministers
participating
in the
conference.

8. The total strength of UNFICYP
as of 31 July
is 3,484 men. That total comprises 3,332 military
personnel and 152 from the civilian police element
of the Force (UNCIVPOL).
By 7 August the total
strength of UNFICYP
will, it is estimated, be 4,238
men. When all the reinforcements currently pledged
have arrived-by
about 12 August-the
total strength
of UNFICYP
will be approximately 4,443. .,

14. We have been one of the architects of that
agreement, and we feel we owe an explanation to
the Council.
15. In Geneva we did our best to help Cyprus. All
we could achieve was this agreement. We regret we
could not do better. The British have helped, and
they earnestly tried to be constructive. In spite of that
help we could not do better. But under the present
circumstances we believe that what we did in Geneva
may be a step in the right direction.

9. I take this opportunity to draw the attention of
members of the Council to the question of the nature
of UNFICYP’s
continued presence in the Turkish
area of control, which I mentioned to the Council on
29 July and which needs clarification. As you know,
UNFICYP
has been playing, and should continue
to play, a most useful humanitarian role in all parts
of the island of Cyprus in assisting the civilian
population-Turkish
and Greek Cypriots alike-who
have been afflicted by the recent hostilities. This
matter is now under discussion by UNFICYP
with
the Turkish Military
Command in Cyprus. I am
confident that these discussions will enable UNFICYP
to continue to perform its role in all parts of the
island with the full agreement of all the parties
concerned.

16. The Geneva agreement takes the present situation as a starting-point and resolution 353 (1974) as
a goal, and lays down the process for the implementation of that resolution. It contributes to the reaftimation, ensurance and protection of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus.
17. It will now be up to the Security Council to
give its guidance and to take constructive steps with
a view to covering the remaining distance to the full
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974). .The sooner
that distance is covered and the resolution implemented, the better it will be for the Council; it will
also be better for Cyprus and for Greece, and it will
be better for Turkey.

10. I think that is as much as I should say at this
stage. I am sure that the members of the Council
are fully aware of the complexity of the situation. I
do not have to say that I and my colleagues in the
Secretariat, both here and in Cyprus, are prepared
fully to co-operate with the parties in order to restore
peaceful conditions in the island, so that negotiations
2

Greece. For the past 10 years there has been an
enormous number of Greek forces-a strong army
constituted against and in violation of agreements-in
Cyprus. As the Council knows, article 129 of the
Cyprus Constitution of 1960, which has been tom to
pieces, provides that the Cyprus Army shall comprise
2,000 men, 60 per cent of whom shall be drawn from
the Greek community,
and 40 per cent from the
Turkish community.
I have come across a letter
published in .The Times of London from a former
British High Commissioner
in Cyprus-a
neutral
source-in
which it is said that in 1964 the Cyprus
Government
formed its .National
Guard; despite
protests from the representatives in Cyprus of the
British and Turkish Governments and of the United
Nations, that wholly Greek organization was built
up to a strength which at the time-19Mwas
estimated to be over 20,000, some 5,000 of which,
including the officers, came from outside the island.
That, I believe, goes far to explain the situation we
are in now.

18. In the meantime, there are some very urgent
problems, and I am grateful to the Secretary-General
for having reminded us of them. Reports from the
island this morning were not encouraging:
some
20 hours after the signing of the Declaration in
Geneva, serious violations
were reported.
Such
reports-are still coming from Cyprus.
19. This morning, at 10.45 a.m., a Turkish infantry
unit was moving from Ayios Pavlos neck heading
towards the village of Karavas.
20. At 11 a.m., Turkish troops attacked the villages
of Lapithos and Karavas. They also attacked the
villages of Ayios Ermolaos and Skylloura.
21. Reports received this afternoon say that in two
villages inhabited only by Greek Cypriots, all those
inhabitants left and there is an imminent threat that
the Turkish army will occupy those‘two villages.
22. I have complained several times at this table
of the fact that Turkey has not been complying with
the cease-fire. Well, now we have a signed document,
and almost 24 hours after the signing of that document
Turkey still is not complying. I only hope that this
is the result of a lack of communications.

28. The Turkish policy on Cyprus has remained the
same from the very outset of the intercommunal
talks. I can say today that the position of the Turkish
Government in 1960 and 1964 was the same as it is in
1974, despite all that has happened-and
there are
probably very few round this table who can make
similar statements about the positions of their Govempreoccupation
with Cyprus is
ments . Turkey’s
primarily and foremost with the security, rights and
legitimate
interests of the Turkish community
in
Cyprus and, of course, of Turkey itself, which is
a signatory to the treaties giving birth to the Republic
of Cyprus. Turkey has never acquiesced in violations
of the international
treaties; it has always drawn
attention to the dangerous consequences of such
violations, and always deplored the fact, which we
continue to deplore, that no one other than itself
has ever protested or reacted in an effective manner
against these developments which have led to the
present situation; and Turkey has never taken any
action in contravention of any treaty it has signed.

23. Then there is another fact, to which the SecretaryGeneral drew our attention: the Turkish military
authorities have indeed asked, the United Nations
Force in Cyprus to withdraw from Cyprus territory
occupied by Turkey. The Secretary-General
is, I
understand, now engaged in consultations with the
Turkish Government to work out a practical arrangement. I only hope that he will find it easier than
we found it in Geneva.
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Turkey.
25. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I am very grateful to
the Secretary-General for his report, which squarely
indicates the most urgent problems faced by the
international
community in relation to the situation
in Cyprus.
26. I have listened with great care to what my
colleague from Greece has just said about the military
situation on the island. I am not in a position either
to confirm or to deny what he has said, but I am sure
he will also realize that at this very moment, probably
because of the same lack of communications,
the
beleaguered Turkish villages remain under the threat
of Greek forces on the island.

29. However, I suppose that by now everybody
knows who has destroyed the integrity of the State
of Cyprus by violating its Constitution.
I suppose
that everybody around this table knows who has tried
to pave the way to enosis, although this was clearly
ruled out by international
treaties. And I suppose
everybody knows why for more than 10 years the
Turkish.community,
which represents one fifth of the
population, lived as refugees in their own land and
were encouraged to emigrate if conditions did not
suit their aspirations.

27. I really do not want to start an argument, but
for the benefit of those members of the Council who
may not know all the details of the military situation
in Cyprus I should like to say that when I speak of
“Greek forces” I do not necessarily mean forces from

30. Everybody ,knows who since 1964. has turned
the island into a huge depot of armaments and armed
forces, ‘against which the Turkish forces that have
entered into the action about which you all know were
fighting a few days ago.
3

31. In response to all these developments
the
international
community
has not up to now done
anything, because our appeals called for action and
it was considered so much more difficult to take
action than to remain silent as long as the Turkish
community itself was not reacting.

38. Now may I perhaps .put that declaration into
its context. No one is suggesting for one moment that
the Declaration is either a perfect document of that
it provides a blueprint for the, future of the island
of Cyprus. What we say about it is quite simply
this-that
it was the best response which the three
Powers sitting down in Geneva were able to make
to the request which had been placed before them
by the Security Council resolution 353 (1974).

32. This ‘situation continued until Turkey was left
without any alternative but to take the initiative
foreseen in the international treaties. But even at this
stage Turkey has not exceeded the purposes defined
at the outset of the military operation. This operation
placed humanitarian
considerations
above all, as
witnessed by reports of the international news media.
Before and during the operation all peaceful methods
of solution continued to be sought.

39. As regards the immediate
steps to maintain
security in Cyprus, the three countries agreed in
Geneva that the areas controlled by the opposing
forces would not be extended. I quite understand
that the views of some people around this table will
be that that agreiment is not enough and that to
have emerged with a declaration
that the areas
controlled
would not be extended is something
different from an agreement that the areas controlled
should be diminished.
And of course I accept that
distinction. But I must emphasize to the Council that
after the negotiations had gone on for some days it
did become apparent that the best response that we
were going to get, if I may echo the words of our
colleague from Greece, was that initially the areas
controlled by opposing forces would not be extended.

33. Now the first step towards such a peaceful
solution seems at long last to have been found
yesterday in Geneva. It took the form of a text
which in our view totally in keeping in letter and in
spirit with’ the purposes and principles that we have
defined from the very outset.
34. I have nothing else’ to add to what I have just
said but my hope that we are going to continue, with
the help of the Greek Government, with the help of
the United Kingdom Government and, when the time
comes, with the help of the duly accredited representatives of the two communities,
to find a lasting
solution to the problem. I have nothing to add, and
I hope that I shall not have anything to add during
this meeting.

40. Secondly, there was an agreement that all forces,
both regular and irregular, should desist from hostile
activity, and again, to try to freeze the situation,
that a security zone should be established by the
representatives of Greece, Turkey and the United
Kingdom, in consultation with the United Nations
force.

35. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
I should
like to confirm for the purposes of the record that as
far as the United Kingdom is concerned we would
wish to withdraw the .draft resolution in document
S/11399, in view of the fact that the draft resolution
to which the President referred [S/11400] is in fact
being circulated at this moment.

41. Speaking in the House of Commons this afternoon, the Foreign Secretary, Mr. Callaghan, said:
“That is a necessarily incomplete summary of
the main provisions of the Declaration. It is not
a perfect document.“-1
think we could all echo
that.-“ But Greece and Turkey have, I believe,
been brought back from the brink of war, and
what we have done in Geneva will help to keep the
peace and give everyone a chance of moving on
to the second and more important phase of making
a peace-a peace which will last and which will
create the essential confidence among the communities which has been lacking. The immediate
aim had to be to remove the risk of war, but our
abiding concern is the welfare of the people, of
Cyprus. Cyprus will not flourish as long as it remains
and armed camp. We must do our utmost to secure
compliance with resolution 353 (1974) of the Security
Council in all its aspects, including its military
provisions, as well as the resolution of the constitutional . problems of Cyprus, in such a manner as
will command the confidence of all its peoples.”

36. Paragraph 5 of resolution 353 (1974) called on
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom to enter into
negotiations without delay for the restoration of peace
in the area and constitutional
government in Cyprus
and to keep the Secretary-General
informed. The
Council will remember that when we adopted resolution 353 (1974) the invitation to the talks had already
been submitted by the United Kingdom Government,
and indeed we were at that moment waiting for a
reply, so that that resolution sanctioned the holding
of the talks. I hope that the Council would feel that
the talks which began on 25 July in response to this
resolution were indeed a speedy implementation,
as
far as we were concerned, of that call.
37. It was, as the Council will know, a difficult set
of negotiations. I gather from those who took part in
them that they did not get very much sleep and that
the bargaining was hard. But at the end of the day
they did emerge with a declaration.

42. That was Mr. Callaghan speaking this afternoon
in the House of Commons, and it is against that
background and in that context.that I would-commend
4

this Declaration to the Council and that I would uree
the Council to adopt the draft resolution in documeit
S/l 1400 which is now before us.

received this declaration. Archbishop Makarios was
guarded and cautious, as perhaps one would expect
him to be in the circumstances, when he commented
on the declaration, but he welcomed it. He said this:

43. What it is important
to realize is that the
Declaration ,was seen as a first step and not as a last
step. What is significant is that if one actually looks
at the terms of the Declaration itself one finds there
set out in its preambular parts a firm statement by
the three Foreign Ministers that resolution 353 (1974)
is to be implemented,
and also that while they are
seeking more long-term solutions in more general
terms, there are certain urgent and immediate matters
which have to be dealt with. It is those urgent and
immediate matters which are set out in the Declaration.

“I am pleased that the discussions at the Geneva
conference have resulted in an agreement for a ceasefire in Cyprus which will put an end to the terrible
loss of human life and suffering. I cannot say,
however, I am satisfied with the whole contents of
the agreement. In its most important part, which is
the withdrawal of the Turkish troops from Cyprus,
the agreement is very vague.”
He went on to say:
_ “In any case I hope that the agreement will be
the first step towards the full implementation
of
the Security Council resolution of 20 July.”

44. We believe that it is important
because it
produces conditions for making the cease-fire in
Cyprus stick. I think this is the vital point for peace
and security in the area and above all for the people
of Cyprus themselves. If the cease-tire does not stick
it is those people in Cyprus who will suffer. It is
not we in the Security Council. It is the ordinary
people, both Greek and Turk alike. Therefore the role
of an impartial umpire or intermediary
is clearly
going to be a vital one. We believe that the United
Nations should not hesitate to fulfil this role, particularly in view of United Nations association with
Cyprus in the immediate past and indeed the presence
in Cyprus at the moment of UNFICYP.
The situation
is such that if the United Nations does hesitate to
fulfil this role, if somehow or other this cease-fire
which we have managed to attain with such difficulty
is allowed to slacken, then the sufferers, as I say,
will be the people of Cyprus and perhaps even the
peoples of Greece and Turkey.

Mr. DenktaS commented today in Cyprus in favourable
terms upon the achievement of this declaration and
this cease-fire. Mr. Clerides said that Greeks and
Turks will have to live side by side in future, and
the longer the bloodshed went on the more difficult
it would have been to arrive at a peaceful solution.
47.’ It is in this spirit that the United Kingdom, on
which resolution 353 (1974) placed a special responsibility in the light of our existing international treaty
obligations,
proposes the adoption of the draft
resolution now before the Council, as a matter of
urgency. The delineation of the limits of territory at
present occupied by Turkish forces, which are
referred to in the declaration, constitutes urgent work.
None of the political issues are dealt with in the
declaration. None of the major political issues that
may have to be dealt with in the future can be dealt
with in the draft resolution before the Council tonight.
But what is essential, in our view, is that the SecretaryGeneral should be in a position to take the action
that is required to enable UNFICYP
to play its part
in the arrangements that are clearly necessary to stop
the bloodshed in Cyprus and to establish the basis for
a peaceful resolution of Cyprus’s problems.

45. .I should like to say a word about the next stage
as we see it. Mr. Callaghan said that when he first
went to Geneva the first words he said were that they
should not forget the people of Cyprus, whose island
it is and who live there. He said to the people of
Cyprus yesterday that the agreement that had been
reached was a first step towards the creation of the
confidence and the security which they must have if
they are to have a stable and peaceful future. He
went on to say:
“We all know that the Declaration is but a
first step on what is going to be a long road to the
recreation of confidence and stability
in the
Republic, not only for its own sake but also to
avoid embittering
relations between Greece and
Turkey. I certainly do not under-estimate
the
difficulties which lie ahead, particularly in finding
a just and lasting answer to the constitutional
problems of the island, but without the cease-fire
and without a general agreement to ensure that it
is stable we could not go on as we plan to do.”

48. Our choice here today is not whether we believe
in one particular solution for Cyprus or in a different
one. That is a matter for the Cypriots themselves to
decide. Our choice is whether we are prepared to
assist in the establishment of a cease-fire and a standstill-no
more than that. I have no doubt that all
the anxieties that are felt around this table will be
expressed in the next week or so and in the months
to come, but without a cease-fire which is effective
we do not believe that conditions can exist for the
political decisions which are yet to come, and without
the use of UNFICYP
we do not believe that the
cease-fire can be made as effective as we think it
needs to be.

46. It might also be worth while looking at ‘how the
various leaders in Cyprus themselves seem to have

49. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpuetution
from French): My delegation cannot but express its
5

gratification at the outcome of the negotiations which
went on for almost a week in Geneva and which have
made it possible to take a first step towards a solution
of the painful crisis which since 15 July has pitted
two Member States against each other, a crisis which
has occasioned great suffering to a third Member
State, the Republic of Cyprus. I should pay a tribute
here to the patience and perseverance and the.
extraordinary efforts of the Geneva negotiators, and
particularly the .United Kingdom Foreign Secretary,
Mr.. Callaghan, who presided over the proceedings.

a spirit of moderation, all ‘our efforts and the efforts
of the international community will remain vain.
54. In view of those considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution in document
S/11400, which seems to us to meet both the concerns
of the majority of the members of the Council and
the interests of the peoples of Cyprus, for which, as
I have already repeatedly said, we feel particular
sympathy.
55. Mr. ‘MAINA
(Kenya):
My delegation
has
followed with a concern that has increased each day
the events that have taken place in Cyprus since
15 July 1974.

50. We hope that the practical arrangements agreed
upon by the negotiators will be implemented and that
the situation on the spot will be very quickly stabilized.
I think that there is a very precise moral significance
to’this idea of stabilization. Each of the adversaries
of today and yesterday must henceforth do everything
possible to ensure that the populations that have so
grievously suffered from the events of the past weeks
may experience a less precarious existence and may be
spared any trials and ordeals. It is high time the spirit
of vigilance gave place to that of reconciliation.

56. We witnessed early in the morning of 15 July
an act of aggression against the Republic of Cyprus
engineered and directed by the Greek military officers
attached to the Cypriot National Guard. Everybody
in this Council has had an opportunity to condemn that
interference in the internal affairs of a Member State.
My delegation noted the admission by the representative of Greece of that involvement of the Greek officers
in the military coup d’itat in Cyprus. The Council
was convened on 16 July, at the request of the
Secretary-General,
to consider the serious situation
that had been created by that coup d’etat. Indeed, it
was right that the Council should meet,to discharge
its obligations in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

51. My country is particularly
gratified at the
provisions in the Geneva agreement which call for
the participation of representatives of Cyprus in the
talks which will resume on 8 August. It is certainly
essential, it is obviously essential, that the principal
parties involved should indicate how they mean to
coexist within the framework of a stabiiized constitutional order, an order which remains still to be
specified.

57. As if the Republic of Cyprus had.not had enough,
we witnessed after a few days another act of aggression
against that State Member of the United Nations, this
time by the intervention of Turkey;.on
the pretext
that it was only fulfilling its duty and obligation,
as required of it by the agreement of 1960.

52. For the time being, however, what remains most
important is that the material arrangements should
be made without delay for the first stage of a return
to security and tranquillity.
The United Nations
Force is called upon to play an important role in that
respect. We are gratified that the Secretary-General
has been able to make a statement to us today
summarizing
the tasks that will devolve upon
UNFICYP.
They are arduous tasks, and there are a
great many of them; they will not always be easy to
accomplish. But I do not see who could take on those
tasks, and take them on very quickly, if not the
“blue helmets’*. Once again, what is at stake is the
lives of thousands of men, women and children, and
it is no accident that some of the zones in which
UNFICYP must operate are now described as security
zones.

58. ‘Kenya, as a peace-loving
Member of the
Organization,
cannot but be very disturbed when
events threatening the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a Member State with which
we have the closest relationship take place, with the
apparent complicity
of certain Member
States.
Because of our desire to see peace and security
speedily restored in Cyprus, we voted in favour of the
draft resolution that became resolution 353 (1974),
although we had serious reservations regarding the
holding of talks on the affairs of a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations by third parties without
the participation of that Member State. We had hoped
that by the unanimous decision of the Council on
23 July our desires regarding a free and independent
Cyprus would be fulfilled without delay. While it is
accepted that the magnitude of- the loss of life has to
a certain degree been diminished, the ingredients for
a lasting peace are still far from being present.

53. There was therefore a note of urgency in the
Council’s agreeing on and approving in-a resolution
the arrangements that the Secretary-General proposes
to make. I would note as a particularly important
factor the Secretary-General’s
determination
to act
only in full agreement and constant liaison with the
parties concerned, whose spirit of moderation does,
however, remain indispensable.
May I once again
appeal for that moderation and point out that, failing

59. In view of the grave situation still existing and
in view of the very unsatisfactory methods by which’
certain members are proposing to settle the intricacies
6

of the Cyprus question, I find it necessary to restate,
and probably elaborate a little more on, my Govemrnent’s position on this crisis.

very unsatisfactory and does not reflect. resolution
353 (1974) in this crucial matter of the withdrawal of
foreign military personnel. Indeed, it negates the
Security Council resolution.

60. As I stated earlier, the ‘Council met initially .to
try and restore, peace and security to the Republic of
Cyprus. We believed that by so doing we would be
restoring normal conditions in ‘Cyprus, including its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The events that have taken place so far have ,not
convinced us that the Council’s initial understanding
and actions have been fulfilled or are even likely to
be fulfilled. We have found manoeuvres that definitely
threaten the independence, sovereignty,and territorial
.,
integrity of a Member .State.

64; Another matter that is of great concern to my
Government is that of the participation of the Republic
of Cyprus in all matters affecting it. My delegation,.
right at..the beginning, had expressed an opinion
favouring the ,participation of the Republic of Cyprus
in the negotiations in Geneva. We are convinced that
we were right in considering that the participation
of Cyprus was vital. The Declaration we. have just
received clearly demonstrates the need for Cyprus to
participate inany future negotiations and talks affecting
its vital interests.’ We are not satisfied .with the:
provisions of the Declaration in this crucial matter
of participation
by the Republic of Cyprus. In our
opinion, no outsider should determine. who will.
represent Cyprus at the talks. My delegation, therefore,
will support only a draft resolution or proposals that,
will give to the Republic of Cyprus its rightful place
in the negotiations that are envisaged to take place
in the future.

61. I should like to state quite categorically that my
Government
will not support any move that will
involve the United Nations in the illegal removal or
imposition of governments in territories of Member
States. To do so would be contrary to the spirit
and letter of the Charter of the United Nations. My
Government will also not support any moves that
would involve the United Nations in any arrangements
that had any colouring of a colonial or imperial nature,
such as the arrangements to dismember a Member
State like Cyprus.

65. Earlier on I stated that my Governmen; will
not accept any measures that will involve the United
Nations in imposing governments in territories of
Member States. I think my delegation is fully entitled
to hear from the guarantors the interpretations they
gave to the invitation
to the talks contained in
paragraph 5 of the Declaration. We would, also like
to know what they actually mean by the words
“constitutional
legitimacy”
in paragraph 5.

62. As I stated .on 20 July [178fst meeting], it is
the hope of my delegation that the future Government
of Cyprus will take all measures necessary to reconcile
the people of Cyprus to the fact of their being an
independent nation made up of different peoples
and that their energies should be directed towards the
building of one nation. It has also been accepted and
emphasized by all Member States that independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected.
The Council on ,20 July unanimously adopted resolution 353 (1974), paragraph 5 of which called on the
guarantor Powers to enter into negotiations without
delay for the restoration of peace in the area and
constitutional government in Cyprus. We have now
received a declaration and a statement agreed by the
Foreign Ministers of Greece, Turkey and the United
Kingdom and resulting from talks which, I must
emphasize, were conducted without the presence of
the Republic of Cyprus, the party most directly
involved.

66. We consider that it will be the duty of the
Council to initiate measures that will help. Cyprus
regain its total independence and sovereignty after
the outrage of the last few weeks. We consider that
the agreements of 1960 were completely unequal.
We are therefore looking forward, indeed, to calling
upon the guarantor Powers to review their agreements with Cyprus with a view to making it possible
for the Republic of Cyprus to exercise without fear
its rights, sovereignty and independence.
67. I should like to make very brief concluding
remarks with regard to what the Council is expected
to do in respect of the implementation
of further
measures to restore peace and security in Cyprus.
We noted that the Declaration made in Geneva requires
the Secretary-General to take certain measures for its
implementation.
Specifically, I refer to the role of
UNFICYP.
The Council definitely has to give this
Force a new mandate in addition to the one envisaged
in resolution 186 (1964). It will be necessary to expand
this Force and probably to equip it more than at
present.

63. The agreement that was reached in Geneva,
while attempting to solve some of the problems, is
far from satisfactory as far as my delegation is
concerned. We have noted, for example, that whereas
resolution 353 (1974) demanded an immediate end to
foreign military intervention in the Republic of Cyprus
and the withdrawal of all foreign military personnel
in excess of those permitted by international agreements, the Declaration merely talks of what measures
should be elaborated which will lead to the timely
and the phased reduction of the number of armed
forces and the amounts of armaments, armour and
other war material in the Republic of Cyprus. This is

68. My delegation would also like to propose that the
United Nations should be given a much more direct
role in the talks that are envisaged to start on,
7

.

8 August. We were not satisfied with the observer
status given to the United Nations. As we heard from
the Secretary-General before, this made it impossible
for the Secretary-General’s
representative to attend
any significant meetings in the recent talks. If the
role of the United Nations, and especially of this
Council, is to maintain peace and security, surely
it is desirable that the United Nations should be
involved in discussions that -will require the services
of the Organization
in the future. Otherwise, the
United Nations is being used only as a tool.

defined-and
this has to be acknowledged-the
framework for a solution to the problem of Cyprus.
In particular it posed a series of principles to which
my delegation
attaches the highest importance.
Among those principles, I should like to cite respect
for the territorial
integrity and independence
of
Cyprus. That principle should be the prerequisite for
any solution of the Cyprus problem.
74. Another principle laid down in this resolution
is the need to restore a constitutional
regime based
on taking into account the interests of all Cypriots.

69. My delegation is very hesitant about supporting
any moves that will tend to make the Council and
the United Nations subordinate to other groups
discussing international peace.

75. My delegation therefore believes that the Security
Council has assumed its full responsibilities by defining
so precisely the framework for a solution to the
problem in Cyprus and the principles which should
constitute the basis for that solution. ‘Today my
delegation, at least, can be gratified that the action
of the Council led the three guarantor Powers to
undertake commitments which, if they are respected,
as we hope they will be, and entered into as they
should be entered into, could lead to a global solution
of the problem that is acceptable and perhaps
definitive.

70. My delegation will continue to consult with other
members of the Council with a view to making
proposals that we hope will assist in solving the
present crisis and restoring to the Republic of Cyprus
peace, security, independence,
sovereignty
and
territorial integrity.
71. In view of what I have said, and without being
associated with the moves envisaged by Powers
which are violating the independence of Cyprus, I
would support the request of the Secretary-General
for the continued use of UNFICYP
for humanitarian
purposes without even noting the declarations referred
to in his report. We are bing asked to adopt a draft
resolution which begins with the words: “Noting
that all States have declared their respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus” [S/11400]. I should be happy to go along
with that draft resolution, but I should like to know
whether that is a fact. Is it a fact that, as of now,
the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus is
respected by the Member States, including the ones
I have referred to, which have taken measures in
the last few weeks to dismember Cyprus? It would be
very important if the declarations we are assuming
in this draft resolution were made positively, at least
by the two major Powers involved in this conflict.

76. Allow me to express the thanks of my delegation
to the three Foreign Ministers-those
of Greece, the
United Kingdom and Turkey-for
their constructive
spirit and contribution to peace. We hope that the
future negotiations will lead to more thorough and
more positive results, but we firmly believe that the
Cypriots should be closely associated with those
negotiations,
which directly involve their future.
We should also like to point out very clearly that in
our estimation that would only be a first step in the
implementation
of the provisions of resolution 353
(1974).
77. In the light of those considerations, my delegation
is fully prepared to support any action by the Council
which would enable the Secretary-General
and the
United Nations to play a still more active role in
consultation with all the parties involved. We are
certain that the action provided for in the draft
resolution in document S/11400 would render easier
a peaceful and global solution to the problem.

72. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania)
(interpretation
from French): The crisis in Cyprus has deeply
concerned my country and continues to disquiet it.
In fact, this is a crisis which has taken place in a
particularly sensitive region and which threatens a
fragile balance. Only the efforts of the Security
Council and the United Nations have succeeded in
maintaining that balance so far. This is also a crisis
which seriously affects peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean and which also endangers the
independence,
the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

78. Before concluding, I should once again like to
express to the Secretary-General
our very deep
appreciation for the manner in which has constantly
kept the Council informed of developments in this
problem. We should also like to thank him for his
efforts since 15 July to bring peace to Cyprus and
to alleviate the sufferings of the population of that
republic.
79. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion from .Spanish):
I call upon the representative of Cyprus.

73. It is the awareness of this situation which,
prompted my delegation to associate its efforts with
those of other members of the Council in order to
prepare and to adopt resolution 353 (1974). That text

80. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): We have before us
the Declaration by the Foreign Ministers of Greece,
8

Turkey and Great Britain arrived at in the Geneva
conference. That conference, it may be recalled, was
set up in virtue of operative
paragraph 5 of
resolution 353 (1974). Paragraph 2 of the Declaration
of the Foreign Ministers stipulates a cease-fire as
of 30 July. Although the date is different from that
contained in resolution 353 (1974), it is nonetheless
in compliance with that resolution, which provides
for a cease-fire “as a first step”.

84. Incidentally,
I wonder of which country of our
world of today it can be said that there is this
Utopian condition
of mutual confidence. Mutual
confidence is a two-way affair. If the country which
is occupying part of Cyprus by military force wishes
there to be no such confidence so that it will never
leave the island, it can very easily achieve that.
And, in any case, who is going to be the judge
that there is such a degree of confidence that it will
induce the occupying Power to withdraw its forces if
it does not wish to do so? This is such a vague
and indefinite provision of withdrawal as to amount to
continued military occupation by foreign troops of
a part of Cyprus in violation of its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, to which so
much dedication is expressed in the Security Council
resolution and in the Declaration of the Foreign
Ministers. It would also be in direct contravention
of the Council resolution, which is so emphatically
affirmed in the same paragraph of the Declaration.

81. The President of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios,
expressed his satisfaction with the agreement on the
cease-fire, which, he said, “will put an end to the
further loss of human life and suffering”, and he also
expressed the hope that the relevant agreement would
be “the first step towards the full implementation
of resolution 353 (1974)“. However, the President of
Cyprus said that he was not satisfied with the entire
text of the agreed Declaration, particularly its most
important
part, namely, the part concerning the
withdrawal of the Turkish troops from Cyprus, which
is left rather vague, to say the least.

85. So how could my President find this paragraph
satisfactory? How could any member of this Security
Council find those parts satisfactory? Would it be
satisfactory to the concept of the Council that its
resolution is directly contradicted and negated by the
body that is set up to carry it out? I can understand
a delay or difficulty in implementation-but
direct
contradiction of it?

82. May I now, in this resnect. make certain
comments on the Declaration *which I think are
pertinent and should be brought to the attention of the
Council.
83. Regarding the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Cyprus, paragraph 4 of the Declaration contains what
I would call an over-riding
clause reaffirming
resolution 353 (1974), which the paragraph provides
should “be implemented
in the shortest possible
time”. That is also consistent with the said resolution.
In iis sequence, however, the Declaration seems to
follow a completely
contradictory
course, contradicting what it has itself already said. For, whereas
operative paragraph 3 of the resolution demands an
“immediate
end to foreign military intervention
in
Cyprus”, the Declaration is so drafted as to convey
the firm impression of foreign military intervention
being indefinitely
extended, as though it was to
become almost perpetual. And whereas paragraph 4
of the resolution calls for the withdrawal of all foreign
military forces “without delay”, paragraph 4 of the
Declaration-although
its beginning is consistent with
that provisions of the resolution-goes
on to make
the withdrawal conditional upon the conclusion of
“a just and lasting solution acceptable to all the
parties concerned” and states that:

86. Now, that is the situation with regard to
paragraph 4, and I do not think I need say any
more. The rest is for the members to consider, because,
really, this concerns not only Cyprus, but the United
Nations as a whole, international peace and security,
the small countries particularly, and the non-aligned
countries, of which Cyprus is one.
87. Now, with regard to paragraph 5, first of all
it contains certain statements that are not correct.
It says here that the representatives of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities should be
invited to participate in the talks. We had understood
here in the Council that it had been stated that the
Government of Cyprus, through its President, would
be asked to participate, and that was even more
definitely stated by the representative of the United
Kingdom.
88. Now, here we have a situation which again is
peculiar. Even if the text were to say that first of
all the Government of Cyprus should be invited to
participate-and
how it would participate is another
matter, as is clearly stated-and even if they wanted
to specify how the Turkish Cypriot community should
be represented, it should read “the Government of
Cyprus and the Turkish Cypriot community”,
not
“the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities”.

“as oeace. securitv and mutual confidence are
established- in the- island, measures should be
elaborated which will lead to the timely and phased
reduction of the number of armed forces and the
amounts of armaments, munitions and other war
material in . . . Cyprus”.
That is so different from the resolution that it is
almost, as the representative of Kenya has said, a
negation of the resolution.

89. All the reports of the Secretary-General
during
all these years have been calling the Government of
9

95. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): The
United States is deeply gratified by the, agreement
reached in Geneva among the Foreign Ministers of
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom.
In that
connexion, I should like to read a statement issued
yesterday by the White House in Washington:

Cyprus the Government recognized by all States as
the Government of Cyprus, and have called the Turkish
Cypriots the “Turkish
Cypriot leadership”
or the
“Turkish Cypriot community”.
But they have never
ignored or bypassed the Government of Cyprus.
90.

Also, it is stated in .paragraph 5 that:

“The Ministers noted the existence in practice in the
Republic of Cyprus of two autonomous administrations, that of the Greek Cypriot community and that
of the Turkish Cypriot community.”
That, again, is factually completely incorrect, and
a glance at the reports of the Secretary-General
will show that what is recognized is the Government
of Cyprus, and there is no question of autonomous
administration.
The reference is again to the areas
under the control of the Turkish Cypriot leadership.

“The United States welcomes the announcement
in Geneva of the agreement reached by the Foreign
Ministers of the United Kingdom,
Greece and
Turkey. We consider this an important step toward
the restoration of peace and stability in Cyprus.
We commend the intensive and patient efforts of the
three Governments concerned which brought about
this achievement.
In particular, we wish0 to pay
tribute to the skill and persistence of Mr. Callaghan,
the Minister of State of Great Britain, who as leader
‘_ of the conference deserves great credit for its
success, and to the Foreign Ministers of Greece
and Turkey.”

91 Recently, as I have verified from the Secretariat,
the Turkish Cypriot leadership has called itself the
“Turkish Cypriot administration”,
but this document
refers ‘only to the attitude taken by the “Turkish
Cypriot leadership”. Therefore, this question of the
two autonomous
administrations
is decapitating
Cyprus and separating it from its Government,
depriving it of the identity of a country with a
government, rendering it simply a territory with two
separate autonomous administrations.

96. We believe this agreement justifies the wisdom
of the Council in adopting resolution 353 (1974),
and thereafter in supporting the intensive efforts
in Geneva to negotiate the serious issues involved
m this Cyprus crisis. I want to reiterate the view
of my Government that we consider this agreement
an important step toward the restoration of peace
and stability in Cyprus.
97. We particularly welcome the recognition by the
three Foreign Ministers in their Declaration of “the
importance of setting in train, as a matter of urgency,
measures to adjust and to regularize within a reasonable
period of time the situation in the Republic of
Cyprus on a lasting basis”, having regard to the
international
agreements of 1960 and resolution 353
(1974). My Government wants to see strict maintenance of the cease-fire in the area and the prompt
implementation
of other portions of the agreement
signed in Geneva. My Government very much hopes
that this agreement foreshadows a quick return to
more normal conditions in Cyprus--conditions
which
will bring to all the people of Cyprus a return to
constitutional
government and a new measure of
political stability and general well-being.

92. That again is one of the things that are unsatisfactory. I v&y well understand thi circumstances of
pressure and of time and of negotiations carried
out until the last minute under the gun and under
the threat, “Either
you complete it now or we
occupy” or “continue
the war”-with
25,000 to
30,000 troops imported into Cyprus unhindered, and
with the air space of Cyprus violated and Cyprus
bombed by airplanes, also unhindered. No one has
moved to stop it, even though the conference was
expected to put an end to this situation in Cyprus.
93. Therefore it was a gigantic, a titanic task for
those who were negotiating, having the burden of
carrying out the responsibility of the Security Council
in preserving peace and security in Cyprus. It is a
peculiar situation. I commented on it before, and we
now see the fruits of that situation. It is the Council
that has the responsibility
of preventing aggression
and stopping aggression, and no one else. Thus we
now have a situation in which we are to look forward
to the positive side of it. And the positive side of
it is the cease-fire, for which we are grateful and
which we appreciate and which we want to help
towards materializing.

98. We note that the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus is asked to undertake certain
responsibilities under the terms of the agreement of
30 July. UNFICYP
has been on duty now for more
than 10 years, and we may recall that Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) recommended, in paragraph 5
“that the function of the Force should be, in the
interest of preserving international
peace and
security, to use its best efforts to prevent a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute
to the maintenance and restoration of law and
order and a return to normal conditions”.

94. Therefore we believe that the draft resolution
before us is a constructive one in that direction. Of
course, we have no voice in the matter, but ‘I should
like to put it on record that this is a constructive
draft resolution.

We consequently
Secretary-General
10

believe it appropriate to urge the
to take immediately any necessary

steps to t.his end. Consistent. with this view, my
delegation supports the draft resolution before the
Council requesting the Secretary-General
to take
appropriate action, and we urge its adoption without
delay.

U.NFICYP
on the basis of paragraph 3 of the
Declaration if we could be given the assurance
that the Greek Cypriot forces and the Turkish
Cypriot forces have indeed accepted the- Declaration
and are prepared to respect its provisions and cooperate with UNFICYP.
The representative of the
United Kingdom gave an indication in that direction
in his statement when he referred to the reaction of
President Makarios, of Acting President Clerides and
of Vice-President Denktas. My delegation does not
think that UNFICYP
should be involved in the
implementation
of paragraph 3 of the Declaration
without that assurance, as we cannot take the
responsibility
of UNFICYP’s
getting invdlved in
fighting with Cypriot forces on the island, whether
Greek or Turkish Cypriots.

99. An important first step has been taken towards
the normalization
of conditions in Cyprus and it
points the way towards the full implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974). We believe it is now the obligation of this Council to maintain and encourage the
momentum towards peace which has been generated.
We strongly urge members of the Council to support
the efforts of the parties and to place no doctrinal
or procedural barriers in their way. Our individual
and collective support for this Geneva agreement
and its continuing implementation
will be our most
important
contribution
to the maintenance
of
international peace and security in the area.

103. Another clarification that we would like to seek
is: what will be the status of UNFICYP
vis-a-vis the
three guarantors if it is going to act on the basis
of their Declaration? Will UNFJCYP become defacto
an instrument of the three guarantors, with all the
consequences that such ba relationship
involves?
In the opinion of my delegation, UNFICYP
can only
operate solely as the instrument of the United Nations
and responsible only to the United Nations with
regard to its activities.

100. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): It is not my
intention to make a long statement. I have not much
to add to the basic views which I already expressed
in my first statement on the Cyprus matter during the
meeting on 20 July last [1781st meeting]. I shall
limit my intervention mainly to the -role UNFICYP
is expected to play in the developments in Cyprus.
101. My delegation is happy that the three guarantors
of Cyprus’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity have succeeded in agreeing on a declaration
aiming at the restoration of peace and constitutional
order in Cyprus. My delegation would have been
much happier if the declaration had been achieved
with the active participation of the representatives of
Cyprus. As a matter of principle it is extremely
difficult for us to accept the fact that discussions
which affect. directly the vital interests of Cyprus
should have been held without the participation
of
Cyprus itself. My delegation therefore notes with
appreciation that Cyprus is to be represented by the
leaders of the two communities of the countries in
the negotiations that are going to start on 8 August.

104. As I stated in my intervention
on 20 July,
Indonesia attaches great importance to the fact that
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus as a non-aligned country shall be respected.
We must confess that we know very little not only
about what is actually happening in Cyprus, but also
about what is actually developing outside Cyprus
with regard to Cyprus. We are of the view, however,
that any involvement
of the United Nations in the
Cyprus problem should be directed to assisting and
speeding up the process towards the restoration of
peace and constitutional order in Cyprus on the basis
of respect for its sovereignty,
independence and
territorial integrity as a non-aligned country.
105. It is with this in mind that my delegation is
evaluating the Geneva Declaration and the role that
has been reserved for UNFICYP
and, therefore,
the United Nations, in that Declaration.

102. My delegation has tried to understand the
implication of paragraph 3 of the Declaration, which
refers to the role which UNFICYP
is expected to
play. As UNFICYP is expected to be active in Cyprus
to help maintain
the cease-fire, my delegation
considers it necessary to know first of all the reaction
of the parties on the island itself with regard to the
Declaration-whether
or not they have endorsed it.
My delegation, of course, expects that the Turkish
military forces on the island .will respect the provisions
of the Declaration, as Turkey was one of the participants in Geneva. But as UNFICYP
is expected to
situate itself not between the Turkish forces and the
military forces of Greece or the United Kingdom on
the island, but between the Turkish forces and the
Greek Cypriots or National
Guard and between
Greek and Turkish Cypriots elsewhere, it would be
easier for my delegation to agree on the role of

106. In conclusion, let me express once again to
the Secretary-General,
his representative in Cyprus,
the Commander of UNFICYP
and the men under
his command the high appreciation of my delegation
for the role they have played in restoring peace and
tranquillity
in Cyprus and for the efforts they have
made in the humanitarian field to lessen as much as
they can the suffering of the population caught in the
fighting, whether Turkish or Greek Cypriots. I think
we should stress this humanitarian ‘aspect of the
activities of UNFICYP
in Cyprus, performed under
most difficult and dangerous conditions, for which
UNFICYP
certainly has earned our praise and
thanks.
11

107. My delegation recognized the danger of the
situation in Cyprus which required action from this
Council. My delegation is prepared to vote in favour
of the draft resolution in document S/l 1400, stressing,
however, that the activities of UNFICYP
should
continue to be guided by the provisions of resolution
353 (1974).
108.

Mr.

114. As the Secretary-General
has pointed out, the
agreement and the Declaration
submitted
to us
yesterday constitute the first step, and an indispensable
Iirst step, for strengthening and stabilizing the ceasefire and ending the hostilities and all further acts of
violence such as those which have occurred in the
Republic of Cyprus. That is a most important contribution to the implementation
of some, if not all, of the
military provisions of resolution 353 (1974). The
urgency of this action need not be stressed again here,
in the light of all the recent developments, including
what has apparently occurred in recent hours. The
urgency of the action is further underlined by the
necessity to provide UNFICYP
and other United
Nations organs in the island with a clear and agreed
basis for the performance of their tasks. We for our
part are particularly impressed by the humanitarian
dimension of these tasks, which became fully visible
and fully understandable
from the latest report,
which the Secretary-General
provided yesterday.
Above all it is the helpless and defenceless men,
women and children in the island, whether of the Greek
or of the Turkish Cypriot community,
that urgently
need the help of UNFICYP.

Republic of Cameroon)
I have had the occasion
to state the position of my Government since the
beginning of the debate on the drama of Cyprus.
At this stage my delegation would like once again
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report, which has been especially clear and
useful.
(interpretation

NJINI?

perseverance and willingness to come to an agreement-an agreement which, being a compromise, and
a compromise to be achieved under most difficult
and trying conditions,
could obviously not be a
perfect one.

(United

from French):

109. The delegation of Cameroon is gratified, in the
light of the views it has expressed here on this very
same subject, by the very clear commitment
of the
honourable negotiators in Geneva to respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus. My delegation hopes that this
commitment, of which we are taking note, will become
a living reality.
110. In our view, it would be desirable to encourage
the efforts undertaken to implement resolution 353
(1974), which in our view constitutes the beginning
of progress. The sooner the Council encourages the
Secretary-General
to act in the best and clearest
interests of the Cypriots, all Cypriots, the better it
will be.

115. As I have said, a first step has been taken
towards the implementation
of resolution 353 (1974)
in Geneva, and it was a considerable step. However,
continued and much greater efforts will be necessary
to implement the resolutions of the Council on the
basis of the generally agreed principles
of the
independence, sovereigny and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. Acting in this manner and acting with this
goal in mind, it is a matter of course that the people
of Cyprus, the representatives of both communities,
should be closely associated with any further political
efforts to be undertaken to solve the crisis. It is a
matter of satisfaction to us that such representation
will be provided in the future talks in Geneva.

111. In view of all those considerations, my delegation is prepared to support all efforts designed to
bring about a durable peace in Cyprus, in the whole
of the region, and thus it will vote in favour of the
draft resolution contained in document S/11400 under
consideration.
112. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): My delegation
has listened with the greatest attention to the previous
speakers, who have given us a very concise impression
of the view the Council is taking of the latest developments in Cyprus, and we have listened with particular
attention to the statement of the Secretary-General.
We should like to express to him our appreciation for
,the full and comprehensive analysis of the situation he
has provided.

116. We deem it necessary that any further negotiations on the restoration of peace r&d constitutional
government, and indeed on any matter affecting the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
should not be conducted
without the
CYPr=,
participation
of representatives of the Republic of
Cyprus.’ In all these negotiations
the fate of the
people of Cyprus will be at stake, as it has been at
stake in past negotiations. It is our firm belief that
in the end only the people of Cyprus themselves can
decide on their fate and on their future and that nobody
should disenfranchise the people of Cyprus.

113. We believe that the time for action has come
and that the urgency is undebatable. We believe that
on the basis of the statement the Secretary-General
has made to the Council, important action can be
taken to proceed further with the implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974), a process to which the conference
at Geneva, set in motion by the Security Council, has
been called upon to furnish an important contribution.
Indeed this contribution
is not a negligible one.
Irrespective of results, all participants in the conference deserve high tributes
for their patience,

117. The tasks of the United Nations and in particular
of UNFICYP
in the coming days and weeks will be
difficult indeed. We believe that these efforts deserve
12

fi

c

and will vote in favour of it. We hope that it can be
adopted unanimously as a matter of urgency.

all our support and we hope they will receive our
unanimous support. We continue to believe, as we have
believed in the past, that the United Nations is called
upon to play a central role in all efforts to protect
and maintain the independence,
sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a fellow Member State, the
Republic of Cyprus, and that in everything we do, in
everything that should be done, in the coming days
that goal should never be lost sight of.
118. In view of those considerations,
will support draft resolution S/I 1400.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from SpunI should now like to make a settlement as
representative of PERU.
ish):

124. In the first place, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for the tireless efforts he has been
making for peace in Cyprus, efforts to which circumstances have made me an exceptional witness. I should
like to thank him also for his important statement,
containing valuable information on and an evaluation
of future action devolving upon the United Nations
in the maintenance of peace and security in the area.

my delegation

119. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE
(Australia): I am
sure that my Government would wish me to express
its own gratification and the gratification of the people
of Australia at the fact that the three Foreign Ministers
in Geneva have been able to reach the agreement that
was presented to us late yesterday in the form of the
Declaration. It is indeed a tribute to the tremendous
patience and pertinacity of the three Foreign Ministers
and of their Governments that this result has come
about, a result which may not be satisfactory to all
the members of the Council but which I believe, and
indeed am convinced, we must persuade ourselves is
the best that could be obtained, as the representative
of Greece has said.

125. I should like to state that my delegation, in a
spirit of realism, has a favourable attitude towards the
results achieved yesterday in the negotiations carried
out by the representatives of Greece, the United
Kingdom and Turkey in Geneva, in compliance with
the express request of the Security Council in
paragraph 5 of resolution 353 (1974), which this Council
adopted unanimously 11 days ago.
126. Our favourable reception of that agreement is
based on the fact that it constitutes an initial and
urgent step, but my delegation feels only limited
satisfaction. We believe that the true nature of the
problem remains to be solved and that the full exercise
of its sovereignty and independence should be restored
to Cyprus. In other words, the members of this
Council still have very wide latitude for work and
efforts to restore peace to the Republic of Cyprus and
guarantee its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

120. We fully recognize that this is, as has been said
this evening, only the first step towards the full
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974), which all of
us are convinced must be implemented in all its parts.
We fully recognize that difficult, indeed formidable,
problems lie ahead and remain to be settled before
constitutional
government,
which has been so
tragically disrupted in Cyprus, can be restored, the
constitutional government which will meet the wishes
and the needs of the people of Cyprus and which
ultimately
can be determined only with the full
participation
and the full consent of the people of
Cyprus.

127. In that connexion, my delegation wishes to
express its very deep concern that the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus should
be respected, as I have already said, not only because
my country has traditionally
upheld the full implementation of those principles, but also because the
country involved is one with which Peru is very closely
linked within the non-aligned movement.

121. But the immediate task, as we must again all
recognize, is to stop the fighting, to stop the bloodshed
and to stabilize the situation on the ground in Cyprus,
and to prepare an atmosphere
in which future
negotiations-lengthy
and arduous as they will have
to be-can, as we hope, make progress towards a
final agreement that would in truth embody the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus on a lasting basis and at the same time
remove what we must recognize to be a longstanding impediment
to the harmonious
relations
between Greece and Turkey. In that.task the United
Nations must inevitably play a vital part, and for that
purpose it is obvious that an immediate instrument
at hand is the United Nations Force in Cyprus.

128. The delegation of Peru would also like to make
it clear that, although we are aware of the circumstances that made it impossible for the Republic of
Cyprus to participate in the negotiations, we deeply
regret that it was not able to do so and we express the
firm hope that the Republic of Cyprus will be directly
involved in any new phase of the negotiations, and
particularly in everything relating to the restoration
of the stnrus quo prior to the overthrow, by means
of a deplorable foreign intervention,
Of Archbishop
Makarios .
129. In the same spirit of realism to which I referred
at the beginning of this statement, my delegation will
vote in favour of draft resolution S/l 1400.

122. For that reason, and in view of the urgency
of the situation-an
urgency that has been made
clear by the Secretary-General himself-my
delegation
fully supports the draft resolution before the Council

130. Speaking as PRESIDENT,
representative of Cyprus.
13

I now call on the

131. Mr. RGSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to express my
thanks to you, Mr. President, for the devoted efforts
you have been making, in this case and for your
statement in favour of the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Cyprus. I am grateful also
to the other members of the Council who have
emphasized the necessity of respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus
-something
which is really threatened at this .time,
as everyone here knows.

one disputes. We now have before us a draft resolution
which was drafted in the past few hours, which
has been the subject of thorough discussion with
all delegations.
The representative
of Cyprus,
Mr. Rossides, unquestionably
one of those more
immediately concerned who have spoken, recognizes
that the draft resolution is constructive in nature and
he has himself expressed the wish that we should act
without delay.
140. The problems that confront us are of unquestionable urgency. What we must do is take practical
measures to ensure effective observance of the ceasefire. Only a few hours ago the agencies brought us
news from Nicosia indicating that the fighting is still
going on in some parts of the island. I think therefore
that the situation is clear. It is that that fighting must
be brought to an end, and I do not think that any
member of the Council will wish to take upon himself
the responsibility of making possible, be it only for a
few hours, the continuance of such action. Like the
representative of the United Kingdom, therefore, I
am opposed to any further delay. we have only one
task ahead of us this evening and. that is to vote on
the draft resolution. Let us therefore do so immediateiy.

132. I wish to address a particular word of thanks
to the representative of Kenya for his most constructive, lucid and far-sighted statement.
133. But the main purpose of this Statement is to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for
the great efforts he has been exerting throughout
these recent days in connexion with the question of
Cyprus. He has a formidable task before him in
preserving peace in Cyprus through UNFICYP.
We
should like to see the United Nations more directly
involved in the talks in Geneva.
134. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
f,Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (rrunslurion from Russian): Pursuant to the
first paragraph of rule 33 of the provisional rules of
procedure, the Soviet delegation proposes that this
meeting of the Council should be suspended for two
hours. The Soviet delegation needs this time in order
to receive instructions.

141. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spunis& I should like to remind the members of the
Council that the second paragraph of rule 33 of the
provisional rules of procedure states: “Any motion
for the suspension or for the simple adjournment of
the meeting shall be decided without debate*‘.

135. For more than two weeks, we have awaited
the document to which representatives have been
referring today in their statements. I trust that members
of the Council will accede to our request for a
postponement of the vote and a suspension of the
meeting for two hours.

142. Since an objection had been raised, I shall
immediately put to the vote the motion for suspension
of the meeting.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

136. During both the informal
and the formal
consultations, my delegation listened carefully to and
took into account the views of other members of the
Council regarding the drafting of the text of the draft
resolution which we are now discussing. The Soviet
delegation hopes that the members and the President
of the Coutlcil will accede to this request.

In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Republic of Cameroon.
Aguinst:

None.

Abstentions: Australia, Austria, China, Costa Rica,
France, Peru, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

137. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Smznis@: Are there any objeciions -to the pr6posal made
by the representative of the Soviet Union?

The result of the vote was 7 in favour, none against,
with 8 abstentions.

138. Mr. RICHARD
<United Kingdom): I object to
that motion. This is a matter of great urgency. The
outlines of the issue have been known for some days.
I do not think, it would be right in these circumstances for the meeting to be suspended.

The motion was not adopted, having failed
obtain the qffirmative vote of nine members.

to

143. Mr. SAFRONCfiUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): In accordance
with rule 31 of the provisional rule-s of procedure,
the Soviet delegation submits a formal amendment’

139. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): We have been here since 10 o’clock
this morning, with a break for lunch only. For almost
seven hours, then, we have had under review the
situation in Cyprus, which is of an urgency that no

I Subsequently circulated as document S/11401.

14

‘.

‘,

to the operafive part of the draft resolution contained
in document S1114OO. I shall read out the amendment.
After the words “Requests the %ecretary-General to
take appropraite action in the’light of his statement”,
we would is the following: “taking into accoqnt the
fact that th&,sase-fire will be the first step in the full
implementation
of Security Council resolution 353
(1974)“.
144. In introducing
this amendment,
the Soviet
delegation is pioceeding on the basis of paragraph 2
of resolution 353 (1974), which calls upon all parties
to the conflict and to the fighting as a first step to
cease-firing+nd
I stress “as a first step”. In putting
forward this formal amendment, my delegation also
proceeds on the basis of the statement of President
Makarios as transmitted by Reuters from London on
30 July. In that statement,
President Makarios
emphasizes tliat a cease-fire agreement can. only be
a first step towards full implementation
of thk Security
Council resoliution of 20 July. That is why we have
introduced
this formal amendment
to the draft
resolution which has been circulated and is now under
discussion.
145. In accordance with rule 46 of the provisional
rules of procedure, my delegation requests that this
formal amendment which I have just read out should
be circulated in all of the official languages.

.-

requested that its amendment should be circulated in
all of the official languages. We have every right to
do so, and this request has been made by other
members of the Cbuncil as well; we are therefore
surprised that you have not yet printed our request.
151. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr: Pr’esident, there is nothing in rule 46, as I see it, that
says that a draft resolution or an amendment has in
fact to be published in the official languages of the
Security Council before the Council has dealt with it.
152. Now, we are here in the position-thanks
to
the representative of the Soviet Union-of
knowing
what his amendment is. Everyone around this table
has heard it.,He cannot complain that it has not been
translated into Russian, because it is his amendment.
Therefore, we have a simple situation in which there
is an amendment-one
that is acceptable, it would
seem, to the majority of the members of the Councilmerely adding the words “taking into account the
fact that the cease-fire will be the first step in the
implementation
of Security Council resolution 353
(1974)“) which is a matter on which we are all in
accord. It would seem unfortunate if any undue
technicality should hinder the Council from putting
into legislative effect the common view of us all.
153. Indeed, I am grateful to my colleague from the
Soviet Union for proposing the amendment. To a
certain extent, it underlines the point I was seeking
to make.

146. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I would not
dream of doing anything .this evening to upset the
good humour that the Council h.as been in so far. I
would merely observe that as far as my delegation
is concerned, I am perfectly happy to accept the
amendment. If it would assist the representative of
the Soviet Union, I am quite happy that the amendment should be accepted by the Council and that we
should proceed to the vote on the draft r&solution
as amended.

154. Therefore, given all the circumstances,
hope we can now proceed to the vote.

I would

155. -Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian):
I have sat in the Security Council for only ‘a short
time, but I can frankly state that my experience with
the United Nations covers more than one decade.
Since 1951, I have participated in the work of various
organs and of the General Assembly. I am surprised
at some of the methods used by members of the Council
today in their attempt to impose-even
contrary to the
provisional rules of procedure-an
immediate vote.
Moreover, I ‘believe it is a long-standing practice of
the United Nations, and not one just introduced
today, that the request of a Member State for the
circulation of a particular document, especially amendments to a draft resolution, is binding and that the
Member State has the right ti, insist. I therefore
support the request that the amendment be translated’
into all of the languages and cikculated. The representative of the Soviet Union is not the only representative
of a bember State making this request. I ask that the
rules of procedure be followed. We have always
abided by them. We could go very far astray and
set a bad precedent for our future work if we failed to
accede to this request.

147. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): I am entirely in agreement with this
amendment, which seems to me not to conflict with
the spirit of the draft resolution before us. I am prepared
to vote on the amendment without having a French
translation circulated.
148. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): I am in a little difficulty
here as I do not have any copy of the amendment being
talked about. If it has been circulated I would be
grateful to have a copy. I have not seen a copy so far.
149.

.;.s ;,. ;:’

The PRESIDENT

(@rerprerarion fionz Spanof Kenya would be
satisfied if the representative of the Soviet Union would
be so kind as to read out his amendment slowly.

ish): Perhaps the representative

150. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. President,
the Soviet delegation, acting in full accordance with
rule 46 of the provisional rules of procedure, has

156. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
ish): I should like to draw the attention
15

from

Spun-

of members

164. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I was merely going to point out what
you have called to our attention. Certainly, rule 31
says that motions shall “normally”
be placed before
representatives in writing. I would submit that this
is not a tiormal situation. We are dealing with a
first-rate crisis, and I would again urge that we move
on to the vote.

to rule 31 of the provisional rules of procedure, which
states: “Proposed
resolutions,
amendments
and
substantive motions shall normally be placed before
the representatives in writing.”
157. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
We have been talking here about the independence
of States. I am sure we have been glad to hear
from the representative of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic.

165.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
I should like to point out the paradox
we are facing. The representative of the Soviet Union
has himself proposed an amendment. The sponsors of
the draft resolution, those who worked on it, most of
the members sitting around this table, feel that that
amendment
follows the same lines as the draft
resolution, which means it is not necessary to circulate
the amendment in, writing. I am astonished that the
representative of the Soviet Union insists on making
us waste two hours in order that his own amendment
may be circulated in writing, an amendment he has
had up his sleeve since 4 o’clock this afternoon.

from French):

158. He says he has been around the United Nations
a long time, and he does not know of any single
previous example of our acting without having
texts in writing. I believe he has not been a very
constant observer of the Council or, for that matter,
of committees and other bodies of the United Nations.
159. I think we all know the reasons for this delay.
We have this amendment before us; it has been
accepted. It is acceptable to my delegation. We have,
as our French colleague has told us, been waiting
here all day, and I think we should proceed to the
vote.

166.

160. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I, too, should
like to draw attention to rule 31 of the provisional
rules of procedure, according to which proposed
resolutions and amendments are normally submitted
in writing. Therefore, if my request is not granted--and
I insist on it-that
will be a flagrant violation of the
rules of procedure.
161. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

from

I would request that.we proceed to the vote.

167. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trunslurion from Russian): In connexion
with the point of order raised by the representative
of the United Kingdom, I should like to remind him
that before the start of the voting any member of
the Security Council may at any time introduce any
amendment he deems necessary. Accordingly,
the
remarks he made in raising the point of order are
entirely out of place.

Span-

ish): I should like to call the attention

of the representative of the Soviet Union to the fact that the word
“normally”
is used in rule 3 1.

168. I insist that my amendment
be circulated
officially in all of the official languages.
169. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
If there are no further speakers, it seems to me that
the normal thing-and
in this abnormal situation even
more so-is to proceed to the vote.

162. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): On a point
of order I should like to say, with great respect for
my colleague from the Soviet Union, that it really
does not lie in his mouth now to complain that the
amendment is not in writing, when the reason it is
not in writing is that he held it up his sleeve until after
his motion to suspend had in fact failed.

170. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion
from
ish): Does any one else wish to speak now?

163. He will have observed that I have been sitting
next to him throughout the evening. It is not a question
of a sudden amendment .taking him by surprise in
the course of the debate. The representative of the
Soviet Union, for perfectly good purposes of his
own-1 make no complaint about it-is entitled to use
the provisional rules of procedure as he likes; indeed,
he gave me a lecture about them the other night, as
the Council will remember. So I am perfectly satisfied
to see him using them with the skill he is displaying
at the moment. But, with great respect, he cannot at
one and the same time hold the amendment up his
sleeve until he thinks it is convenient to produce it
and then complain that because he has delayed in
producing it the Council is not entitled to deal with it.

Spun-

17 1. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian):
If some members of the Council find it difficult to
accept the idea of an amendment being circulated as
a separate document in all of the official languages,
then perhaps we could take a different approach to
this question. Since, as I understand it, the members
of the Council most directly interested in draft
resolution S/l 1400 have accepted this amendment,
perhaps it would be ‘appropriate to issue a revised
text of the resolution. But in that case we, for our
part, would request that the document be circulated
in all of the official languages. I would ask, Mr. President, that you act in accordance with the provisional
rules of procedure.
16

172. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I am sorry
to keep coming in, but, really, is’it seriously being
suggested that the Security Council has no emergency
procedure and that in any case in which an amendment
is being proposed to a draft resolution the Council,
even in a matter of extreme urgency, shall adjourn
so that the provisions of rule 46 shall be complied
with?

rules 31 ‘and 46 of the provisional rules of procedure,
my delegation insists that its formal amendment be
circulated in all of the official languages. We are
demanding just one thing: strict and unswerving
compliance with the provisional rules of procedure.
The attempts by some members of the Council to
interpret these rules in their own way and even to
sidestep compliance with ‘them cannot deprive us of
the right to apply the rules of procedure as they should
be applied.

173. Even from my limited knowledge of the Security
Council--and of course I defer to my colleague on the
right when it comes to a knowledge of the rules of
procedure-it
cannot be right that the Council cannot
act quickly. Of course it can. The whole object of
the Council is to act quickly. And if the interpretation
that our Byelorussian colleague and the representative
of the Soviet Union are putting on these rules is
correct, the Council would not be able to proceed
immediately
in any emergency situation, no matter
how grave, because as soon as an amendment is
proposed we would then suddenly have to adjourn so
that it should be, published in all of the languages of
the Council.

178.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
Combat is still raging in Cyprus; we
have been discussing the situation for more than
10 hours. An amendment on which almost everyone
agrees has just been put forward. One delegation,
however, insists on dragging things out for at least
another two hours by means of a procedural trick.
You stated, Mr. President, that if that delegation did
not withdraw its request you proposed to ask the
Council to decide. I propose that we take a vote on
your proposal.

from

French):

179.

Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interpretation
May I just say that my delegation was
one of those which voted for a suspension of the
meeting because we thought that a delegation has every
right to ask for a few hours’ suspension so that it can
receive instructions. We did so in good faith, and
the representative of the Soviet Union has put forward
an amendment which we have well understood. We
find it a very felicitous amendment.

174. It is only necessary, I say with respect, to
analyse the proposition to realize that it cannot in fact
be right. Indeed, if we look at rule 46 in the context
of rules 45 and 47, we find that rule 45 says that
verbatim records of meetings shall be kept, rule 46 that
all resolutions shall be published, and rule 47 that
documents shall, ifthe Council so decides, be published
in any language other than the languages of the Council.

from French):

175. As to rule 3 1, the use in it of the word “normally”
illustrates, if it needs illustrating, the fact that there
is an emergency procedure in which the Council
can proceed to look at an amendment when it is not in
writing but is oral. Otherwise, there would be no need
in that rule 31 for the use of the word “normally”.
And it clearly is an emergency situation, because if it
were not an emergency situation the representative of
the Soviet Union would no doubt have produced his
amendment earlier on for us to consider. The fact
that he felt it necessary to keep it until ten past eight
at night obviously illustrates that it is an emergency
situation which should be dealt with, in my submission,
in an emergency way.

180. We should like to say to all concerned that
these procedural manoeuvres certainly do not help the
Cypriot cause and do not redound to the prestige of
the Security Council. And whatever vote may now be
taken on this procedural matter, my delegation will
abstain.

176. The PRESIDENT
(interpreetution from Spanish): It is my view that since rule 31 is not mandatory, and since rule 46 refers to resolutions which
have already been adopted, I would respectfully
request the representative of the Soviet Union not to
press his request for distribution of the, amendment in
the official languages so that we may proceed
immediately to the vote. If the Soviet delegation feels
that it should not accede to my request, then I would
have to consult the Council on the decision it wishes
to take concerning its procedure in this regard.

181. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from’ Spunish): I now put to the Council the proposal to proceed
immediately to a vote on the draft resolution in document S/11400, as amended by the delegation of the
Soviet Union.
182. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): In accordance
with rule 31 of the provisional rules of procedure, my
delegation would like to introduce a second amendment,* this time to the preamble of draft resolution
S/11400. The amendment
relates to the second
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution. After the
that all States have declared their
words “Noting
respect for the sovereignty,
independence
and
territorial integrity of Cyprus,” the following words
should be added: “as a State not belonging to any
. military alliance”.
183. In accordance with rule 46 of the provisional
rules of procedure, I insist that this amendment, too,
be circulated in all of the official languages.

177. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (rrunslution from Russian):
Pursuant to
17

184. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): I
should like to be helpful in clearing up this .confusion,
if I may. I move that we accede to the Soviet request
that both its amendments be put in writing. And if I
may be permitted an observation,, I hope there will
be enough negative votes or abstentions to clear up,
this matter.

191. Mr. BENNETT
(United States. of America):
Does that mean that the ,representative of the Soviet
Union’ has withdrawn’ his amendment?
..,
192. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Not at all.
193. Mr.. BENNETT
(United States, .of America):
Then I shall be glad to read it out, if it will help other
.
representatives.

185. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spunish): I shall now -put to, the vote the- motion of the
representative ‘of the United States that the two
amendments ‘of the Soviet Union to the .d&ft resolution in document S/ 11400 be circulated in. writing in all
the working languages of the Council.
<
A vote wus taken by a show of hands.,.’
In favour:

194. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):. I should like to ask the representative of the
Soviet Union kindly to read out his second amendment
as a contribution.to
the work of the Council.
‘L
195, Mr:’
SAFRONCHUK
(Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics)
(translation
from Russian):
Mr. President, yielding to your urgent request and
out of respect for all the members of. the Council, I
shall now for the second time read out the amendment,
although I do not .rule out the possibility that if this
amendment is not circulated in all of the official
languages, so that the members of the Council may
read it, I shall have to read it out several times more,
perhaps even for each member of. the Council
individually.
Nevertheless, I shall now read out this
amendment which, in our opinion, is of fundamental
. .:
importance.

None.

Against: Australia, Costa Rica, France; United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Abstaining: Austria, China, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania, Peru, United Republic of Cameroon.
The result of the vote was no votes in favour,
5 against, with 8 abstentions.
The motion was not adopied, having fiiled
the q@mative vote of nine members.

to obtain
196. The amendment is to the se&d
preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution
contained in
document S/11400. The amendment would add, after
the words “Noting that all States have declared their
respect for the sovereignty,
independence
and
territorial
integrity of Cyprus,” -the- words “as a
State not belonging to any military .alljance”.

Two members
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republics and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
did not participate in the.voting.
186. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, is not the situation now that there is before the
Council one amendment and a draft resolution? It
has been agreed that the amendments should not be
reduced to writing. The are no other speakers and I
move that we vote on the draft resolution.

197. Once again I propose, in order to facilitate and
expedite the work of the Council and so that members
of the Council may take a definite decision on this
amendment, that it be circulated in :all. of the official
languages of the United Nations, as;required by the
provisional rules of procedure
:.

187. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): It is my understanding
that we must vote
first on both amendments and then on the draft
resolution.

189. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I should like to ask the representative of the
Soviet Union to be so kind as to read out once again
his second amendment to draft resolution S/l 1400.

198. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (translation from
Chinese): In voting on resolution 353 (1974), the
Chinese delegation made reservations on its provisions concerning UNFICYP.
Since, the present draft
resolution mainly concerns the question of UNFICYP
and the Chinese delegation has always held different
views on the question of the dispatch of United
Nations forces, the Chinese delegation, based on our
principled position, will not participate in the voting
on the draft resolution contained in document S/l 1400.
For the same reason, we shall also, not participate in
the voting on the two related amendments.

190. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union’of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I shall wait
until the amendment is available in writing in all of
the official languages. I have already read it out.

199. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I shall now put to the vote the first amendment
put forward by the Soviet Union to the draft
resolution in document S/11400, which would add at

188. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Could we please have ‘the second amendment read out
for us again?

18

the end of the operative paragraph the following
wording: “taking into account that the cease-tire with
be the first step in the full implementation
of
Security Council resolution 353 (1974):
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The amendinent
One member
voting.

was adopted bj 14 votes to. nonP:
‘. ‘.
(China) did not participatb
in’ thh

200. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
frorit Spanish): I shall now put to the vote the second amendment submitted by the delegation of the Soviet’Union,.
to add at the end of the second paragraph of the pre-,
ambule the following words: “as a State not belonging
to any military &tnce.”
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against:

Notie’.’

Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Costa Rica, France;
Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,’ Peru, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon,
United States of
America.
The result of the vote was 2 in favour, none against,
with 12 abstentions.
The amendment was not adopted, having failbd to
obtain the qffirmative vote of nine members.
One member
voting.

(China)

did not participate

in the

201. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): Before putting to the vote the draft resolution,
as amended, I shall call on the representative of
Kenya, who wishes to explain his vote before the
vote.
202. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): I wish to explain my
delegation’s vote before voting. We have very serious
reservations about the declaration under discussion,
on which the Secretary-General based his report.
203. We deplore in particular the discussion of the
affairs of Cyprus by those guilty of creating these
tragic conditions without the participation of Cyprus.
We deplore the fact that there is apparently no
machinery for making Greece and Turkey pay for
UNFICYP,
which they are calling upon to maintain
the peace which they have sought to destroy by their
military adventures. However, as we are seeking a
speedy return of peace to Cyprus, we shall vote for
the draft resolution contained in document S/11400

because we do not wish to delay any measures that
may lead to that goal. In so doing, we should like to’
stress that we consider the measures envisaged in the
draft resolution to be but the first steps’ towards a full
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974) ,’ and .the
restoration in Cyprus of full independence, sovereignty.
and territorial integrity.
204. The .PRESIDENT
(interpretation
frtim Sp&ish): I shall now put to the vote the draft, resolution
--I call on the representative
of the Soviet Union. ’ ’
,
j.
.. .. ,
205. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America);.
Point of order. The Soviet representative can speak
only in explanation of vote. We are in the voting
process.
206. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I should : like to ,a& ,the- representative of the
Soviet Union whether he intends to explain his vote
1f
before the vote.
.*
207. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation
from Russian):. .If I say
something more, is there anything to prevent me from
doing so? May I speak?
208. The PRESIDENT,
(interpretation
from Spanish): The voting procedures have already commenced. That is why, out of deference to the Soviet
delegation, I was going to call on the Soviet representative to explain his vote before the vote. I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
209. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Point of order.
I am asking for the floor so that I may speak in
explanation of vote.
210. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I call on the representative of the Soviet Union.
211. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): The situation
that has arisen is most unusual. There is a Russian
proverb which says: “Straight from the ship to the
ball”. Unfortunately,
I am in a somewhat different
situation in this instance: I came off an airplane straight
into a meeting of the Security Council.
212. However, the question now under consideration
by the Council and on which a vote is about to be
taken, is a very serious one. Documents concerning
the question under discussion have been received
today; the draft resolution was submitted today, only a
few hours ago. Not a single delegation, apart from those
that are geographically close to their Governments,
has had an opportunity to receive instructions. The
Soviet delegation has not yet received instructions.

213. The fundamental question is that of a ceasefire. That is the decisive question. Both parties to
the conflict in the region which is the subject of the
item before the Security Council have formally
undertaken to implement the Security Council decision
on the cease-fire. Judging from the newspapers-and,
unfortunately,
I have not had an opportunity
to
familiarize myself with the official text of the Geneva
Declaration-both
parties, with the participation of a
third party, the United Kingdom,
have reaffirmed
their position concerning compliance with the Council
cease-fire decision. Consequently, this question may
be regarded as settled and accepted.

representative of the Soviet Union, I shall do the same
for him, despite the fact that the voting procedure had
already started.
219. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian):
Mr. President, we are now precisely at the stage where
explanations of vote are being made. You have given
the floor in explanation of vote to a number of
representatives.
I believe that all members of the
Council have the right, before the vote, to explain
the reasons why they take this or that position. Of
course, because of a violation of the provisional rules
of procedure and because certain procedural decisions
were imposed upon us, some. members will now find
it difficult to define ‘their position on the substance
of this question. Nevertheless, we should like to draw
the Council’s attention to a number of considerations
relating to the draft resolution, and‘we should like to
state our views on these matters.

214. The question arises as to what functions should
be entrusted to the United Nations in the situation
that has arisen. What is at issue here is, apparently,
new functions and a mandate for the United Nations
force in Cyprus. This question needs further study
and requires the Council to take appropriate measures.
The question also arises whether some changes should
not be made in the composition of the Force in Cyprus.
This is not to prejudge the question, but it does
unquestionally arise and the Council will have to give
some thought to it. There is a need for more detailed
study of the Geneva agreement, especially for those
who are interested in the preservation of peace and
security in the eastern Mediterranean.

220. The first preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution refers to resolution 353 (1974). We all know
very well that the Security Council unanimously
adopted and endorsed that resolution, stressing that it
represented a positive contribution by the Council to
a solution of the urgent problems that had arisen in
connexion with the events in Cyprus. We shall not,
of course, dwell on the substance of the question,
since what we are now doing is explaining our vote.
Nevertheless, we should like to note the importance
of the reference to resolution 353 (1974).

215. In the light of all the foregoing considerations,
the Soviet delegation makes a formal procedural
proposal that we postpone the vote and that appropriate
consultations be undertaken among members of the
Council.

221. As the Council will clearly recall, the point is
that resolution 353 (1974) calls for respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. We would also note that the resolution calls
for an immediate end to foreign military intervention,
a cease-fire and a number of other important steps,
the full implementation
of which is the main task
facing us at this stage. It is precisely that resolution
and the reference to it that requires us to take special
action to ensure that the provisions of the earlier
resolution are fully implemented.

216. That is essentially what I had to say in explanation of vote.
217. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, I wish to speak on a point of order. With great
respect to the representative of the Soviet Union
who has just come in, we fully appreciate his
difficulties. He possibly does not know, for the reasons
which he gave us, that this issue was in fact put
before the Council about half an hour ago and was
voted upon-the
proposal by the Soviet delegation to
postpone discussion of this item; and this proposal
has in fact already been voted on and has in fact
already been rejected.
In those circumstances,
particularly since we were in the voting process when
the representative of the Soviet Union arrived hotfoot, if that is the right word, from Kennedy Airport,
1 really would suggest, Mr. President that we go back
to the position that we were in when he came among
us, or upon us. In those circumstances, what we
should do is to continue with the vote that you were
in fact proceeding with.

222. At the same time, we are constrained to note the
fact that as a result of the imposition on us as a matter
of urgency-but
when it is not strictly necessary, as
I must candidly point out--of the adoption of the draft
resolution which is now before us, we are damaging
the authority of the Council as well as doing harm to
the very important and serious decisions adopted
earlier on the item under discussion.
223. However, the positions taken by some countries
obliges us to appeal to the members of the Council
once again to give serious thought to the situation that
has arisen, to refrain from taking steps which might
be somewhat unilateral in nature and to postpone the
vote for the period of time requested by the Soviet
Union, since, as is known, this has to do with the
determination
of our position. And it is not only’the
delegation of the Soviet Union that is concerned.

218. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The representative of the Byelontssian
SSR
has asked to be allowed to explain his vote before the
vote. Since I made an exception in the case of the
20

wished to explain his vote. You called upon him,
Mr. President. He made a speech. Now, with respect,
we have not yet voted. I do not see how he can twice
explain the vote he has not yet cast. Once, with
respect, is enough.

224. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I shall now put to the vote draft resolution
s/ 11400.
225.

I call on the representative

of the Soviet Union.

235. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I wish to state
that if the desire of the USSR delegation to postpone
the vote is not respected and the draft resolution is
put to a vote before the Soviet delegation receives
instructions, my delegation will be unable to support
the draft resolution and will be obliged to vote against
it. If those who are trying to impose the draft resolution
upon us want that to happen in the voting, then let
them pursue their tactic of imposing things and let
them take full responsibility for the results.

226. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation fvom Russian): I very much
regret that the United Kingdom representative did
not heed my reasonable arguments and is adamant in
calling for a vote on the draft resolution. This calls
to mind the very worst times of the cold war, when
decisions of the Security Councilwere forced through
by a mechanical majority of votes I would not wish
to recall those melanchoiy times; neither would I
wish to see such methods practised again.
227. It was stated very reasonably that the Soviet
delegation did not have instructions.
That is a
procedural consideration.
Of late, and even in the
worst times of the cold war, such considerations were
taken into account; if delegations had no instructions,
the vote was postponed. I recall how frequently
both the United Kingdom delegation and the United
States delegation, as well as others, demanded postponement of a vote for this reason.
228. Mr. BENNETT
Point of order.

(United

236. I do not see what the great hurry is. A matter
of a few hours is not going to decide the issue. The
cease-fire has gone into effect in accordance with
both the Security Council resolution and the Geneva
agreement. Hence, there is no particular haste; it is
only the United
Kingdom
delegation’s
stubborn
desire to impose the resolution on us that is prompting
it to insist on a vote and to disregard the practice
that has developed over the whole existence of the
United Nations whereby resolutions are voted upon
not less than 24 hours after they are submitted and
not after only a few hours. That is the established
practice in the work of the Security Council. In view
of these procedural considerations I insist that the
vote be postponed, and if this request is not heeded
I shall have to vote against the draft resolution.

States of America):

229. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call on the representative of the United
on a point of order.

Span-

States

236. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
May I state that the representative of the Soviet
Union has, so to speak, dropped straight out of heaven
to join us here. He is not speaking to explain his
vote. He has already done that. We are in the midst
of voting. We have done the Soviet delegation the
courtesy of voting on its two- amendments, as is the
proper procedure, and I insist that we follow proper
procedure and continue the vote.

237. ‘YiThe PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
in document S/ 11400, as amended through the adoption
of the first Soviet amendment.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In~favour: Australia, Austria, Costa Rica, France,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, United
Kingdom of Great. Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon,
United States of
America.

231. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I asked to speak
in order to explain my vote. As I see no reason for
haste, I should like to state...

Against:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Union’ 1of Soviet Socialist Republics.

232.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): It was my understanding that the Soviet delegation
has already explained its vote before the vote.

The result of the vote was 12 in favour

Republic,

and2 against.

The‘draft resolution, as amended, was not adopted,
one of,the negative votes being that of a permanent
member of the Council.

233. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I would like to
explain; let me explain the substance of the matter.
I am stating that we have no instructions, and I am
going to vote against the draft resolution.

One’ member
voting..
,_

234. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
The
representative of the Soviet Union came and said he

(China)

did not participate

238. ‘%The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I give the floor to the Secretary-General.
21

in the
Span-

239. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In my statement earlier this evening I mentioned the question
of UNFICYP’s
continued presence in the Turkish
area of control. I stated that that matter was under
discussion with the Turkish military command in
Cyprus. In the meantime; I have received from my
Special Representative
in Cyprus the text of a
message received on the night of 31 July from the
Turkish military command. The message reads as
follows:

Turkish forces. So everv move thev make is towards
increasing the tension and not relieving it, and therefore
not towards confidence.
244. Also, there is the connotation that the territory
occupied by the Turkish forces is no longer the
territory of Cyprus: it is now part of Turkey, and
therefore the United Nations Force is on Turkish
territory, not Cyprus territory.
245. A very serious situation arises from that attitude,
and it reveals a great deal that should be revealed.

“Turkish
Peace Force Commander
is of the
opinion that the United Nations forces in the area
have successfully completed their functions and
now should move outside the Turkish-controlled
area to the locations where their mandate is most
needed. Such a move is felt to be also consistent with
the Geneva cease-tire agreement signed on 30 July.
Therefore I kindly request your. consideration of
giving necessary instructions to the elements of
UNFICYP
and UNCIVPOTd to leavre the Turkishcontrolled area within the earliest time possible.
I must reiterate on this occasion my sincere
appreciation and gratefulness for the efficiency and
spirit of co-operation shown by your forces in my
area of responsibility during the accomplishments
of their duties. I hope our relations with the United
Nations forces along the security areas, when
established, would be as best as ever. I would be
most happy if I could help United Nationssupported
humanitarian
activities
in Turkishcontrolled area in the future.“.

246. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call upon the representative of Greece.

Span-

247. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): In my first
statement I brought to the attention of the Council
that 24 hours after the signing of the Geneva agreement
the firing had not stopped in Cyprus, and in fact two
Greek Cypriot villages were threatened with occupation by the Turkish army.
248. Now, after what we heard from the SecretaryGeneral, I consider that we find ourselves in a very
serious situation, and I should like to ask my honourable colleague from Turkey: What is really the intention
of the reply of the Commander of the Turkish forces
in Cyprus? Is it that UNFICYP
will operate in the
territory which is not occupied by the Turkish forces
and that it will not operate in the territory occupied
by the Turkish forces? Is it, by any chance, the
intention that this territory should become something
other than what it is now? Is there any intention that
this territory should no longer be Cyprus territory?
I should appreciate an answer to that.

That is the message our Force Commander
today from the Turkish Force Commander.

received
1:: ’
240. I felt it my duty to inform the Council of the
foregoing and of my intention to give appropriate
instructions to the Commander of UNFICYP,
keeping
in mind that the Force can operate successully only
if it has the full support of all parties concerned.

249. Mr. PRESIDENT
(interprefation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

Span-

250. Mr. OLCAY (Turkev): I have listened with great
attention to what ‘the Secretary-General
has said
concerning the communication
the Commander
of
UNFICYP in Cyprus seems to have received from the
Commander of the Turkish armed forces over there.
We have been haggling since yesterday afternoon or
yesterday evening about the necessity of entering into
a more definite relationship between UNFICYP
and
the Turkish forces. We have tried since yesterday to
establish the relative legal positions of UNFICYP
and
the Turkish forces. So far, I suppose because the
Secretary-General-and
I appreciate his position-has
not been able to receive a clear mandate from this
Council, the situation has remained,‘to
say the least,
explosive, and this has been expressed around this
table.

241. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreturion fron? spanis/z): I call upon the representative of Cyprus.
242. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): This move by the
Turkish Commander violates all the agreements with
regard to the presence of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus
and renders the work of that Force very
difficult because it must occupy the positions it has
held before in order to protect the population on both
:
sides.
243. Why do the Turkish Commander and theTurkish
Government ask for the removal of that Force? The
impression is created that they want the Force,not to
see what they are doing there and therefore not to be
able‘ to afford protection. Even if there is no such
intention, that impression is created, and that,ereates
suspicion and lack of confidence-but
the dTurkish
Foreign Minister in Geneva said that mutual confidence
is an important element towards the removal of the

251. Now, in paragraph 3 (a) of their- Declaration
the three Foreign Ministers agreed that:
“A security zone of size to be determined by
representatives of Greece, Turkey and the United
22

258. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I would certainly not
jump to the conclusion that the future of UNFICYP
seems hopeless as a result of the situation which has
arisen before what UNFICYP
can or cannot do on the
island has been the subject of a thorough study among
all the parties involved, as indicated in paragraph 3
of the Declaration.

Kingdom in consultation with UNFICYP
should
be established at the limit of the areas occupied by
the Turkish armed forces at the time specified in
paragraph 2 above. This zone’*-that
is to say, the
security zone between the areas-“should
be
entered by no forces other than those of UNFICYP,
which should supervise the prohibition
of entry.
Pending the determination of the size and character
of the security zone, the existing area between the
two forces should be entered by no forces.”

259. In reply to what my colleague from Greece has
.said about the mixed villages, the mixed villages
mentioned here are certainly not mixed villages that
might be in the security zone. Otherwise, this paragraph 3 (c) would not be a separate paragraph.

But nowhere is it stated in that paragraph that within
the zones UNFICYP
should operate.

260. As far as I can, judge, not knowing the military
situation and not having been a party to the negotiations
which led to the adoption of the Declaration, there is
in fact in Cyprus right now, as a result of the military
operation and as a result of the encirclement of the
Turkish villages, the following situation. There is a
security zone, which is the zone in which the operation
took place, which is under the control of the Turkish
armed forces, and this is dealt with in subparagraph 3 (a).

252. Now, as will be realized, I am without instructions on the matter referred to earlier and just now by
the representative of Greece, and I am not therefore
in a position to say what has happened. There is one
thing I do know for certain, and that is the legal
positions with regard to the various zones: the zone
occupied by the Turkish forces and the zone between
the areas occupied by other forces and the Turkish
forces have not yet been clarified. And that is why
since yesterday I have been insisting that the position
of UNFICYP
with regard to those areas and the
relationship
between UNFICYP
and the Turkish
command need to be established.

261. The second category is dealt with in paragraph 3 (b); it is that of the Turkish enclaves.
Everybody familiar with the pre-war situation in
Cyprus knows that the Turks used to live in enclaves.

253. I very much hope that when the SecretaryGeneral finds that he is in a position to give instructions
to the Force to enter into some kind of negotiations
with regard to the implementation
of this paragraph 3 (a) of the Declaration, the situation may be
clarified. At this stage I cannot say more than that.
254. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Greece.

262;‘. The third category is the mixed villages, for
which a special provision has been designed. The main
problem that confronted the negotiators in Geneva
-and again I am drawing conclusions on the basis of
what I have read-was the non-existence of a definite
mandate of UNFICYP
covering the new situation
which arose as a result of the military operation. This
is precisely why this Council has been trying all day
today to arrive at a resolution, that is, in order to allow
the Secretary-General and his representatives to come
to what would be the beginning of on arrangement.

Span-

255. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): Again without
having any instructions from my Government, I am in
about the same position as my colleague from Turkey
on, this matter, but I note that paragraph 3 (c) of the
Geneva Declaration reads: “In mixed villages the
functions of security and police will be carried out by
UNFICYP.”
Are there not any mixed villages in the
Turkish sector right now? What about Kyrenia, for
instance?

263. That is the sum of what I can say at this time,
having no instructions.
264. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

265. ’ Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): The representative
of Turkey speaks about the security zone. The security
zone was supposed to be a buffer zone that would be
operated by UNFICYP
irrespective
of its other
operations on the island. Therefore, in the area outside
the security zone, within the territory occupied by the
Turkish forces, UNFICYP
is now operating. And it
will have to operate, particularly in mixed villages, as
provided for in paragraph 3 (c). And there are mixed
villages, among them the town of Kyrenia, which has
a mixed population. So, this concept of reversing and
disrupting the whole function of UNFICYP
in Cyprus
is not Ia hopeful sign. It is an ominous indication of
the intentions of Turkey in respect of its occupation

256. In any case I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the very serious situation in which
the Council and all of us find ourselves. I do not know
what my Cypriot colleague thinks-if
he would be
disposed to permit the operation of UNFICYP in the
Turkish enclaves in all the rest of the island when
those forces cannot operate on the territory occupied
by the Turkish forces. If that is the case, then I do
not see any future for the United Nations Force in
Cyprus. I think that would be unfortunate.
257. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

Span-

Span23

of this territory in Cyprus, coming immediately after
the much vaunted agreement in Geneva. It really
comes as a contradiction for those who expressed the
hope that now we are entering a period when there will
be confidence and trust in Cyprus. It comes from the
very source which is going to be the trouble and
which causes the lack of confidence and trust in
Cyprus-as a matter of fact, the source of the projected
partition of Cyprus. With the phantom of partition,
how can there be peace in Cyprus? With division,
parcellation and further parcellation
as envisaged,
what can be the future of Cyprus? One of peace and
quiet? We see the results from the statements now
made by the representative of Turkey.
266.

The PRESIDENT

(interpretation
from
of Turkey.

Soviet delegation has been unable today to support
the draft resolution so hurriedly imposed upon the
Security Council without giving the- USSR delegation
an opportunity
to study the substance of the draft
properly, and the Geneva agreement as well, and to
receive instructions on this question from the Soviet
Government. This practice of imposing urgent, hasty
draft resolutions on the Council has, it seems, not been
particularly popular in recent times.
270. There have been many occasions when the
delegation of the United Kingdom, for example, not
having instructions,
has requested postponement
of a vote in order to telephone London to get instructions from its Government, and the Council has been
accommodating in such cases. In the present instance,
the United Kingdom delegation acted directly counter
to this established practice in the work of the Council
by insisting on an immediate
vote on the draft
resolution. Of course, it was not possible to go along
with this. We all recall that other delegations, in
particular the United States delegation, have found
themselves in similar situations where the Council
has suspended meetings or postponed voting because
the United States delegation had no instructions; the
United States representative,
Mr. Scali, and his
predecessor would call the State Department while
the Council waited until the United States delegation
received instructions or postponed the voting. That is
the generally accepted and long-established practice in
the work of the Security Council. The delegation of
the USSR cannot but express its regret that at this
meeting both the representative of the United Kingdom
and the representative of the United States did not
take this into account and, contrary to the established
practice of the Security Council, insisted on a vote.
For the record, we note this as an instance which in
recent times is without precedent.

Span-

ish): I call on the representative

267. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I am not going to speak
on the issue of partition. We have dealt at length in
the past and recently, and probably shall deal at length
in the time ahead, with the future of Cyprus on the
basis of what its past has been. The constitutional
aspects of Cyprus will be decided upon by those who
at the time will represent the community of Greek
Cypriots and the community
of Turkish Cypriots,
along with the three countries that are scheduled to
meet in August. That is a totally different matter.
Now when it comes to the question of the mixed
villages, I can only repeat again that there is a
question of a zone of occupation. There is the zone of
occupation for which a special situation will arise if
UNFICYP
is going to have anything to do with that
part of the island because, as the Secretary-General
has indicated, the Turkish commander has already
said that he is ready to give him all the facilities for
humanitarian-purposes.
But the area as it now stands
is a military zone. All the references to the possible
activities of UNFICYP
on the basis of this paper
are between zones, as indicated by the representative
of Greece and also as referred to by Mr. Rossides.
The problem with which we are confronted, I repeat,
is the question of the mandate of UNFICYP,
which
obviously is insufficient as it stands to cover all the
situations. The Secretary-General
has had ample
opportunity to indicate to the Council that if he is to
operate on behalf of peace he needs something more
than he has at present. That is the crux of the matter.
The sooner this problem is solved the better we shall
all be. I still do not see any reason to infer that this
arrangement, which has had no chance of being applied
in its simplest form, is doomed to failure.
268.

The PRESIDENT

271. Furthermore,
the exchange of views among
delegations has even more convincingly shown that
the Soviet delegation acted quite correctly in objecting
to the hasty adoption of the resolution. As a result of
the exchange of views among the delegations of the
parties directly concerned in this matter, it is perfectly
obvious to the Council and to all members that there
are a great many unresolved problems on which the
Council needs to reflect, to consult and to give new
instructions to the Secretary-General.
I very much
regret that the Secretary-General made his statement
after the vote. Before the vote it would have convinced
the Council even more that there are many matters that
are not yet clear and require further consideration by
the Council. A new situation is developing. After a
brief exchange, the parties state that some new
functions are required for the United Nations Force.
This, too is something that should be pondered;
moreover, the two representatives
of the parties
directly involved have declared that as yet they cannot
make any official statements because they have not
received instructions. Here is a vivid example of the
difficult situation in which delegations find themselves

(interpretation

from Spanit will be my
understanding that the Council has heard the statement
of the Secretary-General and agrees with the attitude
which he proposes to adopt and of which he informed
us.
ish): If there are no further comments

269. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I regret that the
24

when, because of the hasty consideration
of a
question, they do not have .mstructions. Why were
the legitimate requests of the Soviet delegation not
to rush into a vote but to postpone voting until it had
received instructions not taken into account-requests
which were in accordance with the Charter, the
provisional rules of procedure and the long-established
practice of the Security Council?

evening. If I may say so respectfully, it is strange to
be without instructions but nevertheless to veto an
important draft resolution of this sort.
277. Secondly, the draft resolution that we were
considering this evening was not in fact a new one.
It has been known, certainly in the corridors of this
building, since early this morning, You, Mr. President,
will know that intensive consultations took place. You
will also know that, as a result of those intensive
consultations, broadly speaking, if I may summa&e
the view .of the Security Council-at
least as we felt
it-it
seemed that most members were agreed that
the Secretary-General should in fact be in a position
to respond at any rate to the minimal calls which
were made upon him by the Declaration issued by the
three Foreign Ministers.

272. I must stress, in the light of the situation that
has arisen, that when we receive instructions. the
Soviet delegation will be prepared to resume consideration of this question forthwith and to adopt an
appropriate draft resolution which takes into account
both the provisions and concerns of the earlier draft
resolution and the provisions which must be reflected
in the resolution
and the decisions of the Council
.
in the hght of current developments in Cyprus. We
should like particularly to stress that there is a need
for a new decision by the Council underscoring the
importance of strict observance of theCouncil’s ceasefire decision. If there is even the slightest violation of
the cease-fire, the Council must emphatically demand
that there should not be any violation, however small,
by any of the parties. The Council should reflect on
this and consider the question without delay tomorrow
morning; its consideration should not be put off until
evening.

278. We have been considering this matter now for
some weeks. It is not a new issue. The fact that
UNFICYP might be involved in an eventual declaration
coming out of Geneva is something which, I should
have thought, has been in the minds of most people,
and certainly it has been in the minds of my delegation
and, I think., of many other delegations around this
table. I regret very much that the Soviet Union felt
it necessary to cast the vote it did this evening.
I hope that, as I think the representative of the Soviet
Union seemed to be indicating, a period of reflection
-perhaps
overnight but at any rate a period of
reflection-may
enable the Soviet Union to join in
what were, after all, the wishes of not only my
delegation but, if I remember the vote correctly, no
less than 12 members of the Security Council, with
only one delegation not participating.

273. The Turkish representative raised the question
of the functions of the United Nations Force. If that
question arises, then it; too, mustsbe considered by the
members of the Council and by the Council as a whole.
The Council must have detailed consultations on all
these questions and issue new instructions to the
Secretary-General
or ask him for his views and
suggestions as to what the Council and the United
Nations in general should do in present circumstances.

279. I take mild objection-not
strong objection at
this hour of the night but mild objection--to
the
allegation that I and my ~delegation were trying to
steamroller a draft resolution through the Council
against the wishes of the members. With great respect
I must say that the votes on the whole indicated that
that was not the position. I fully understand that it
may perhaps be easier to obtain instructions from
London than it is to obtain instructions from Moscow.
If that is the position one must of course accept what
the representative of the Soviet Union has said to us
this evening and hope that a period of reflection-a
period of rest perhaps after his journey and our
exertions-may
mean that the Security Council
tomorrow, when, as we hope, this draft resolution
or something like it will be introduced, will come to
a different conclusion from the somewhat extreme
one it came to this evening.

274. That is why the Soviet delegation did not find
it possible to accept this draft resolution, which was
put forward in undue haste. We object as a matter
of principle to attempts by any delegation or group
of delegations to impose such a decision upon the
Council in haste when certain delegations have not
received instructions from their Governments and
when time is so short it would have been physically
impossible for their Governments to study the new
documents-which
are of great
international
importance both at the present juncture and because
of the possible consequences-in
order to determine
their position on the item under discussion.
275. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I do not
wish to engage in recrimination with the representative
of the Soviet Union about what happened this evening.
I would only make two observations upon it, since
he was kind enough to make some observations
upon me.

280. Mr. MALIK
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I should like
once again to explain to the United Kingdom representative that the USSR delegation was unable to
support the draft resolution for procedural reasons
having nothing to do with the substance.

276. First of all, he is without instructions.
We
have been told that on a number of occasions this
25

281. As I have repeatedly stated, my delegation has
not yet received instructions.
It is now night in
Moscow, and it is not possible to call a meeting of
the Government to discuss the question.
282. I would like to clarify the issue. The United
Kingdom representative, in insisting that .a vote was
essential, was in effect trying to impose a decision,
contrary to Security Council practice and to common
sense. I am not afraid to call such behaviour irresponsible.
283. As for his remark about “reflection”,
I can
assure the United Kingdom representative that it is
not a matter of reflection but of having to obtain
official instructions from our Government. There is a
big difference. Reflection has its place, as it has
always. had and will continue to have. But the absence
of Government instructions made it impossible for our
‘delegation to support your draft resolution, which you
‘tried hastily to ram through the Council.
284. The United Kingdom representative raised the
question of my needing some rest. As you see, I am
hale and hearty; I do not need any rest. I have been

Litho in United Nations, New York

resting at an excellent sanatorium for a month, and
I feel just fine. That is why I am able to come straight
from a plane to a meeting of the Security Council
and take part in it. I am not sick; I am not tired. The
plane flew perfectly well, the food was excellent, and
I had all I wanted to drink. So I had a fine rest on
the plane. I am full of energy, and we can continue
meeting until morning if you like; when midnight
comes, I shall be moving to the President’s Chair,
because I am to be President of the Council as of
1 .August. I am prepared to continue working until
morning. I do not need any rest. That is why I did
not support the draft resolution which you tried today
to force through the Security Council, not because
of any need for reflection and not because I was tired.
No, not for those reasons, but exclusively for
procedural reasons. You must-not impose a resolution
after it has been before the Council only a few
hours. The established practice requires at least
24 hours if one of the delegations in the Council so
requests. You did not heed my request, and this is
what comes of such an unyielding attitude. So the
responsibility rests with you, not with me.
The meeting

00400

rose at 9.35 p.m.

74-82001-April

X983-2300
