270

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement in
the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made of
the finite resources available for the elaboration of multi­
lateral treaties,
Aware that the Asian-African Legal Consultative Com­
mittee has been reviewing certain aspects of multilateral
treaty-making,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General sub­
mitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth, 31 thirty­
sixth, 32 and thirty-seventh33 sessions, including the replies
and observations made by Governments and international
organizations on the review of the multilateral treaty-making
process,
Having considered the report of the Working Group on
the Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process, 14
established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/ 112
of 10 December I 981, and noting that the Working Group
will require more time to fulfil its mandate as provided in
paragraph 2 of that resolution,
Taking into account the statements made at the current
session in the debate in the Sixth Committee, 15
1. Decides to reconvene the Working Group at its
thirty-eighth session with the aim of completing the exam­
ination of the matters referred to in paragraph 2 of resolu­
tion 36/112;
2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to pre­
pare and publish as soon as possible new editions of the
Handbook of Final Clauses36 and the Summary of the Prac­
tice of the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral
Agreements, 37 taking into account relevant new develop­
ments and practices in that respect;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Review of the mul­
tilateral treaty-making process".
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982

37/111. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session, 38
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 39 and
to give increasing importance to its role in relations among
States,

A/35/312 and Corr. I and Add. I and 2 and Add.2/Corr. I.
A/36/553 and Add. I and 2.
33 A/37/444 and Add. I.
34 A/C.6/37/L.29.
35 See Official Record.5 of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-sevellfh Se.uion,
Sixth Committee, 65th and 66th meetings.
36 ST/LEG/6.
37
ST/LEG/7.
38 Official Records of the General Assembl\'. Thirtv-seventh Session.
•
•
Supplement No. JO (A/37/10).
39
Resolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
31

32

Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting
questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics which
might be submitted to the International Law Commission,
and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the Commission
further to enhance their contributions to the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Welcoming the establishment of general objectives and
priorities which will guide the study by the International
Law Commission of the topics on its programme of work
within the term of office of Commission members elected
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest
for the contemporary international community, may be suit­
able for progressive development and codification of inter­
national law and therefore may be included in the future
programme of work of the International Law Commission,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session
and, in particular, for having completed the final reading
of the draft articles on the law of treaties between States
and international organizations or between international
organizations;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments
of Governments, whether in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should continue its work aimed at the prepa­
ration of drafts on all the topics in its current programme;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intention of the International Law Commission concerning
its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in para­
graphs 266 and 270 of its report;
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the in­
creased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and approves the conclusions
reached by the International Law Commission4<> concerning
summary records of its meetings and the application to its
documentation of the thirty-two-page limit, as well as the
request made by the Commission in paragraph 272 of its
report;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to in­
ternational organizations to respond as fully and expedi­
tiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments and observations on its draft
articles and questionnaires and for materials on topics on
its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Com­
mission will continue to enhance its co-operation with in­
tergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for
the progressive development of international law and its
codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the In­
ternational Law Commission, for its attention, the records
of the debate on the report of the Commission at the thirty­
seventh session of the General Assembly and to prepare and
distribute a topical summary of the debate.
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982
4
11 Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. II! iA/37110). paras. 267-269 ·and 27f
