S/PV.8600*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8600th meeting

Tuesday, 20 August 2019, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Czaputowicz/Ms. Wronecka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Michaelis
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Pompeo

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Challenges to peace and security in the Middle East
Letter dated 6 August 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/643)

* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 September 2019.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-25823 (E)
*1925823*

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Viotti: I thank the Polish presidency for
convening this timely discussion.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Challenges to peace and security in the
Middle East
Letter dated 6 August 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/643)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Egypt, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires, ad interim,
of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; and Mrs. Nasria Elarja Flitti, Deputy
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/643, which contains the text of a letter
dated 6 August 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Poland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.
2/47

20/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East remains troubling
and complex, characterized by protracted conflicts,
geopolitical tensions that play out at the regional level,
governance issues and severe deficits in socioeconomic
development in a number of countries. Yet, as the
Secretary-General noted to the Security Council
last year,
“The mechanisms and the safeguards to manage
the risks of escalation that existed in the past no
longer seem to be present.” (S/PV.8231, p. 2)
Our shared aspiration must be to find ways for a region
so rich in human capital and natural resources to fully
realize its potential for the benefit of all. We must never
lose sight of this aspiration.
In recent weeks alone, we have seen some of the
challenges on full display. The series of incidents in
the Strait of Hormuz and adjacent waterways have
raised tensions to dangerous levels. It is crucial that the
rights and duties related to navigation be respected in
accordance with international law. Restraint and genuine
dialogue are urgently needed in order to avoid the risk
that a minor miscalculation might inadvertently lead to
a major confrontation, with disastrous consequences
even well beyond the region. Deep disagreements about
Iran’s nuclear programme are further exacerbating
differences in the Gulf. Notwithstanding the concerns
about it, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
remains the only agreed international framework to
address Iran’s nuclear programme.
In Syria, Special Envoy Geir Pedersen is sparing
no effort to finalize the arrangements for the launch
of the constitutional committee as a door-opener to a
broader United Nations-facilitated political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and to implement
confidence-building measures, including on detainees.
However, the United Nations is concerned that the
ongoing hostilities in north-west Syria might risk
undermining the Special Envoy’s efforts to revive the
political process.
In Yemen, the United Nations continues to provide
desperately needed, life-saving humanitarian assistance,
while Special Envoy Martin Griffiths remains engaged
in efforts to implement the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We hope that will lead to broader and fully inclusive
discussions on ending the conflict.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the most
long-standing issue on the United Nations peace and
security agenda. A just solution acceptable to both
sides is essential for the future of the whole region.
The United Nations remains ready to support efforts
towards allowing Palestinians and Israelis to live in
two democratic States, side by side in peace and within
secure and recognized borders, based on relevant
United Nations resolutions.
As in other regions, realizing the promise of full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and
international humanitarian law requires commitment
and bold action, especially with a view to ending conflict,
addressing the root causes of violence and sustaining
peace. In the same vein, tackling the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism must simultaneously address
security concerns and uphold international human
rights obligations. Accelerating the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
intrinsically linked to conflict resolution and prevention.
Inclusive growth, environmental sustainability, gender
equality and opportunities for young people are all key
aspects of durable solutions.
There have been some notable gains in gender
equality in recent years, including substantial increases
in literacy and education and access to health services.
Yet equal opportunities remain limited, and genderbased violence is still widespread. Greater participation
by women in governance and economic activities would
not only improve family income and national economies,
but also reduce vulnerabilities to socioeconomic shocks
and liberate enormous potential.
While equality before the law is gradually gaining
ground, there is still a long way to go in a number of
situations in amending discriminatory laws and ensuring
more representative participation in parliaments and
leadership in political and public life more generally.
We know how crucial it is in conflict-affected countries
that women be able to play a meaningful role in peace
processes; indeed, women’s equal participation is
directly correlated with more sustainable peace. Yet
women continue to be marginalized. Moreover, with
a push-back on women’s and girls’ rights at the core
of terrorist and extremist agendas, it is all the more
important that efforts to strengthen gender equality be
central to our work in prevention, resilience and peace.
The power of youth is equally critical, as recognized
by the Security Council in its landmark resolution on

S/PV. 8600

youth, peace and security (resolution 2250 (2015)).
Children and young people make up nearly half the
region’s population. Job creation is an imperative, as
is investing in education, training and skills that match
the needs of today’s societies and markets.
The list of challenges is long, but that should not
deter us. The first order of business must be preventing
the most acute flashpoints in the region from boiling
over. Keeping the channels of communication
open needs to be priority number one, followed by
confidence-building measures to move parties away
from confrontation towards dialogue.
The United Nations is addressing the numerous
challenges on multiple fronts: from supporting
preventive diplomacy to mediating ongoing conflicts;
from providing humanitarian assistance to millions of
people to addressing the human rights dimension; and
from supporting sustainable development initiatives
to nurturing capacities to tackle climate change,
including through the region’s ample alternative
sources of energy. The Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in the region
are working extensively with a wide range of regional
and subregional organizations and national and regional
stakeholders, including civil society and women’s and
youth groups, in close cooperation with the United
Nations country teams. The role of the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
remains indispensable.
The Middle East region has many fault lines
and divisions. Yet within those challenges lies the
opportunity to build on the words and intentions of the
United Nations Charter towards action that will bring
real change and a bright future to the peoples of the
region. The United Nations remains strongly committed
to that endeavour.
The President: I thank Ms. Viotti for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland.
First, let me very warmly thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti for her insightful and comprehensive
briefing on the recent developments in the Middle East
and their impact on international peace and security.
Let me also say that Poland fully subscribes to
the statement to be delivered today by the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU) .

19-258233/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

Middle Eastern issues have been very frequently
discussed in the Security Council Chamber.
Unfortunately, solutions worked out so far have not
provided peace and stability. In recent years the region
has been ravaged by a wave of violent conflicts in a
number of its once-peaceful countries.
What we need is a positive approach in order to
restore peace and economic growth in the Middle East.
Uneven distribution of wealth generates inequality,
disrupts social cohesion and distorts economies.
Therefore, promoting entrepreneurship, especially
among young people, strengthening good governance,
combating corruption and ensuring access to education
are key to addressing social issues and releasing the
economic potential of the region.
Today’s meeting comes at a critical time. Current
uncertainties about the dynamics in the Middle East
are again keeping the whole region in the political
spotlight. The war in Syria has not ended, and any
subsequent escalation might bring about shattering
consequences for the Syrian people. We are witnessing
in Yemen the world’s largest humanitarian crisis, with
13 million people facing starvation. A political solution
acceptable to both sides in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine remains elusive. Growing tensions
in the Persian Gulf may lead, through a minor accident
or miscalculation, to a military confrontation.
These tensions have a variety of root
causes — demographic pressure, weak economies
and governance, violent extremism, radicalization
and illegal mass migration. People in Syria, Yemen
and Palestine face daily struggles with deprivation,
food shortages, low-quality medical care and lack of
education. It is our common responsibility and moral
obligation to find a way to end the suffering of civilians
and bring peace and stability back to the region. The
Security Council should actively support those willing
to act in accordance with international law to counter
aggressive policies and activities in the region.
Security in the Middle East is integrally linked
to the structure of the global order. Conflicts and
tensions in the region trigger worldwide political,
economic and social consequences, such as refugees
and increased migration, which are among the most
urgent global issues.
International
terrorism
represents
another
challenge. In Iraq and Syria, the defeat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant is an important step. But we
4/47

20/08/2019

are still far from eliminating the scourge of terrorism
in the region and the threat that it poses around the
world. In our view, the aim is to set up financial rules
and regulations in such a way as to prevent terrorists
from using existing gaps to conduct their activities.
The return of foreign fighters also poses a threat to
their homelands.
Another challenge is the proliferation of missiles
capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction,
particularly to non-State actors. The tragic consequences
of the loopholes in the control regime have been
repeatedly observed, inter alia, in the case of Houthi
attacks in Yemen. It should be reiterated that resolution
1540 (2004) states that all countries should introduce
domestic controls on technologies related to weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems.
We are also concerned, as a European Union
member that is a party to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), about Iran’s announcement that it
will not commit to fully abide by the provisions of the
agreement. Iran should refrain from actions that could
further undermine the implementation of both the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
The freedom and security of maritime navigation
in the region is an ongoing concern. Recent attacks
and seizures of ships in the Gulf pose a direct threat
to the security of maritime navigation. The United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea must be
fully observed.
With its ample resources and strategic location, the
Middle East plays a key role in securing global energy
supplies. There is a need to strengthen the security
of critical energy infrastructure in order to minimize
fluctuations in crude oil prices and further ensure the
security of supplies.
Ensuring security in cyberspace is another key
challenge is. Responsible behaviour in cyberspace
by nations in the Middle East can reinforce
regional cyberstability.
It is often reiterated at the United Nations that there
is a strong link between human rights and peace and
security. The observance of fundamental human rights
in the Middle East, such as free and fair elections, the
freedom of speech and the rule of law, is of particular
importance. It applies also to the rights of women, who
are predestined to fight hatred and to build stability and
social peace.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8600

Poland organized a Security Council briefing last
week (see S/PV.8596) on international humanitarian
law on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions. It is our common responsibility
to observe international law and protect the most
vulnerable groups in armed conflicts, including
children, women, people with disabilities and members
of religious minorities.

I call on His Excellency Mr. Michael Pompeo,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.

In two days’ time, on 22 August here in New York,
we will celebrate the International Day Commemorating
the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion
or Belief — established by the General Assembly on
the initiative of Poland. Advancing the security and
safety of religious minorities in the Middle East is our
common obligation. The rich culture of the Middle East
region also requires protection. We should safeguard
tangible and intangible heritage alike, which helps
develop interreligious and intercultural dialogue as a
vital platform for reconciliation.

As I argued in January in Cairo, the Trump
Administration is reviving America’s leadership role
in the region by building and supporting coalitions to
tackle regional challenges. These are not talkfests; we
care about outcomes, not gestures. We should consider
what has been accomplished in just seven months. We
helped dismantle the physical caliphate of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and we continue to
work with 79 partners in the Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIS to help the region recover from that menace. We
are working closely with United Nations Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to help bring peace to Yemen.

We need a bold initiative to address the challenges
to peace and security in the region. Poland, in line
with the EU position, underscores that solutions to the
Middle East’s problems require multilateral approaches.
Building on that assumption, in February Poland
and the United States jointly organized the Warsaw
Ministerial to Promote a Future of Peace and Security
in the Middle East, which launched the Warsaw process.
It will consist of working groups dealing with the main
horizontal topics that I have just presented. The groups
will cover counter-terrorism and illicit financing,
missile proliferation, maritime and aviation security,
cybersecurity, energy security, as well as humanitarian
and human rights issues.
The working groups are scheduled to convene
in October and November, and the results of their
discussions will be presented at the high-level conference
in the first months of 2020. We will be encouraging
countries from around the globe to join these efforts.
We trust that the Warsaw process will contribute to the
resolution of the multifaceted problems of the Middle
East and bring more stability and confidence to the
region and beyond.
We need to create the conditions for stability and
well-being in the region. Only then will the Middle East
be able to unlock its enormous potential as a valuable
contributor to global peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ribeiro Viotti for her briefing. I also thank
our Polish friends for using their Security Council
presidency to confront the complex challenges in the
Middle East.

We are facilitating new links between Israel and its
Arab neighbours through the Warsaw Ministerial and
follow-up meetings, which the President just discussed.
We organized the Bahrain workshop in June to bring
together Government, the private sector and civilian
leaders to help improve the lives of the Palestinians. We
hosted the second-ever ministerial to advance religious
freedom last month; protecting religious minorities in
the Middle East was the centrepiece of that event.
Most recently, the United States launched our
effort to protect international shipping in the Strait of
Hormuz. We have welcomed the United Kingdom and
Bahrain as partners and look forward to other nations
joining that mission to protect the freedom of the seas.
Those are precisely the kinds of multilateral efforts
that the United States supports. They are meaningful
and effective, and they reflect the values of freedomloving societies, which the Council should be working
to uphold.
But now is our opportunity to do more. Just look
at the challenges facing the region. Conflict in Libya
still rages. More than 5.5 million Syrian refugees and
nearly 6 million internally displaced Syrians have yet
to return to their homes because of continuing violence.
The Gulf Cooperation Council rift has not fully healed.
Many countries fail to honour their people’s basic
human rights, and radical Islamist terrorists and their

19-258235/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

financial benefactors are looking for new weaknesses
to exploit.
Of course, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
its proxies continue to foment terror and unrest in
Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen, with devastating
humanitarian consequences. Since the United States
declared our intention to bring all Iranian oil purchases
to zero in April, the Ayatollah has gone all in on a
campaign of extortion diplomacy. Here is just a short
list of what the regime has done since July.
On 1 July, Iran surpassed its 300-kilogramme limit
on its low-enriched uranium stockpile, in defiance of
its nuclear commitments. On 2 July, the Iran-backed
Houthis attacked Abha airport in Saudi Arabia, and
they have continued to do so since that time. On 8 July,
Iran reached levels of enrichment of about 4.5 per
cent, breaching its nuclear commitments, which cap
enrichment at 3.67 per cent. Iran continues to threaten
further expansions of its nuclear programme, in
defiance of its international commitments.
On 10 July, the Navy of the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps unsuccessfully attempted to seize a
United Kingdom tanker as it passed through the
Strait of Hormuz. On 14 July, the Navy of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps seized a Panamanianflagged, United Arab Emirates-owned, tanker in the
Strait of Hormuz. On 19 July, the Navy of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps seized a British tanker,
the Stena Impero, in the Strait of Hormuz, and Iran
continues to detain that ship and its crew. On 19 July,
the Navy of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps also
seized the Liberian-flagged, British-owned, tanker,
Mesdar. On 25 July, Iran test-fired a ballistic missile,
in defiance of resolution 2231 (2015).
On another Iran-related note, we are already
tracking very closely the provisions of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action that are expiring in
October 2020, namely, the United Nations arms embargo
and the travel restrictions on Qasem Soleimani. The
whole world is able to track them, too. We now have a
countdown clock on the State Department’s Iran web
page. Time is drawing short to continue the activity of
restricting Iran’s capacity to foment its terror regime.
The international community will have plenty of time
to see how long it has until Iran is unshackled to create
new turmoil and figure out what it must do to prevent
that from happening.
6/47

20/08/2019

Clearly, from Aleppo to Aden and Tripoli to Tehran,
greater cooperation in the Middle East is needed more
than ever. We need fresh thinking to solve old problems.
That is why Poland and the United States have created
the Warsaw process and its working groups, which were
recently announced. The Warsaw process is the product
of this year’s Warsaw Ministerial to promote a future of
peace and security in the Middle East.
The creation of the working groups is another
iteration of the United States mission to take on
Middle East challenges with our friends, allies and
partners. The seven new working groups will focus
on cybersecurity, human rights, maritime and aviation
security, energy security, missile proliferation, counterterrorism and humanitarian issues and refugees. We
call for all nations, which have been invited, to attend
the initial meetings of the first five of those groups this
fall, and we express our gratitude to Bahrain, Romania
and South Korea for joining Poland and the United
States in hosting them.
No one country will be the subject of those
discussions. All nations will be heard and all voices
will be respected. As we continue to work through the
Warsaw process, we will look to reconvene nations in
2020 for a follow-up to the Warsaw Ministerial. I hope
that those present will all be there.
Mr. Michaelis (Germany): Germany welcomes
the initiative taken by Poland to put today’s meeting
on the agenda. We particularly appreciate United States
Secretary of State Michael Pompeo’s presence among
us today.
The Middle East has always been looked at as a
volatile region, and one of the truisms was, and is, that
it can be destabilized easily. Unfortunately, that is what
we witness today. But that is not the old story. Many
trends indicate that we are looking at a new Middle
East, and that new Middle East certainly does not
match the vision of a prosperous and peaceful region,
which spread in the 1990s. It is the story of increased
tensions and mounting dangers. Allow me to distinguish
five trends.
First, we see heightened tensions among the States
of the region. That, for instance, holds true of the
situation along the Gulf. Secondly, we observe longterm internal conflicts, which contribute to large-scale
fragmentation. Syria and Yemen are two examples.
Thirdly, we are looking at an interplay of intra- and
inter-State conflict. That is what characterizes the nature
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. They increasingly
involve regional and outside actors. Fourthly, powerful
regional actors are displaying increasingly aggressive
behaviour, thereby undermining regional stability. Last
but not least, we notice an increased interest by new
actors from outside the region, often pursuing a selfish
and destructive agenda.

S/PV. 8600

Thirdly, we should be guided by the principle of
coordination and cooperation of all outside actors and
choosing multilateral solutions instead of unilaterally
imposed ones.
I would like to pick out three brief country files to
illustrate that approach.

The combination of those factors makes the situation
in the Middle East more volatile and dangerous than it
has been for a very long time. We have to change the
negative dynamics in the region and stop moving from
bad to worse in the Middle East. Long-term instability
in the Middle East will make us all suffer, and most
certainly the people in the region. But how do we move
forward in the Middle East?

Concerning Syria, the bloodshed there must end.
In this instance, we have not one but two platforms
of dialogue of the international community. We have
the small group and that of Astana, which, in theory,
can reconcile conflicting interests and foster regional
cooperation. Bridging those two formats will be key to
bringing peace to the Syrian people. Germany stands
ready to play a role in that regard.

It is for the nations of the regions themselves to
create political environments that allow their people to
lead lives without fear of repression, torture, hunger and
violence, and that instead provides them with safety,
dignity and liberty. Dialogue and compromise within
the region that bridge religious and ethnic divides are
the only sustainable way to reconciliation.

With regard to Iran, we remain firmly committed
to maintaining the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) because, under the JCPOA, Iran is subject to
the world’s most robust nuclear verification regime,
implemented by the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We believe that that is a valuable safeguard
to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free Iran, and we have not
seen any viable alternative to it.

As much as the States of the region have to do their
share to build peace at home and in the neighbourhood,
it is not their task alone. The stability of the Middle
East has always been a question of global concern. The
involvement of the international community comes
with increased responsibility. Only if all outside actors
look beyond narrow national interests and regional
actors invest in lasting stability can we make progress
towards a secure Middle East. The international
community therefore cannot stand on the sidelines. But
which principles should guide our action? The answer
is threefold.
First, we should be guided by the principle of
fully upholding respect for international law. That
is particularly true for international humanitarian
law, which, looking at Syria in particular, is too
often ignored.
Secondly, we should take de-escalatory steps and
devise de-escalation strategies. Where international
law is disputed or brushed aside, political processes that
promote de-escalation and confidence-building need
to be put in place. I believe that this has to lie at the
heart of our Middle East policy. Today we are far from
providing solutions to the problems of the Middle East,
but we can create the foundations for the development
of those solutions.

At the same time, we are not naive, and we
know that the JCPOA is only one part of the puzzle.
Iran’s regional role, ballistic programme and threats
to maritime security in the Gulf need to be, and are
being, addressed. We do that through political dialogue
and, if need be, coordinated sanctions. France, the
United Kingdom and Germany are right now looking
into options of how to foster regional cooperation
on maritime security. We are convinced that active
de-escalation by all sides will yield positive results,
whereas greater pressure and unilateral actions will do
the opposite.
With regard to Israel and Palestine, overall, I
have served almost eight years as a diplomat in Israel.
Germany’s steadfast commitment to the security of
Israel is a cornerstone of its foreign policy, and it is the
bedrock of my personal belief. There, as in the region
as a whole, the United States is the key stability factor.
I hope that it will continue its long-standing policy of
supporting both parties in reaching a negotiated twoState solution. What is badly needed is a resumption of
dialogue, in the absence of which violence is spreading.
In conclusion, today’s debate once again
underscores that the Middle East offers one of the most
intricate webs of political, religious, social, economic

19-258237/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

and cultural forces worldwide. It is a fascinating and
wonderful region. The people in the Middle East
deserve peace and stability. We, the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole, need to support all
initiatives that bring us closer to that goal.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Poland for taking the initiative to convene
this high-level debate and welcomes the Minister for
Foreign Affairs on his return to New York to preside
over this meeting. China also thanks Ms. Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing.
Peace and Security in the Middle East does not
only affect the fundamental interests of the countries
in the region, but also global stability and development.
China has always closely followed peace and security
in the Middle East and has upheld an objective and
impartial position advocating for a new security
concept featuring common threads of cooperative and
sustainable security in an effort to build a community
with a shared future for humankind. I would like to
make the following points.
The first concerns intensifying efforts to achieve
political solutions to regional hotspot issues. The hotspot
issues in the Middle East are complex and intertwined
with one another. The international community should
support the United Nations in playing a central role
through its good offices, commit to reaching political
solutions, promote dialogue and negotiations, adhere
to constructive situation control and consistently take
into account the legitimate rights and interests of all
parties. The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned should
be respected. China is firmly opposed to the wilful use
or the threat of use of force. China opposes external
intervention, power politics and bullying.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue. It is the root problem in the Middle East.
Upholding the legitimate rights of the Palestinians is a
shared responsibility of the international community.
The two-State solution is the sole way to address the
Palestinian-Israel issue. The relevant United Nations
resolutions, the land-for-peace principle and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the fundamental principles to be
followed to defuse the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
international community should hold up the banner of
multilateralism, adhere to the principles of fairness and
justice, advance the timely resumption of peace talks
8/47

20/08/2019

between the Palestinians and the Israelis and create the
necessary conditions for resuming talks.
Secondly, with regard to helping countries of the
Middle East achieve sustainable development, the
turmoil in the Middle East is rooted in poverty and
underdevelopment, and its resolution ultimately lies in
achieving sustainable development. Development has
an impact on the livelihood and dignity of people and is
an essential guarantee to achieving social stability and
lasting peace.
Focus should be placed on youth education,
employment and poverty reduction, the importance
of which Ms. Viotti just mentioned. Only when young
people achieve dignity through development will we be
able to see the hope of a future. We should be openminded in our support of countries of the region in
exploring development paths in line with their national
situations and building mutually beneficial and win-win
partnerships to achieve economic and social progress.
Thirdly, with regard to building synergies to
respond to the threat of terrorism, the Middle East is
faced with a dire situation involving counter-terrorism
and deradicalization, while countries of the region suffer
acutely from terrorism. The international community
should build consensus, unify standards, integrate
policies and address the root causes and symptoms of
the problems in resolutely countering terrorism and
extremist forces.
The countries of the region should be able to enjoy
policy dialogue, information sharing and strengthened
cooperation with regard to technical cooperation,
personnel training, cutting off sources of terrorist
financing, combating cross-border organized crime and
exchanging lessons learned in deradicalization in an
effort to maintain shared security and restore regional
stability and order.
Fourthly, with regard to preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, efforts should be
made to uphold the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and ensure its full and effective
implementation, which was set forth in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is also the only realistic
and effective way to address the Iranian nuclear
issue and conforms to the common interests of the
international community. The parties should proceed
from the overall and long-term perspective, stay the
general course of political and diplomatic solutions,
ensure the balance of rights and obligations under the
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

JCPOA and facilitate the reduction of tension over the
Iranian nuclear issue.
China will continue to make efforts to achieve the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the Plan
of Action, while firmly maintaining its own legitimate
rights and interests. China supports the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction.
At present, the Middle East situation remains
complex and continues to evolve with ever-increasing
security challenges. The challenge of responding to it
has surpassed the ability of any single country. The
United Nations should deepen its cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
League of Arab States, and consolidate and strengthen
collective security mechanisms.
We support countries in the region in developing
good-neighbourly relations based on mutual respect
and non-interference in others’ internal affairs. Parties
should commit themselves to resolving conflicts
through dialogue and consultations, facilitating the
de-escalation of tensions and maintaining regional
security and international energy security in order to
avoid igniting new crises. We welcome any and all
dialogue initiatives conducive to achieving peace and
security in the Middle East. We embrace the concept of
collective security in the Gulf as proposed by Russia.
China would like to maintain communications with all
the relevant parties to that end.
China has always been committed to playing a
constructive role in facilitating political solutions
to hotspot issues in the region. We maintain contact
and communication with the countries concerned in
the region, support mutual confidence-building and
promote peace talks. China has actively participated in
various efforts under the auspices of the United Nations
to promote peace in the Middle East. We are engaged
in peacekeeping missions in places such as Lebanon
and provide substantial humanitarian assistance to
refugees from the relevant countries so that they can be
hopeful of rebuilding their homes. We have contributed
to the economic and social development of the region.
We are committed to strengthening cooperation with
the countries of the region through the Belt and Road
Initiative in order to create new opportunities for the
development of the region.
We have always cooperated with other parties on
Iranian issues. We are committed to preserving the

S/PV. 8600

Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as part of our
efforts to address the Iranian issue. China will continue
to make unrelenting efforts for the long-term security
and prosperous development of the Middle East.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to acknowledge the
presence at today’s meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland, His Excellency Mr. Mike Pompeo
and His Excellency Mr. Andreas Michaelis for being
here today. I would also like to thank Ms. Viotti for
her briefing.
The Middle East is deeply divided and experiencing
a tragic loss of its diverse religious, ethnic and cultural
fabric. That is the situation as we face a slew of conflicts
that undermine stability in the area. We see that the
territorial integrity of countries such as Syria, Yemen
and Libya is under threat and that millions of people
have been displaced from their homes. The impact
of such instability is felt in neighbouring countries
and beyond.
The actions of terrorist groups are a key destabilizing
factor. To meet their objectives, such groups are willing
to sacrifice the lives of innocent civilians, including
children. The war on terrorism must remain a priority.
It is clear that, to safeguard the goal of maintaining
peace and security in the region, efficient mechanisms
that shed light on and punish human rights violations
are needed.
In addition, despite the international legal
frameworks in place to protect women and children,
women and children continue to pay the highest price
of the conflicts in the region. It is vital that their rights
be fully promoted and protected. However, it is also
imperative to protect public institutions, as they play
an important role in re-establishing peace and security
in the region.
Investing in education is key to achieving peace and
development in the region. It is the tool that provides
new generations with the vital link to a normal life. It
is therefore urgent to protect educational institutions
and infrastructure during conflicts, while taking into
account the fact that attacks on such facilities limit
the ability of children and young people to develop the
skills necessary for their future.
The lack of the right to peaceful assembly,
limitations on the freedom of expression, child, early
and forced marriage, sexual and gender-based violence

19-258239/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the lack of opportunities for women and young
people to participate in decision-making processes are
major constraints faced by a region striving to achieve
lasting peace and security.
The dearth of opportunities as a result of economic,
social and climate challenges lead to the displacement of
groups of people, which, in turn, could result in clashes
among them. No country is immune to the destabilizing
effect of climate change. Combating climate change
requires collective efforts. The United Nations should
therefore continue its efforts to alleviate food insecurity.
Similarly, that effect can exacerbate social, economic
and institutional vulnerabilities, which could lead to
new clashes. We can understand how climate change
has become a multiplier of conflicts.
Control over weapons of mass destruction and
chemical arsenals must be a priority on the Council’s
agenda. We must seek to combat illicit weapons
trafficking by strengthening arms control mechanisms.
Illicit weapons trafficking exacerbates conflicts,
strengthens terrorist, rebel and criminal groups
and undermines stability in areas where calm has
been restored.
Lastly, we encourage the Council to reaffirm its
responsibilities and make every effort to ensure that it
stabilizes and reconciles communities and restores the
peace and security lost as a result of conflict.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for being with the Security Council once
again and for convening today’s important debate. I
also thank Secretary of State Pompeo for taking the
time to join the Council today, and I welcome State
Secretary Michaelis.
Last year we commemorated the centenary of the
end of the First World War — a war that did much to
shape the modern Middle East. Many of the conflicts
in the region have their origins in the First World War
and the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The end of
the First World War also led to the establishment of the
League of Nations. That, in turn, laid the foundation
for the United Nations. Many of the conflicts that have
wrought so much destruction in the region — from
Syria to Yemen and from Libya to Gaza — continue
to feature prominently on the Council’s agenda. The
region’s current trajectory is troubling and fraught
with the risk of still further conflagration and conflict.
Ms. Viotti mentioned the difficulty of managing
escalation in today’s world. And while our efforts at
10/47

20/08/2019

multilateral solutions have not always worked out as
well as we might have hoped, the alternative looks
decidedly worse.
Experience tells us that, however imperfect,
de-escalation and dialogue, political processes and
support for the rules-based international system are the
best means to address tensions that risk undermining
our collective interests in security, stability and
prosperity. We know that is true around the world, and
it is quite true of the situation in the Middle East today.
That is why the United Kingdom remains a steadfast
supporter of the United Nations and the Council’s
efforts to resolve international conflict.
Secretary of State Pompeo and State Secretary
Michaelis mentioned the importance of regional
efforts. In recent weeks, a number of members of the
Council — most recently our Russian colleagues — have
also mentioned the importance of finding a way to
collectively address some of the underlying challenges.
That may well be an idea whose time is yet to come, not
least because the region itself needs to be ready for such
work. But we believe it is important that we look in an
exploratory way at what might be possible and where
we might start. One option might be to start with the
most recent trouble spot — the Strait of Hormuz — and
begin serious, inclusive dialogue between regional and
international actors, as the State Secretary of Germany
set out.
Secretary Pompeo touched today on Iran’s role in
the region. My country has great respect for the Iranian
people. We respect Iran’s culture. It is an ancient culture
and one that features alongside the great developments
in classical history in Europe. We accept that Iran has
a legitimate role in the Middle East. And we accept
that, like all of us, it has a right to self-defense. But
we cannot ignore the fact that the way it pursues its
national interests contributes to several of the regional
problems we are discussing today.
When I addressed the Council in the resolution
2231 (2015) format in June, I reiterated that the priority
of United Kingdom policy towards Iran was to prevent
Iran achieving a nuclear capability that would threaten
the stability and security of the Middle East region
and beyond. As the representative of Germany set
out, we continue to judge that this objective is best
served by efforts to preserve the nuclear deal, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We urge Iran
to return to full compliance with the deal. It is in none
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8600

of our interests to see the deal unravel. It is an essential
part of the global non-proliferation architecture. And it
is critical for our national security and for the shared
security of our partners and allies. There is no better
solution. There is no alternative.

regime towards negotiations. We understand that
Iran has provided assurances to the Government of
Gibraltar that the vessel and its cargo will not go to an
EU-sanctioned entity such as Syria. Iran needs to abide
by those assurances.

The United Kingdom, with France and Germany,
has been consistently clear that we will work to support
the deal. We remain fully committed to the delivery
of the INSTEX mechanism, thereby ensuring that
legitimate trade with Iran can continue. We continue to
participate in core projects within the deal, including
taking on the role of co-chair of the Arak modernization
project. We also welcome President Macron’s efforts to
find a way through to dialogue in close coordination
with the three European signatories.

We urgently need a cease fire in Idlib to prevent
further suffering. We need answers as to why and how
international humanitarian law is being so flagrantly
violated by the regime and its allies. I want to recall, if
I may, that such crimes confer individual and personal
responsibility on the perpetrators. The violations also
continue to create space for radicalization and further
extremism, and Da’esh continues to pose a serious
threat across the region.

The JCPOA is not a licence for Iran to roam
free across the conflicts in the Middle East. Iran
continues to support proxies across the region that
undermine regional security and violate Security
Council resolutions, whether resolution 1559 (2004),
on Lebanon, or 2216 (2015), and the arms embargo on
Yemen. We regret that, rather than backing a political
solution in Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
Iran has instead chosen to support Al-Assad in pursuing
a military solution, including through organizing and
sending sectarian militias to Syria, which has helped
fuel that conflict. This pattern of Iranian behaviour
poses a serious danger to peace and stability.
Secretary Pompeo mentioned that on 19 July a
British-flag tanker, Stena Impero, was boarded by
Iranian forces while transiting through the Strait of
Hormuz inside Omani territorial waters. The Stena
Impero remains seized. As the Chef de Cabinet noted, it
is imperative that we defend the freedom of navigation
in the Strait of Hormuz to reassure the global shipping
industry and to deter further attacks. This is not just
the British aim; it is in every nation’s interests, and it
requires the coming together of international nations to
support maritime security in the Gulf.
I will not touch much today on Syria, because the
Council has very many meetings on that sad conflict.
But I will simply note that there can be no reconstruction
without a sustainable, United Nations-led political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
With regard to the Iranian vessel Grace 1, we
have welcomed Gibraltar’s recent actions and legal
proceedings to implement European Union (EU)
sanctions, which are in place to pressure the Al-Assad

We cannot take for granted the progress that has
been made in Iraq in providing security and stability
for the Iraqi people. The United Kingdom, alongside
the international community, will continue to support
the Government of Iraq to ensure that the conditions
that gave rise to Da’esh are tackled.
The situation in Libya is in danger of deteriorating
still further. Over the past four months, it has become
clear neither side can win a military victory. The only
winners in the current conflict are the terrorist and
extremist groups that look to exploit the chaos and
instability for their own ends. As others have said,
the way forward is for the parties to comply with their
obligations under international law and commit to
political dialogue and a lasting ceasefire.
Likewise, a political solution is urgently needed in
Yemen — not only to end the conflict but to alleviate the
immense humanitarian suffering. We urge the parties
to agree the latest United Nations proposals to allow
for wider political discussions. The events of concern
in Aden serve to highlight the need for an inclusive
political process. We welcome the initiative taken by
His Majesty King Salman to resolve the situation.
In the context of heightened tensions in the region,
it is more important than ever that the Lebanese
Government and all Lebanese parties implement
Lebanon’s policy of disassociation from regional
conflicts. We call on all parties to implement the
relevant resolutions in full, particularly resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). For our part, we will continue
to help build the strength and capacity of the Lebanese
State to resist encroachment by Hizbullah. We will help
Lebanon achieve economic stability, while making
swift progress on implementing the commitments

19-2582311/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/08/2019

made at the Conference for Economic Development and
Reform through Enterprise.

how the Warsaw process includes economic and public
policy factors.

I want to take this opportunity to commend the role
played by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in maintaining calm and stability along the
Blue Line. But I stress at the same time the importance
of enabling UNIFIL to deliver its mandate unimpeded.
It is unacceptable that UNIFIL is still unable to access
Hizbullah tunnel sites in southern Lebanon. Other
speakers have addressed the question of a sustainable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As the Chef
de Cabinet said, it is the longest-running international
peace and security issue here. For the United Kingdom,
our position on the two-State solution remains
unchanged. We urge the United States Administration
to bring forward its detailed proposals for viable peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties.

To go back to where I started, we cannot see
the countries of the Middle East exploit fully the
opportunity to modernize their economies when we see
the sort of push-back on women’s rights that the Chef de
Cabinet mentioned. The current tensions and instability
in the Middle East serve no one. I want to call again
for de-escalation, for full respect for international rules
and for engagement in dialogue through which the
region can discuss its problems transparently and in
the interests of the populations there who have suffered
so much.

Efforts by the United States to support the
development of the Palestinian economy are very
welcome. It is essential that political progress be
made in order to unlock economic opportunities. But,
as we have said in the Council before, until there is
political progress, steps need to be taken to address the
constraints imposed on the Palestinian economy by the
Israeli occupation. We want to see increasing external
trade opportunities for the Palestinians. We want to see
the financial sustainability of the Palestinian Authority
realized. Only a safe and secure Israel living alongside
a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as a shared capital of both
States, can bring about a lasting solution.

Building peace and security for all in the Middle
East and the Gulf region is indeed a major objective
of the efforts of the United Nations and its Security
Council. We are therefore pleased to be able to address
this issue in a cross-cutting manner today, under
your leadership, Mr. Minister, and in the presence of
Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Michaelis. Belgium fully endorses
the statement to be made by the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union.

I have concentrated today on the geopolitical
and international peace and security aspects as
the most immediate challenges facing us. But you,
Mr. President, and a number of other speakers, rightly
drew attention to the vital importance of economic and
social development, notably for women. I agree on the
importance of this area. But I want to make clear that
it is, however, not an excuse for certain Governments
to divert funds that could be better spent at home on
the very real things that help build the State towards
violence, persecution and adventurism. You, Sir, spoke
about good governance, education and youth. I want to
stress our new Prime Minister’s interest in advancing
girls’ education in particular. But it is also true that
investment, equality before the law and the rule of law
are also fundamental, and Secretary Pompeo set out
12/47

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank Ms. Viotti, Chef de
Cabinet, Executive Office of the Secretary-General, for
her informative briefing on this difficult subject that
concerns us.

The Middle East and the Gulf region are currently
plagued by many tensions and conflicts that are
periodically on the Security Council’s agenda. The
conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Libya, the deadlock in the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the risk of instability
in Lebanon, tensions in the Strait of Hormuz, the
Iranian nuclear issue and the fight against Da’esh and
Al-Qaida: all these elements threaten regional security
but also, through their internationalization, endanger
international peace and security, of which the Council
is the guarantor.
However, these agenda items are all too often
addressed in isolation. As demonstrated by the
informal interactive dialogue on the Middle East and
North Africa held in the Council last 21 March and the
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on 13 June (see S/PV.8548),
it is crucial to develop a regional and multidimensional
approach. Such a regional approach makes it possible
to take into account the root causes of tensions and
conflicts as well as regional dynamics and the common
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

security challenges underlying them, and can be
divided into three essential and interdependent areas
that remain relevant: political and security aspects,
with a view to defining and building a common space
of peace and security; economic and financial aspects,
with a view to building an area of shared prosperity;
and social, cultural and human aspects, with a view
to promoting new, inclusive social contracts based on
education, economic opportunities for young people,
equality for women, respect for human rights and the
equitable sharing of national wealth.
With regard to the first point — security
aspects — weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical and nuclear weapons, remain a central focus.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, is
unacceptable and contravenes international standards.
For my country, disarmament, non-proliferation and
the fight against impunity for the use of chemical
weapons are priorities. It is essential that responsibility
for chemical attacks in Syria be established.
In the same spirit, resolution 2231 (2015) remains
the best available multilateral basis for engaging Iran
on nuclear non-proliferation issues and their impact on
regional stability and international security. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action must be preserved, and
the challenges it currently faces must be overcome.
Through the verification mechanisms agreed with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, it allows for
much-needed confidence-building.
Belgium intends to build peace and consensus
and therefore will continue to give its full support to
strengthening the role of the United Nations and its
Security Council with a view to taking a regional,
horizontal and multidimensional approach to tensions
and conflicts in the Middle East and the Gulf. Only a
concerted approach that includes all actors in the region
and addresses all issues can ensure stability and peace
in the region in a sustainable manner, with full respect
for multilateralism and a global order based on the rule
of law.
Finally, let us recall that during the Arab Spring of
2011, people mobilized to demand more rights, freedom,
equality, democracy and economic opportunities.
Some of those expectations have remained unfulfilled.
Any sustainable solution in the region must be based
on ownership of those expectations by societies
and populations.

S/PV. 8600

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate, which
allows us to address all the issues related to the Middle
East in a spirit of dialogue. Because the conflicts in
the region have common roots and are interlinked, this
cross-cutting approach is relevant as a complement to
the individual issues on the Security Council’s agenda.
I welcome the participation of the Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. Pompeo, and I fully endorse the
incisive analysis presented by the German Secretary of
State, Mr. Michaelis. I also wish to associate myself with
the statement to be delivered by the Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union.
First, I would like to come back to the extent of
the challenges facing the region. First, I am thinking of
the security challenges resulting from the persistence
of the terrorist threat, despite the territorial victory
over Da’esh in Syria and Iraq. Beyond the military
response, the challenge of violent radicalization will
not be solved without the implementation of inclusive
political solutions, accompanied by an increased effort
for the stabilization of liberated territories and for
reconstruction where the political conditions are met.
France will also continue to mobilize so as to dry up
the sources of terrorist financing, in accordance with
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted last March.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery to State and non-State
actors is a threat to all, to which we must provide
collective responses. I would like to reiterate here
our vigilance with regard to compliance with the
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons, given that
both the Syrian regime and Da’esh have used them.
France also reaffirms its full commitment to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). There is
currently no alternative to prevent nuclear proliferation
in Iran. As we have already had occasion to say, we
deplore the American withdrawal from the agreement.
The remaining participants, including France, remain
committed to preserving the JCPOA and continue to
comply with their commitments.
We are extremely concerned about Iran’s recent
actions in breach of its obligations under the agreement.
There is no legal provision authorizing non-compliance
with any part of its commitments. That is why we
must all work to preserve this agreement and achieve
Iran’s return to full compliance with its obligations.
France remains resolutely committed to this goal, in
collaboration with its partners. Beyond that, we must

19-2582313/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

build together a long-term strategy, which cannot
be reduced to a policy of pressure, sanctions and
containment. Only a comprehensive approach will make
it possible to resolve the various outstanding issues on
nuclear energy after 2025-2030, on the continuation of
Iran’s ballistic activities and on regional stability.
Secondly, I am thinking of the political challenges
facing the region, which is plagued by conflicts that
threaten its stability and as a result of which the civilian
population is the first to suffer. We see this in Syria and
Yemen, where violations of international humanitarian
law are daily occurrences. The intensification of
the Syrian and Russian bombardments in Idlib is
particularly worrying in this regard. I therefore
reiterate France’s call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the full implementation without delay
of the Sochi agreement between Russia and Turkey.
France, like Germany, believes that the coordination of
the so-called small group and the Astana group would
facilitate progress.
In Yemen, rapid, full and unhindered humanitarian
access to all populations must be ensured and the
Stockholm Agreement implemented. Beyond that,
Yemen requires an urgent resumption of political
dialogue without preconditions.
In this context, beyond an emergency crisis
response, we must work towards pluralistic and inclusive
political solutions that guarantee the region’s stability
in the long term. The priority must be to prevent new
conflicts and to de-escalate them through dialogue.
That imperative is particularly important given the
current tensions in the Gulf. In that regard, we must
work with the States of the region, which are on the
front line, with our international partners and within the
framework of the multilateral organizations concerned
in order to establish an inclusive and balanced dialogue
and, in the longer term, confidence-building measures,
such as ensuring the freedom of navigation in straits.
We must also promote the development of
inclusive political solutions under the auspices of the
United Nations. We must work to bolster strong State
institutions that respect the rule of law and human
rights, and protect freedoms and all components of
pluralistic societies in the Middle East. In that regard,
I would like to encourage the Iraqi authorities to
continue their efforts to rebuild the areas liberated from
Da’esh and reconcile all Iraqis. In Syria, only a credible
political solution will be able to reduce the destabilizing
14/47

20/08/2019

potential of the crisis and allow for lasting peace.
Women must participate fully in the peace process and
in the implementation of those political solutions — it
is a moral imperative and an additional opportunity to
maintain peace and security.
I would like to reiterate France’s commitment to
multilateralism, the role of the United Nations and
respect for international law. Any unilateral decision
that deviates from international law significantly
weakens the order based on international legality and
compromises our collective ability to successfully
conclude peace processes.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate that lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be achieved
only through a just and balanced solution, based on
the establishment of two States living side by side in
security, within recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as the capital of both States, in accordance with
internationally agreed parameters and the resolutions
of the Council. In that connection, we support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose work on behalf of
Palestinian refugees is essential for regional stability.
The Council has a critical role to play because
it is the main guarantor of international law. Among
other things, it must call on all belligerents in conflicts
to respect applicable law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to provide
unanimous support for the efforts of the United Nations,
including by supporting the Council and the Special
Envoys and Representatives of the Secretary-General.
France will continue to defend multilateralism
as a way of ensuring and maintaining international
peace and security. It is by calling multilateralism
into question that today we weaken our security,
particularly with regard to international institutions,
mechanisms and instruments that combat impunity and
non-proliferation.
In conclusion, France has no intention of renouncing
its principles or its commitment to responding to the
crises in the Middle East, or its desire to see the Council
play a greater role in addressing them. The Middle
East is a traumatized region, with too many countries
devastated and societies ravaged by the scourge of war,
from which our important Organization has the primary
duty to protect us. The people of the region aspire to
live in peace and security. That requires us to learn
from the past and, above all, to not repeat our mistakes.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is urgent that we stop this destructive violence. We
can do so if we use the dynamics of competition and
the balance of power among nations in order to seek
collaborative and just solutions and implement a policy
of balanced dialogue so that the countries and the peoples
of the region can find points of convergence, define the
modalities for sustainable neighbourly relations and
opt for non-violent, pluralistic exercise of power. That
begins with the adherence to, and implementation of,
all the relevant Council resolutions.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the initiative of the Polish presidency
to convene this high-level debate, and thank it for
the concept note (S/2019/643, annex), which calls on
us to reflect on the current challenges to peace and
security in the Middle East. We particularly welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of Poland and
thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for her important
briefing this afternoon.
Peru has forged and maintained ties with the Middle
East thanks to its Hispanic heritage. We recognize
the rich cultural, religious and ethnic diversity of
its peoples, as well as their unwavering yearning for
peace and prosperity. It is therefore regrettable that
the region continues to be a place of numerous violent
confrontations, of varying scale and intensity, in which
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights devastate the civilian population.
The hundreds of thousands of victims in Syria after
more than nine years of bloody fighting, the constant
famine and outbreaks of disease in Yemen and the
confinement and lack of hope and opportunities for the
people in Gaza are just a few examples of that harsh
reality. This tragic panorama is further compounded
by the threat posed by terrorist groups and criminal
organizations, as well as by the use of the Middle East
as an ideal market for the large-scale sale of various
types of military equipment.
We believe that the international community can
help by supporting the establishment of robust and
inclusive institutions that can prevent and resolve the
differences that naturally arise among the peoples of
the region. That entails building capacities to meet the
expectations of the people, including protecting and
promoting their human rights and recognizing their
legitimate aspirations, especially those of minorities,
women and young people. It also means consolidating
the rule of law to promote economic growth and aligning

S/PV. 8600

humanitarian assistance with development plans that
offer hope and opportunities to the civilian population,
in accordance with the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Another great challenge we must address is
the plight of the millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which requires not only the
availability of financial resources but, primarily, the
political will to ensure them a safe and dignified return
under internationally accepted parameters.
This Organization in general, and the Security
Council in particular, has a crucial role to play
in that regard — to demand strict adherence with
its resolutions, thereby ensuring full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights as a
fundamental measure to protect civilian populations,
strengthening international cooperation to effectively
combat terrorism and safeguarding non-proliferation
regimes on weapons of mass destruction.
Special priority should also be given to conflict
prevention, which requires coordinating strategic
actions for mediating and facilitating dialogue,
developing early-warning systems, building confidence
and promoting good practices and assisting countries
interested in replicating them. In short, we must
preserve an international order based on norms as a
minimum basis for coexistence in today’s convulsed
and interdependent world.
To that end, Peru stresses that any analysis of the
realities of the Middle East must address the urgent
need to find a solution to the question of Palestine,
which includes promoting the resumption of direct
negotiations leading to the two-State solution. The
Arab Peace Initiative, which remains fully valid and
relevant, should contribute to that objective.
We also take this opportunity to reiterate our
strongest condemnation of the attacks and actions
taken against vessels in the Strait of Hormuz, which
jeopardize the freedom of navigation in an area of
global strategic importance and exacerbate tensions.
We urge all actors concerned to exercise restraint in
these dangerous circumstances and to avoid taking
new unilateral actions that could trigger a conflict with
unpredictable consequences.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that we
are at a critical juncture in which the efforts of the
international community must aim, as a matter of

19-2582315/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/08/2019

priority, to avoid further fragmentation of the Middle
East and to achieve its long-term stability.

establishing a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for choosing today’s topic. I also
welcome the Secretary of State of the United States
and the State Secretary of the Republic of Germany,
and I thank them for being with us today. I furthermore
thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.

The policies of Israel since it joined the
United Nations have had one thing in common:
non-adherence to the Charter of the United Nations,
the non-implementation of resolutions of the Security
Council and international legitimacy, continued
violations and a lack of accountability. The Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory, the Syrian Golan
and Lebanese territory is the root cause of numerous
problems in the Middle East.

The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
The Middle East continues to take up a significant
portion of the Security Council’s agenda — approximately
30 to 40 per cent. The region, which has witnessed
many wars and crises over more than seven decades,
is the cradle of the three monotheistic religions and of
human civilizations and cultures. It has the oldest cities
in the world and has vast natural and human resources.
It is unfortunate, therefore, that it is experiencing such
chronic security and political crises.
I would like to address the topic from three aspects.
First, let me touch on conflicts and means of
prevention. The United Nations in general, and the
Security Council in particular, is dealing with more
than eight issues in the Middle East: one of them has
been on the agenda for more than half a century, namely,
the Palestinian question, and the others for many
years, including Syria, Yemen, the Sudan and Libya.
Currently five Arab countries are bearing witness to
the occupation of parts of their territories.
Our region, which is countering terrorism on five
fronts, is witnessing six internal conflicts. Of the 14
United Nations peacekeeping operations, six are in
Arab countries, and more than one third of refugees and
displaced persons around the world come from the Arab
region. The one common denominator is occupation,
which is the raison d’être of and justification for the
violent and terrorist ideological movements that
exacerbate those conflicts.
In more than one meeting and forum and on more
than one occasion, we have reiterated that settling the
Palestinian question entails ensuring the rights of the
Palestinians to their land and their State, along with
reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
through the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions; ending the occupation; and
16/47

The efforts under way for many years to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East have not gone
beyond managing and containing these crises and
conflicts and addressing their implications. We must
move from addressing the root causes of these crises
to prevention. We would recall that the Charter of the
United Nations is our guarantee and primary means of
preventing conflicts. There have been initiatives on the
table now for several years that Israel has rejected, such
as the creation of a Middle East zone free of weapons
of mass destruction.
The State of Kuwait has, since the first years of its
independence, consistently sought to enhance regional
security by creating the Gulf Cooperation Council
in 1981 and providing mediation efforts to resolve
differences in the region. We even helped to open
channels for regional dialogue with the Islamic Republic
of Iran, based on mutual respect; the principles of
good-neighbourliness; non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries; respect for the sovereignty
of all countries; the adoption of confidence-building
measures; and the avoidance of any unilateral actions or
measures that could exacerbate matters and undermine
security in Gulf waters, which would threaten the
safety of water passages and undermine oil security
in the world while endangering international peace
and security.
Secondly, I turn to the humanitarian aspect.
Yesterday we celebrated World Humanitarian Day, and
today we would recall that our efforts must be focused
on people and based on law. We must seek to provide a
decent life for the peoples of the region and the world
in times of peace and war. We have joined France and
a group of countries to defend civilians and civilian
facilities, including hospitals and schools, against
being targeted in time of war. We suffered from such
acts ourselves during the occupation of Kuwait, when
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

international humanitarian law was violated countless
times. We therefore took it upon ourselves to guarantee
that everyone upholds respect for international
humanitarian law.
The number of refugees and displaced persons
from Arab countries now exceeds 24 million, out of
the 70 million around the world; that is more than one
third. Those present can only imagine how many lives,
properties and opportunities have been lost and how
many people have had to emigrate from Arab countries
in search of a better life. Political solutions to the
problems of the region therefore remain our priority,
and ending the occupation is one of those solutions. We
hope that the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, will play a greater role in guaranteeing that
their resolutions are implemented.
Thirdly, on education and culture, conflicts and
wars have displaced many people, and we are now
dealing with the social and humanitarian consequences.
However, we can invest in the future and ensure that
refugees, migrants and displaced persons do not suffer
any further. We can provide them with a decent life by
investing in education above all. That is one of the areas
in which Kuwait is providing assistance to our brethren
and friends through official assistance or through our
local sector, with a view to fostering a generation that
builds peace. Investing in the future does not make us
forget the past.
We belong to a region of deep-rooted civilizations
where peoples from different religions and cultures
have coexisted for hundreds of years. No one opinion
can erase others, and no crime involving the destruction
of the cultural heritage of humankind can be justified.
Conflicts have led to trading in monuments of Middle
Eastern civilizations and to the crimes committed by
terrorists such as Da’esh and others when they destroyed
cultural landmarks and monuments. Their wars have
razed neighbourhoods and cities to the ground, seeking
to erase the living memories preserved by our previous
generations. Not do we forget the continued practices
of the occupying Power aimed at obliterating the
cultural identity of East Jerusalem and of Palestinians
throughout occupied Palestine.
In conclusion, we thank once again the Republic
of Poland for having chosen today’s topic. We have
tried to address its various dimensions, which can
be summarized as follows: respecting people and
international law.

S/PV. 8600

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I, too, wish to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for her briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. We listened attentively to
the statements delivered by our colleagues. In addition
to you, Mr. President, we wish to welcome the presence
of the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Michael
Pompeo, and the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany, Mr. Andreas Michaelis.
It is no secret that the Middle East is currently
enduring serious crises that are of an existential nature
for a number of States. In order to attempt to arrive at
solutions to such crises, it is important to look not only
forward but also back, so as to understand the mistakes
that were made and try to avoid making them in future.
In our view, the most meaningful conclusion that
we should draw from the experience of the past two
decades is as follows.
No unilateral action of any kind can bring us
closer to the resolution of either the protracted or new
problems plaguing the region. The situation becomes
all the more devastating when certain States Members
of the United Nations attempt to delegitimize other
Member States. The resulting policies, aimed at
destabilizing and overthrowing regimes that certain
capitals deem undesirable, have not only failed to lead
to the settlement of the problems in the region but have
also created new, exceedingly dangerous problems for
the region, leading to greater bloodshed. It is clear to
us, as it is to most of our partners, that the only way to
extricate ourselves from this situation is ensure that the
United Nations and its Security Council play a central
role in coordinating international and regional efforts
in this respect. It is indeed in this Chamber that we
must reaffirm that this premise needs to be the point of
departure for all relevant efforts and initiatives.
Geopolitical engineering, interference in the
internal affairs of others and the imposition of military
solutions have led to the collapse of entire States, tragic
situations and the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
people in the region. It would be no exaggeration to
say that many countries have consequently been taken
hostage by the opportunistic goals of external players
and been forced to wage proxy wars that have proved
detrimental to their national interests.
We listened attentively to the statement delivered
by Mr. Pompeo. I even asked my colleagues to analyse

19-2582317/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

it word for word, as so much hinges on it. As it turns
out, he used many words with negative connotations,
including “challenges”, “deterrence”, “conflict”,
“regime”, “limitations”, “counteraction” and “threat”.
Only once did he use the word “cooperation”, and that
was in the context of building a coalition against Iran.
Not once, however, did he use the word “dialogue”. In
our view, the two latter terms must underpin any and all
diplomatic efforts.
We also noted that he spoke at length in emotionally
charged terms about the Persian Gulf. We, too, are
extremely concerned about the situation in the region.
The only difference is that from the outset his goal
has been to build a coalition against Iran, portraying
that country as the main and virtually sole source of
problems — a kind of evil empire. We believe that the
recent tensions in the Persian Gulf have largely been
artificially fomented and stoked. Against the backdrop
of the ongoing exchange of accusations, we are seeing
an increased military presence, including on the part of
extraregional States, which increases the risk of armed
conflict. Any incident could potentially spark a conflict
with devastating consequences.
We urge all parties to exercise restraint, work
towards de-escalation and settle problems politically
and diplomatically. First and foremost, that translates
into refraining from the imposition of ultimatums,
sanctions or threats. Given the need to develop a stable
collective security mechanism in the region that is
based on equitable dialogue, the Russian Federation
has proposed and presented, inter alia within the
United Nations, a blueprint for collective security in
the Persian Gulf region aimed at resolving conflict
situations and developing confidence-building and
oversight measures.
We believe that the security system in the Persian
Gulf must be inclusive, universal and comprehensive.
All States in the region should be involved in it on
an equal footing, and the appropriate organizational
structures should be established. Such a system would
serve as a prelude to building a shared post-crisis
architecture for the Middle East region. The exclusion
of any party is unacceptable. As experience has
shown, situations involving the creation of improvised
temporary coalitions, based on mutual interests, can
have only unfortunate consequences.
Such unilateral initiatives include the ministerial
conference held in Warsaw in February, which was
18/47

20/08/2019

mentioned today. We repeatedly and publicly stated our
stance vis-à-vis that event during the preparation stage.
We noted that decisions on the format and agenda of the
conference had been taken hastily and covertly in the
absence of serious consultations with the United Nations
and key regional and extraregional stakeholders. We
pointed out that such an approach was contrary to the
declared goal of developing a collective strategy for the
Middle East. We explicitly stated that we considered
this to be yet another attempt to impose a unilateral
solution on the international community with the goal
of advancing parochial geopolitical agendas. The
outcome of that event fully justified those assessments.
Frankly, we see no added value in the efforts made in
the Warsaw format.
We believe that the Russian proposals can and
should be complemented and elaborated. They should
be perceived as a call for a constructive dialogue on
ways to achieve long-term stabilization in the Persian
Gulf region. We stand ready to engage closely with all
stakeholders through both official channels and social,
political and expert circles. In particular, I would note
that in order to step up expert dialogue on this issue,
an international expert round table has been scheduled
for 18 and 19 September in Moscow at the Institute of
Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
We have always firmly believed that negotiations
are possible in every situation, provided that the parties
concerned are willing to embark upon them a spirit of
mutual respect, based on the principles of international
law, diplomatic practices and civility. Like the vast
majority of States in the region, we therefore cannot
accept a situation whereby calls for Iran to come
to the negotiating table are interspersed with direct
provocations and harsh sanctions. Given such an
approach, one could hardly expect the Iranian side
to respond.
Frankly, we see no logic in the fact that our United
States colleagues, who are in breach of resolution 2231
(2015), are now calling on Iran to begin negotiations
without any preconditions. We cannot accept the
fact that 80 per cent of Iranian trade is subject to the
illegal unilateral sanctions of the United States, which,
moreover, are extra-territorial in nature, aimed at forcing
all parties to bow to the will of Washington, D.C.
In that regard, it is fitting to recall here that by
trampling on the norms of international law, the United
States is essentially attempting to punish those countries
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

that are complying in good faith with the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015). Nevertheless, I assure the
Council that even in such difficult circumstances, we
will continue to seek to persuade both our Iranian and
American colleagues to move back from the edge of
this precipice and begin resolving their differences
through civilized dialogue, which entails the end of
policies based on ultimatums, sanctions and blackmail.
As was already the case many decades ago, the
settlement of the Middle East issue lies at the heart of
the region’s problems. The status of Middle East peace
process remains unsatisfactory. The situation in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem is not improving. In East
Jerusalem, Israel is continuing its settlement activities
and the demolition of Palestinian structures. Those
actions are not only illegal under international law
but also constitute one of the major obstacles to a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
At the same time, persistent attempts are being
made to unilaterally impose alternative settlement
schemes that would undermine the long-standing and
internationally recognized parameters for resolving the
Palestinian problem. We believe that the intention to
drag out the efforts at finding a lasting comprehensive
solution to this issue is counterproductive. In the
absence of encouraging political horizons, no economic
surrogates can create the conditions necessary for
the full realization of the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people. The basic principle of the twoState solution remains the cornerstone of a stable and
peaceful future for Palestinians and Israelis both.
We urge all parties to be guided not by narrow
political interests but by the universally recognized
legal framework for a settlement in the Middle East,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. For
our part, we are committed to coordinating our actions
with our Palestinian and Israeli partners, States in the
Middle East and North Africa and the members of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators.
Alongside the Palestinian issue there exists a new
generation, if I may put it that way, of regional crises.
The counter-terrorism operation conducted by the
Russian Aerospace Forces in Syria has led to progress
in the fight against terrorism. The eradication of the
terrorist hotbed in Syria aligns with the interests not
only of the countries of the Middle East and North Africa
but also those of Europe, as it will reduce the terrorist

S/PV. 8600

threat in that area and the flow of migrants therefrom.
I would like to underscore that we have never agreed
that terrorists could remain in Syria or be comfortable
in that country. We therefore call for collective efforts
and the abandonment of double standards in the fight
against terrorism. I will be frank: we continue to
advocate a wide-ranging counter-terrorism front.
We are continuing to strive to bring about a political
settlement in Syria, in cooperation with the United
Nations under the Astana format.
We advocate the unification of regional efforts. It is
important now to address without preconditions issues
related to the socioeconomic recovery of the Syrian
Arab Republic and to the issues faced by refugees and
to cast aside the practice of their forced detention in
third countries.
The focus of our attention needs to be on the
situation in Libya. We are of the view that the only
way to help the Libyans emerge from the crisis is
to consolidate the positions of international actors.
Developments make clear the consequences of foreign
military interventions. In Libya, such intervention has
led to the total collapse of its statehood. We call upon
all Libyan stakeholders to cooperate with the United
Nations and not to advance unilateral agendas. That
approach is also necessary in Yemen, where all parties
must act on the unifying basis of the United Nations to
restore its statehood, combat terrorism and transition to
building good-neighbourly relations.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that it is no
exaggeration to say that the alarming trends I have just
described have created an impasse in the Middle East,
compounded by a propaganda war in the spirit of the
grimmest chapter of the Cold War. The number of fake
news reports circulated by various non-governmental
organizations, which receive financing from a number
of Western capitals, is astoundingly high. Regrettably,
unilateral decisions are being taken on the basis of such
false and highly contentious information, which not
only undermines efforts to resolve conflicts but also
weakens the entire system of international relations.
Such decisions are employed as pretexts for identifying
enemies. At the same time, genuine threats, which
require collective efforts, are ignored. That is an
approach that will not get us very far. The sooner our
Western partners understand that concept, the sooner
we can finally address the problems plaguing the
area — outstanding and new issues alike — based on

19-2582319/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

the aspirations of the peoples of the region. I assure the
Council that we stand ready to do so under any format
of multilateral or bilateral cooperation or dialogue,
under the auspices of the Security Council, on the basis
of a positive agenda, without any double standards or
hidden goals and with, of course, unconditional respect
for the sovereignty of the States of the Middle East and
the rights and aspirations of their peoples.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. Minister, for presiding once again over the
Council’s deliberations. We thank the Polish delegation
for having convened today’s debate on the challenges
to peace and security in the Middle East. My
delegation also appreciates the insightful briefing of
Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet in the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General.
We also welcome the Secretary of State of the
United States and the State Secretary of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany to the Council and thank
them for their statements.
South Africa welcomes the debate on the threats
and challenges to peace and security in the Middle East,
and we wish to emphasize that there is no one-size-fitsall solution to those challenges, given the diversity of
the challenges facing each of the countries in the region.
The destruction of property and infrastructure caused
by bombings in the Middle East is unprecedented
and devastating. The satellite pictures of the region
show destruction resembling the kind of ruins last
seen during the Second World War, 74 years ago. The
unprecedented human suffering and the destruction of
physical and social infrastructure should be stopped.
Millions of women and children have perished
and been permanently disfigured. Millions have been
internally displaced and millions more made refugees
in faraway lands — some since childhood. They have
never known peace. The upsurge in the radicalization
of young people and terror-linked insurgent groupings,
which are causing havoc in the region and beyond, are
of great concern to South Africa.
South Africa firmly believes that the question of
Palestine and Israel remains the core issue and that
its resolution will have a positive impact on the entire
region for many generations to come. South Africa is
deeply concerned about the humanitarian cost of the
various conflicts in the Middle East, which remains the
most acute of any other region, as can be illustrated
by the prolonged and continued suffering of refugees,
20/47

20/08/2019

internally displaced persons and those caught up in
the midst of armed conflict in Syria, Iraq, Yemen
and elsewhere.
We call on the international community to pay
equal attention to Yemen, which remains the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world, and call on the
parties to the Yemeni conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, including the Stockholm Agreement.
South Africa regrets the withdrawal of the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We continue to urge our friends in the United
States of America to reconsider their position in that
regard. The JCPOA is the most important diplomatic
achievement in the area of nuclear non-proliferation in
a very long time. It is a significant multilateral success
that contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We also urge Iran to continue
abiding by its obligations under the JCPOA.
South Africa believes that in order to address the
root causes of the peace and security challenges in the
Middle East, the Council needs to display the necessary
political will and good faith to resolve long-standing
and festering conflicts such as the question of Palestine,
which has been a source of tension in the region for
many decades.
South Africa believes that only multilateral
and collective action and a continued commitment
to preventive diplomacy and inclusive dialogue, as
opposed to confrontation and conflict, will reduce such
tensions, culminating in a more peaceful and prosperous
region that is rich in diversity, culture and civilization.
In conclusion, we would also like to emphasize
the importance of the implementation of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and of the
objective of achieving a nuclear-free Middle East. In
Syria, the Geneva agreement should be implemented.
In Yemen, the Stockholm Agreement should be
implemented. The peace process between Israel and
Palestine should be relaunched. The zone of peace and
stability and the economic boom enjoyed by the Gulf
countries could be utilized to stimulate an environment
of peace across the Middle East, and perhaps begin a
grand debate about the future of the Middle East.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would to
commend you, Sir, and the delegation of Poland for
having organized this important debate in the Security
Council focused on peace in the Middle East. I would
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

also like to join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Mike Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United
States, as well as His Excellency Mr. Andreas
Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany. I should also like to thank Chef de
Cabinet, my old friend Her Excellency Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, for her briefing, which provided insights
into what is happening in the Middle East. Allow me to
make the following points.
First, multilateralism should be our guiding
principle to bring about lasting peace and security in
the region. Any effort that deviate from or, worse, run
counter to, this path would only complicate our joint
attempt to arrive at a lasting solution. We therefore
need to reinvigorate the spirit of multilateralism,
based on the rule of law and the Charter of the United
Nations. All parties, including those trying to mediate
conflicts, must ensure respect for international law and
the principle of multilateralism. That is neither favour
to anyone, nor disfavour to others. For Indonesia, this
is central because, no matter how grand any proposal,
everything will be in vain unless guided by commitment
to multilateralism and international law.
Secondly, let me turn to the importance of investing
for peace in the region. Peace is not something we can
take for granted; it is something in which we have to
invest. Our concept of peace goes beyond the absence
of war. Community empowerment, development,
education, human rights and democracy, as well as
addressing the threat of terrorism, should be part and
parcel of the picture. It should also address the massive
humanitarian problems facing millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, who are in need of prompt
and adequate attention. Saving human lives should be
the focus of our action in the Security Council. I am glad
that we agreed on and adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2019/8) on international humanitarian law
under your presidency, Sir.
Investing in peace also means strengthening the
capacities of affected communities to cope with their
situation. In the context of the Security Council,
investing for peace in the region should also be
displayed through our collective actions in addressing
the various root causes of the challenges facing the
region. But that can be achieved only if members of
the Council are willing to put aside their differences,
or at least to narrow the gap of disagreement. Indonesia
will continue to be actively involved in the endeavour
of bridging gaps and finding solutions.

S/PV. 8600

Thirdly, the Palestinian question at the heart of the
problem. Despite the plethora of conflicts in the Middle
East, let us not forget that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the core issue that intertwines them all, with
implications for other issues beyond the region. While
we might for years have had responses to the situations
in such places as Yemen, Libya, Syria, Iraq and
Lebanon, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has immense
ramifications for the cycles of violence and mistrust
in those other scenarios. It is a long-term conflict that
generates long-term instability. To that end, Indonesia
reiterates that we must go back to the root causes of the
spaghetti-web of issues.
For us, an ecosystem of peace, stability and
prosperity in the region remains almost unthinkable
or unattainable until Palestinians have gained their
right to independence, based on the pre-1967 lines. Our
position on this issue is very clear and has been voiced
on many occasions before the Security Council.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that the
violence and atrocious humanitarian conditions in
those conflict areas come down to the ability and
willingness of the Security Council to function. This
is our political challenge and moral obligation. Let
us avoid the temptation to ignore the blood of other
people’s children. Let us avoid being characterized
as an institution willing only to issue proclamations,
presidential statements and resolutions just because
they are convenient.
The challenge of achieving peace everywhere on
Earth is in our hands. That holds particularly true for
places such as the Middle East, where conflicts often
lead to greater bloodshed and mutate into further
conflict. The more we delay taking action to find peace
in the Middle East, the more complex, fragile and
dangerous the situation will be. We will sink into the
quicksand of conflict only to find ourselves, one day,
with no more air to breathe.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like once again, Sir, to welcome your
presence among us and to express our admiration for,
and commend your dedicated participation in, the work
of your country’s presidency of the Security Council. I
should also like, through you, to thank Poland for having
included this important debate on the programme of
work for the month of August, which is a critical time
for the peoples of the Middle East.

19-2582321/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation would also like to thank the team
represented by the Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeira Viotti, for the very
detailed briefing she has just given us. We welcome the
presence with us today of Mr. Mike Pompeo, Secretary
of State of the United States, and Mr. Andreas
Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany.
Today’s meeting affords us an excellent
opportunity for the Security Council to address threats
to peace and security in the Middle East in an in-depth,
comprehensive and objective way. An acceptable level
of calm has not been seen since the previous century,
least of all now, as rising ethnic, cultural, religious,
economic and ideological tensions fuel open military
conflicts and ever-more-frequent terrorist acts.
The protracted and deteriorating nature of these
internal conflicts, along with sectarian violence, is
polarizing countries across the region. In general,
we note that many of these conflicts are interlinked
and risk spreading throughout the region, with
consequences affecting other regions through
humanitarian crises, unprecedented flows of migrants
and refugees, smuggling and trafficking in persons,
illicit arms trafficking and asymmetric threats that
undermine security.
Furthermore, as if the situation were not alarming
enough, Equatorial Guinea is particularly concerned
at certain statements and decisions relating to recent
unexpected developments in the Persian Gulf and the
surrounding region charged with significant potential
to generate high-risk unrest and uncertainty and
further stoke tensions in the Middle East. This risks
jeopardizing billions of dollars in trade in a region
that has for several years contributed not only to the
development of its coastal populations but also to
progress in many other parts of the world.
In the face of all those concerns, our delegation
would like, first of all, to underscore the crucial need
for a joint comprehensive strategy aimed primarily
at creating an atmosphere of trust among the various
peoples of the region. To that end, bearing in mind
that the same ethnic and religious families coexist in
many countries of the Middle East, national politicians
must show leadership and promote policies of national
cohesion that seek to harmonize and normalize the
coexistence of those religions and cultures. Reaching
that objective would not only facilitate the coexistence
22/47

20/08/2019

of the various peoples of the Middle East, but would
also improve relations among nations in the region.
Moreover, the United Nations plays a critical role in
any process to bring peace and stability to the Middle
East, be it through the Security Council or through the
good offices of the Secretary-General. The Council, as
the primary organ for the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security, has a key role to
play in facilitating and supporting genuine and broad
efforts to prevent and address violence, as well as in
creating and sustaining initiatives for lasting peace in
the Middle East.
In that connection, the unity of all Council
members on all key issues is critical. Due to their
proximity and knowledge of the environment, regional
and subregional organizations can also support the
efforts of the United Nations in preventive diplomacy,
mediation and confidence-building.
With regard to the ongoing conflicts and wars,
we know that reaching a just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question on the basis of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and past agreements
continues to be a top priority and a necessary condition
to achieving peace and security in the region. In this
conflict, there has always been a desire to see just
and sincere collaboration by influential countries in
the region.
We have all seen how the wars in Syria, Yemen
and elsewhere have wreaked havoc on their own
civilians, including women and children. Millions
are now refugees and are creating a heavy burden
for destination countries, to which we pay tribute for
their hospitality. What these conflicts and wars are
missing is political solutions to put an end to human
suffering and enabling the dignified return of the
displaced to their countries of origin. We therefore
stress the importance of respecting international law,
particularly international humanitarian law and human
rights law, in ongoing conflicts, as well as of combating
terrorism, which is spreading due to the destabilization
of State institutions.
I conclude by expressing our concern about
regime-change
policies,
interventionism
and
interference in the internal affairs of other States, which,
in some cases, have been political instruments that have
resulted in regime change and weakened institutions,
giving way, in turn, to loose border controls and the
emergence of chaos in certain States, as we see today
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8600

in Libya — the effects of which are being acutely felt in
West Africa and Central Africa.

participation of women and young people in peace and
development processes.

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
peace and security challenges in the Middle East and
we welcome your participation, Mr. President, in this
debate. We thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing.
We also welcome to today’s meeting Mr. Michael
Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States, and
Mr. Andreas Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, Côte
d’Ivoire underscores that the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), adopted on 14 July 2015, is a solid
guarantee for the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as for
regional and global peace and security. My country
therefore calls on all the parties concerned to promote
dialogue within the framework of the JCPOA in order
to ensure peace and stability in the Middle East. In
the same vein, my country remains convinced that the
recent regrettable situation in the Strait of Hormuz can
be resolved only through inclusive dialogue conducted
in good faith.

The peace and security challenges facing the
countries of the Middle East have always garnered
the attention of the Council. The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the crises in Syria and Yemen and the
Iranian nuclear issue continue to make up a large part
of our work. The complexity of these issues and the
multifaceted threats they represent require the search
for innovative solutions through the concerted action of
the United Nations and regional organizations, as well
as enhanced regional cooperation.
A review of the situation in the Middle East
reveals a lack of prospects for political settlements,
a lack of democratic governance, deadlocked peace
processes, high geopolitical and religious tensions
and humanitarian tragedies. That bleak scenario, to
be generous, is compounded by the serious threat to
security and stability represented by the emergence of
peripheral non-State actors, including armed groups
and terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
In view of this seemingly hopeless situation in the
Middle East, Côte d’Ivoire calls for dialogue as the
best way to strengthen mutual understanding and build
the necessary trust for the comprehensive settlement
of these crises. We therefore urge all stakeholders
in Middle East conflicts to decisively commit to
constructive negotiations, with the support of regional,
subregional and multilateral actors, in order to build the
foundations for lasting peace.
We have a proverb that says that war will never
be rich enough to buy peace and that dialogue is the
weapon of the strong, not the weak. For negotiations
to be successful, they must be inclusive and take into
account all important regional issues — dialogue
among cultures and religions, minority rights and the

With regard to the Palestinian conflict, Côte
d’Ivoire calls on all the parties to renounce violence and
unilateral actions, with a view to promoting a solution
of two States coexisting in peace and security, within
the framework of the pre-1967 borders and each with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions.
As for the Syrian conflict, my delegation renews
its support for the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and calls on the
parties to promote political dialogue and work towards
the establishment of the constitutional committee, in
keeping with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254
(2015).
Finally, with regard to the situation in Yemen, Côte
d’Ivoire urges the parties to implement the December
2018 Stockholm agreements, to cease hostilities and to
resolutely pursue the political settlement endorsed by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, as discussed in the Council this
morning (see S/PV.8598).
My delegation would like to note with regret the
lack of Council unity on these issues, which renders its
action ineffective, while civilian populations continue
to face humanitarian crises and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are a daily
reality in the region. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls for
the establishment of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, including
the League of Arab States, for the prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes in the Middle East.

19-2582323/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/08/2019

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.

claims lives, destroys infrastructure and imperils the
stability and security of States. It prompts us to reiterate
our firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms,
regardless of the perpetrators, places or reasons. We
also reaffirm the need to make joint efforts to counter
the extremist thinking of terrorist groups and dry up
their sources of financing.

I now give the floor to the representative of Bahrain.

In that regard, I wish to recall the eleventh meeting of
the Counter Da’esh Finance Group Meeting, which was
held in Bahrain from 16 to 17 April. The international
efforts that have been undertaken to assiduously
counter Da’esh were under discussion during the
event. The potential of Da’esh to perpetrate attacks has
been significantly downgraded in many countries, as
well as diminishing its capacity to finance and wage
attacks. Such progress requires us to persevere in our
efforts to ensure that we defeat Da’esh and similar
terrorist groups, completely eradicate them and end
their channels of financing. The transfer of funds to
those terrorist groups outside of the global monetary
system represents one of the greatest challenges we
face, as Da’esh, Hizbullah and Al-Qaida illegally use
such funds.

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Polish delegation for convening this important meeting
on threats to peace and security in the Middle East.
I also wish to welcome the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Pompeo, and thank him for his statement,
as well as the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany. I welcome, as well, Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Executive
Office of the Secretary-General, and thank her for
her briefing.
His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the
Kingdom of Bahrain has affirmed that security and
stability throughout the world hinge on the free flow
of trade. Security undoubtedly rests on what takes
place in this important region. The challenges that
the region has been encountering are complicated,
deep-rooted and liable to change the region for many
decades to come. It is therefore incumbent upon us,
as the international community, to undertake all the
necessary efforts to guarantee stability in the region,
and that all countries should be committed to the
principles of good neighbourliness, mutual respect and
the non-intervention in the internal affairs of others. In
doing so, we will avoid long-term destabilization in that
part of the world.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is convinced that the
achievement of lasting security, peace and development
in the region is a shared responsibility and that it is
necessary for us to agree on shared mechanisms
that ensure collective security in the Middle East, in
cooperation with allied States. That is key to achieving
peace and security for States and peoples alike. We
must also reject all those who attempt to destabilize this
strategic region, which is already riddled with various
threats, foremost of which is terrorism.
One of the most significant challenges facing our
region is the disastrous consequences and damages
resulting from terrorism. That is a noxious scourge that
24/47

The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its firm position
regarding the Palestinian question and the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, on the basis of the two-State solution, in
accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. Together with
the United States of America, we held a meeting
from 25 to 26 June to address the need to facilitate a
promising economic future for the Palestinian people.
During that meeting, there was an exchange of ideas
on laying the foundation for a prosperous future for the
brotherly Palestinian people.
The Iran-backed coup militias continue to place
obstacles before the Government of Yemen and threaten
the security of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. In
that regard, we condemn the terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Saudi Shaybah oilfield, which was targeted
by the Houthi militias in a cowardly terrorist act that
constitutes a destabilizing and significant threat against
the oil reserves of the whole world. We support and
extend our solidarity to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in the measures that it has been taking to defend its
security and interests.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

As part of our policy and initiatives, based on
effective participation to achieve security and peace
through cooperation with our international partners,
allies and brethren, we held an important military
meeting at the international level, on 31 July, regarding
the situation prevailing in the region, as well as the
ways to step up cooperation and coordination to tackle
repeated acts of aggression and the practices that we
reject that seek to subvert maritime security in Arab
Gulf waters and the Strait of Hormuz, and jeopardize
stability in the region and the world.
The Kingdom of Bahrain will host a meeting on
maritime and air security later this year, in conjunction
with the United States of America and Poland. That
initiative is in line with the role the Kingdom of
Bahrain plays in contributing to establishing security
and stability within the region, as well as to countering
the threats faced by the region as a result of Iranian
practices, which represent a grave danger to maritime
and air routes.
To conclude, we reaffirm that achieving
international peace and security requires that we all
work hand in hand and forge innovative mechanisms to
tackle challenges. We will continue to work alongside
the international community to settle conflicts in a
peaceful manner and establish peace and security in the
region and the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the assumption of your country to
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. Our delegation has reviewed the concept note
(S/2019/643, annex) that you circulated in preparation
for this debate, and we thank you for your initiative to
convene this meeting.
As usual, and as we have witnessed in many
previous meetings, some Member States of the Security
Council have intentionally derailed the debate from
its objective, namely, the diagnosis and treatment
of the root causes of the challenges that impede the
achievement of peace and security in the Middle East.
They obstruct identifying the causes of occupation,
aggression and the destructive external intervention
in the affairs of the countries of the region in various
forms, including by aiming to forcibly overthrow
systems of Government and investing in terrorism over

S/PV. 8600

peace, as my friend the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia rightly mentioned.
Such causes include the fabrication of crises, their
prolongation and dragging the entire region into bloody
artificial wars to the detriment of the welfare, prosperity
and security of the people. From the beginning of the
twentieth century to this day, the Middle East has
borne witness to tragic events as some colonial States
have preferred to serve their own narrow interests and
ambitions over the principles of law, justice, ethics
and peace. Successfully meeting the challenges facing
the region therefore requires upholding principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
which is the common denominator to all. Those
countries must stop attempting to distort the Charter
and manipulating its provisions.
Ever since the founding of the United Nations, the
challenges facing the Middle East have taken up a major
part of the Security Council’s agenda and that of the
United Nations. Although those challenges are regional
in nature, they are of concern to everyone in the world.
Dealing with them seriously and in accordance with the
law is not merely a regional matter, but rather in the
interests of the entire world. In that regard, my country’s
delegation would like to stress the following points.
First, any objective perspective concerning the
reason for tensions in Middle East must admit that the
main reason for this conflict and the absence of peace
and stability in the region has, and always will be, the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan. That is not owing to any racial,
religious or sectarian factors, which are fabricated
reasons being propagated in order to fragment the
countries of the region, redraw their borders and weaken
the resilience of our peoples faced by Israeli bullying.
The lack of the necessary mechanisms for
enforcing the implementation of the Security Council’s
own resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict has led
to the continuation of the occupation and enabled
it to continue its crimes against our people in the
occupied Arab territories. It has encouraged the United
States Administration to shirk its obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions, which was
apparent in the United States President’s recognition of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and Israeli sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan, and the attempt to pass
off a suspicious deal, which is tantamount to the crime
of the century.

19-2582325/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

Moreover, as we have repeatedly underscored, that
has encouraged the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, to not perform his
mandated duties. Anyone who questions the existence
of an organic link between what is happening in our
region, on the one hand, and the quest to entrench
and prolong the Israeli occupation of Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan, on the other, is delusional,
misinformed or naive.
Secondly, the United Nations was founded on
the principles of the sovereign equality of States and
non-intervention in their internal affairs. Moreover,
it was founded on the principle of refraining from the
threat or use of force. Respecting those lofty principles
calls for, inter alia, compelling the United States and
its allies, including the Turkish occupation forces, to
cease their illegal military presence on my country’s
territories and their pro-terrorism aggression and
crimes against Syrians and civilian infrastructure.
We have seen how the Erdoğan regime has brought
Uzbek, Tajik, Caucasian, Turk, Uighur, European and
Arab mercenaries and terrorists across the border
between Syria and Turkey into Idlib to support the
terrorist Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist entities
affiliated with it. It has also brought in weapons and
ammunition to support those terrorists. Furthermore,
some have demonstrated the degree to which they
have colluded by calling those foreign terrorists the
“moderate armed Syrian opposition”.
Thirdly, we call for the immediate and unconditional
lifting of the coercive unilateral measures, which the
United Nations has consistently declared illegitimate
and which have had a devastating impact on the people
of the region and their ability to achieve development,
while leading them to leave their homes as refugees
and migrants. Those coercive measures are also
a form of economic terrorism complementing the
terrorism of terrorist groups. They are an expression of
hypocrisy when seen against the backdrop of starving
people, while depriving them of their basic needs and
proclaiming concern about the welfare of the Syrian
people and achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so that no one is left behind.
Fourthly, we must deal firmly with the threat posed
by Israel’s arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) to the security and safety of the people in
our region and compel Israel to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as a non-nuclear
26/47

20/08/2019

State, and place all its activities and facilities under the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in accordance with resolution 487 (1981). In that regard,
we renew our call for adopting the Syrian initiative
aimed at establishing a zone free of all WMDs and,
above all, nuclear weapons in the Middle East. Draft
resolution S/2003/1208 on that initiative was submitted
by my country during its membership on the Security
Council in 2003 and continues to be held prisoner in the
Council’s filing cabinets.
Concerning the situation in the Gulf region, my
country condemns policies that fabricate crises and
ignite new wars in the region the goal of which is to
distract the peoples of the region from pursuing their
main cause, which is ending the Israeli occupation, and
countering attempts to impose hegemony and plunder
the region’s wealth. If we fail to do that, we will witness
new wars in which the people of our region will be the
primary victims. The repercussions will not be limited
to the Middle East but will go well beyond.
In conclusion, the time has come for the peoples of
our region to live as others throughout the world — in
prosperity, safety and stability — reclaim their role in
enriching human civilization, the cradle of which is in
the Middle East, and establish the values of peace and
coexistence among peoples, civilizations and cultures.
That requires the Security Council to adopt a serious
and effective approach to dealing with the reasons
underlying the instability that I just mentioned and
to move away from a policy of selectivity and double
standards, which has been the salient characteristic
of the Council’s way of dealing with the issues of our
region, mistakenly called the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this timely debate on a theme
that is of paramount importance to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
For centuries, the peoples of the Middle East and
North Africa lived together in peace and harmony,
regardless of their race, religion, language, sect or
ethnicity. They did so and flourished politically,
economically, socially and intellectually, with a sense
of shared destiny, embracing at the same time their
differences as a source of richness.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today’s reality differs dramatically from that
historical background, and the region is confronted
with ever-growing complex challenges. Sectarian and
divisive policies, the brutal repression of legitimate
demands for democracy and unresolved armed conflicts
resulting in mass displacements, coupled with feelings
of resentment owing to growing discrimination, have
created a breeding ground for relapse into violence.
Today the main challenge in the region remains
keeping the prospects for the resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict alive. It is regrettable that the
vision of a two-State solution, which is the only feasible
path to resolve that long-standing issue, has been
deliberately weakened owing to unilateral and illegal
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories. Any
peace plan for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
should endorse an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. There is no other alternative to viable peace.
Concerning Syria, in addition to the horrific
crimes of Al-Assad’s brutal regime in the form of
indiscriminate air strikes, barrel bombs, chemical
weapons, artillery shelling and, as recently seen once
again in Idlib, the deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, there are other menaces facing
the civilian population in Syria, such as the welldocumented crimes of terrorist organizations such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and other affiliated groups, as well as
the Kurdish Workers Party and its Syrian brand — the
Democratic Union Party and the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units. Let us not forget that only a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) can end the
Syrian civil war.
In that context, I would also like to refer to
hallucinatory remarks of the representative of the
Syrian regime with regard to my country. I repeat that
I do not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart.
His presence here is an affront to the millions of Syrians
who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the
regime. Therefore, I will not honour his delusional
accusations with a response.
We are also deeply worried about the deteriorating
situation in Yemen. We call upon all parties in Yemen
to refrain from further deepening the political and
humanitarian crisis in the country. There can be no
military solution in Yemen. Inclusive political dialogue
is the only way to establish peace and security in the

S/PV. 8600

country. Turkey will continue to support international
efforts aimed at promoting security and stability in
Yemen, as well as protecting the unity and integrity of
the country.
We also see no military solution in Libya. Peace and
stability in Libya can be achieved only through political
dialogue and compromise. Regional and international
actors have a crucial role to play in ending the conflict
and paving the way to peace and stability in Libya. The
divisions within the international community make it
impossible for the Council to assume its most-needed
role. There is an urgent need to return to the United
Nations-facilitated political process.
In conclusion, the international community — first and
foremost the Council — should play a more constructive
and assertive role in resolving the conflicts in the Middle
East. That requires, first of all, respect for the basic
principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, including respect for political
unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful resolution of
disputes and good neighbourly relations.
Secondly, members of the international community
should respect and implement United Nations
resolutions that pertain to the security and stability of
the region, including those on Palestine. That is sine
qua non for a basis for mutual understanding.
Thirdly, it is essential that the international
community avoid approaching the conflicts in the
Middle East from a zero-sum perspective. Peace,
security and stability in the Middle East are in our
common interests. We are all affected by armed
conflicts, wars and crises in the Middle East, and by
ensuing mistrust, alienation and radicalization. If peace
is to triumph, we should constitute a solid foundation
for better dialogue, understanding, cooperation and
collaboration within and with the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Liechtenstein align
themselves with this statement.
Conflict resolution for the Middle East, followed
by post-crisis management, is one of the most difficult
tasks international diplomacy currently faces. The EU
fully supports the United Nations, and in particular

19-2582327/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Security Council, as the key actor for upholding
respect for, and compliance with, international
law, such as United Nations and Security Council
resolutions relevant to the situation in the Middle East.
Only if all sides comply with their obligations under
international law, including adherence to all resolutions
of the Security Council, can credible peace take root.
Otherwise sustainable peace is a stake.
A key challenge to peace and security in the
Middle East is terrorism fuelled by radicalization and
violent extremism. Even if Da’esh has been territorially
defeated in Syria and Iraq, it continues to pose a
serious threat. Terrorist threats also exist elsewhere,
including in Yemen and Gaza. In fact, while there is
a concentration of such activity in the Middle East
region, terrorism can strike in all parts of the world.
Another element to consider is the lack of trust
among key parties and the absence of a political horizon
for many citizens. Many countries in the Middle East
are witnessing an erosion of the social contract, which
puts serious strain on social cohesion and territorial
integrity. That has led to the fragmentation of society
and the multiplication of subnational armed forces and
armed actors with narrow interests. Without trust and
inclusiveness, no political solution can be successful.
Let me explain how we see all those factors in
relation to the situation across the Middle East.
The EU is extremely concerned about the measures
taken by Iran since the beginning of July that are
inconsistent with its nuclear-related commitments under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We
call upon Iran to reverse those steps immediately, refrain
from any further steps that could lead to escalation and
come back into compliance with its obligations. We
recall our firm commitments under the agreement,
including with regard to the lifting of sanctions for the
benefit of the Iranian people. In that regard, we regret
the re-imposition of sanctions by the United States,
following its withdrawal from the JCPOA.
Our support for the JCPOA, endorsed unanimously
by resolution 2231 (2015), goes hand in hand with
our efforts to promote stability in the region. We
remain committed to the preservation and full
implementation of the JCPOA — a key element of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, which
is in the security interests of all. We are determined
to work with the international community to achieve
those goals. We are also gravely concerned about Iran’s
28/47

20/08/2019

ballistic missile activity and transfer of missiles and
relevant technologies to State and non-State actors
in the region. We call upon Iran to refrain from any
activity that is inconsistent with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The EU supports a balanced and comprehensive
approach with Iran, including dialogue, with a view
to addressing all issues of concern, being critical
when there are active divergences and cooperative
when there is mutual interest. We are determined to
continue pursuing efforts to enable the continuation
of legitimate trade with Iran, including through the
initiative by France, Germany and the United Kingdom
to operationalize the special-purpose vehicle INSTEX,
which is registered as a private entity and will support
European economic operators engaged in legitimate
trade with Iran, in accordance with EU law and
resolution 2231 (2015).
The freedom and security of maritime navigation
in the Gulf is currently at stake. The European Union
always supports the freedom of navigation, which is
essential to all our economies. Everybody must fully
respect international law, including, notably, the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which is
rightly recognized widely as the constitution of the
oceans, reflecting customary international law. The EU
has called upon all actors in the Gulf region to exercise
restraint. Prompt de-escalation is necessary to minimize
the risk of miscalculation, which remains high.
Also with respect to Iran, de-escalation and
restraint are of fundamental importance. In recent
high-level meetings in Iran, Kuwait and other countries
in the region, we underlined our concerns about the
prevailing situation and, in turn, our partners have
expressed their own determination to work to promote
calm and stability.
The EU continues to insist on full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law in
Yemen. That includes respecting and protecting civilian
lives, as well as respecting the work of humanitarian
aid workers. Furthermore, the European Union
remains fully committed to the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. The
EU urges all parties to cease violence and engage in
dialogue immediately, in particular by fulfilling their
commitments to the United Nations-led process in an
inclusive and sustainable political process.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

The same must be said of the Syrian conflict and
the protracted violent repression against the civilian
population in Syria, which has continued to take
innocent lives for more than eight years. Successive
ceasefire agreements have been violated. The EU has
repeatedly expressed its grave concerns about the
escalation of violence in Idlib, caused primarily by the
Syrian regime and Russia, which threatens the safety
and security of 3 million people. The EU reiterates
its call for a durable ceasefire to be ensured under the
terms agreed upon in the Sochi memorandum, as well as
for the need to ensure unhindered, safe and sustainable
humanitarian access.
The EU insists that there can be no military
solution and that only a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) can bring about sustainable
peace and stability. The EU fully supports the work
of the United Nations Special Envoy, including
efforts in support of the creation of a balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee that would allow for
progress in the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva towards a
credible, negotiated, Syrian-owned political solution to
the conflict.
The European Union stresses that, with a view
to finding sustainable solutions, it is also key to pave
the way for free and fair elections, to support Syrian
civil society, including women and their equitable and
meaningful engagement in the political process, and to
identify measures to build confidence among parties
to the conflict, including on the issue of detainees and
missing persons.
The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and
inclusive political transition, negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2013/522,
annex), is firmly under way.
The European Union considers accountability
and justice as prerequisites for sustainable peace
in the region and, given the lack of jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, will continue to
support the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria and the Independent
Commission of Inquiry. We will continue to provide
funding for the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in order to identify and hold
accountable the perpetrators of chemical attacks in
Syria. Promoting accountability and justice is a key

S/PV. 8600

element of reconciliation in post-crisis management,
not just in Syria but also in Iraq, where we support
the evidence-gathering work being carried out by
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh.
With regard to the Middle East peace process, let
me begin by reaffirming the EU’s commitment to a just
and comprehensive resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through a two-State solution and an agreement
that ends the occupation that began in 1967, ending all
claims and fulfilling the aspirations of both parties,
including Israeli and Palestinian security needs and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions
and internationally agreed parameters. The EU’s firm
and united position on those resolutions and parameters
has been set out in detail on numerous occasions. We
reaffirm our readiness to work with both parties and our
partners in the region and the international community
towards the resumption of meaningful negotiations to
resolve all final-status issues and to achieve a just and
lasting peace.
Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law and constitute a significant obstacle to peace, as
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). The ongoing
Israeli settlement policy threatens the prospects for a
two-State solution.
Recent and increasing violence in Gaza, including
the firing of rockets into Israel, and violence in the
West Bank remind us that restoring a political horizon
for peace between Israelis and Palestinians is essential
to reduce violence and contain extremism in the region.
In the light of recent tensions, which threaten to
exacerbate the risk to the whole region, the EU recalls
the special significance of the holy sites in Jerusalem
and calls for the upholding of the status quo put in place
in 1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
line with previous understandings and with respect to
Jordan’s special role.
With regard to Lebanon, the EU stresses the
importance for progress on the structural and economic
reform commitments undertaken at the Conference
for Economic Development and Reform through
Enterprises in Paris, as well as reforms related to the
security sector, as pledged at the Rome II meeting, in
March 2018. Moreover, the EU is a strong supporter of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)

19-2582329/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

and reiterates its crucial role in maintaining peace and
stability in the south of Lebanon as well as in the region.
As such, the EU emphasizes the importance of UNIFIL
being able to deliver its mandate in full. The EU also
insists on full respect for, and the implementation of,
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) by all parties,
including the call for the disarmament of all armed
groups in Lebanon.
On counter-terrorism, the European Union
maintains its firm commitment to assisting and working
closely together with our partners in the region.
Besides Da’esh, the reappearance of Al-Qaida in the
region continues to provide fertile ground for violent
extremism and radicalization leading to terrorism, as
do other terrorist organizations sanctioned by the EU,
including Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
The regular counter-terrorism dialogues with our
regional partners, including Israel, Egypt and Jordan,
provide the framework for enhanced joint efforts aimed
at diminishing terrorist propaganda from the Internet,
halting resources financing terrorism and ensuring due
accountability for terrorist atrocities, which constitute
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We are pleased that the Global Coalition
Against Da’esh is pursuing these objectives.
Another key challenge to bringing about peace
and security in the Middle East is the lack of trust
and the need to create conditions for peace among
the population. Strengthening democracy, the rule of
law and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms is an essential strategy for building trust
among different groups in societies and between the
Government and its citizens. It is important to act
against any form of incitement to hatred and violence,
including by using the education system to promote
mutual tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
This analysis leads to the conclusion that
sustainable solutions to the conflicts in the Middle East
can be found only through multilateral cooperation:
by policy and actions coordinated by the international
community, some of which are translated into
international law; or, in other words, by means of a
rules-based international order to which the parties on
the ground and international actors commit themselves.
I would like to underscore that international law
includes international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Only a few days ago, we celebrated 70
30/47

20/08/2019

years of the Geneva Conventions. The EU’s support
for international law is one of the key building blocks
of the Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Our clear policy is in favour of the full implementation
of international humanitarian law at all times,
everywhere—in Syria, Yemen and, equally, in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Our commitment to the fight against terrorism and
our work with partners on the ground to build confidence
exemplify our commitment to the multilateral approach.
Many actions have been agreed at the international or
multilateral level, of which I have mentioned several.
Most are led by the United Nations. The EU, for its
part, will continue to support peace and security in the
Middle East, including through the United Nations.
The lack of implementation of agreed policies and
of enforcement of international law is the real challenge
to bringing about peace and security in the Middle East.
It has almost become fashionable simply not to agree
on a course of action or follow agreements. Narrow
interests often prevail over the international need
for compromise and mutual gain. The international
community must therefore seek methods to make agreed
policies implementable and to ensure full respect for
international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say that my
country endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the United Arab Emirates on behalf of
the Group of Arab States.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
your valuable initiative in organizing this meeting on
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the particular challenges facing peace and security
in the Middle East.
I likewise thank you, Madam, for the concept note
(S/2019/643, annex) prepared by your delegation, which
raised a number of questions and ideas that deserve
consideration. The note refers to the root causes of the
conflicts in the Middle East. Some believe that these
conflicts are ethnic or religious in nature and stretch
back hundreds, or thousands, of years. In reality that
is not the case at all, especially when it comes to the
two main entities responsible for threatening peace and
security in the region, namely, Israel and Iran.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has never been an
ethnic or religious conflict. Indeed, Muslim Arabs have
lived with their Jewish and Christians counterparts in
peace and security throughout the Arab-Islamic rule
in Palestine. That situation changed only when the
Zionist movement, a colonialist and racist one, took
control of Palestinian territories and homes at the
beginning of the twentieth century. After that, Zionist
gangs, such as the Irgun and others, embarked upon
ethnic cleansing that targeted Palestinians, turning
them into refugees and depriving them of their right to
life, dignity and self-determination.
It is not a matter of historical revenge, therefore,
between Palestinians and Jews in Palestine, but rather
basic principles recognized by international law and
United Nations resolutions, starting with the unjust
partition plan presented in resolution 181 (1947),
which insisted on the need to create an independent
Palestinian State, as well as resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 497 (1981), 672 (1990), 694 (1991), 1860 (2009)
and 2334 (2016), all of which reaffirm the need to create
a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as its capital.
Although the world has recognized the imperative
need for the two-State solution, Israel continues to
delay and refuses to recognize the historic right of
the Palestinian people to their land. Worse yet, Israel
continues its provocations, most recently its entry
by force into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its aggression
against that sanctuary on Eid Al-Adha. We condemn
that aggression in the strongest terms.
In addition, some speak of a centuries-old
conflict between Shiites and Sunnis and maintain that
disagreements with Iran are an embodiment of that
conflict. That is also completely false. Indeed, although
Shiite doctrine has existed in certain Arab regions
going back nearly 1,200 years, it did not spread to Iran
until the sixteenth century, during the reign of Safavid,
who managed to convert Iran into a Shiite country, but
did not manage to do the same beyond it. That is why to
speak of a historic religious conflict lasting over 1,000
years is an illusion. Shiite Muslims have lived in the
Arab world alongside their brothers from various Sunni
sects in cooperation, peace and security.
The disagreements with Iran surfaced only after
the Iranian revolution, which gave the Shiite doctrine
a decisive, even exclusive, role in certain domains.
The Iranian revolution did not stop there. It called for

S/PV. 8600

exporting the revolution to the Muslim world. Indeed,
the Iranian Constitution stipulates the pursuit of the
revolution within the country and abroad.
Recognizing those historic realities is a starting
point for ensuring international peace and security
in the Middle East. It is imperative to recognize the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination and their
right to create an independent State. Amid the violence,
settlements, displacement and destruction of homes, it
is imperative to recognize the right of the people of
the region to live in peace, free from interference in
internal affairs, free from exported revolutions through
militias, such as the Houthis and Hizbullah, and without
being pitted against their own countrymen.
The Security Council must use every means to
reaffirm the basic principles of international relations
and reject occupation, violence, oppression, sedition
and incitement to violence, of which Israel and Iran are
guilty, and through which they have destabilized the
Middle East region. Recognizing those basic principles
will enable the entire region to dedicate their human,
intellectual and natural resources for cooperation,
development and fighting terrorism and dealing with
causes of its expansion, such as foreign occupation,
marginalization, social injustice and ethnic and religious
discrimination among people of the same country.
My country reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of international law. We support all measures
to ensure peace, stability and security in the region.
We also support development in the region, for we
are convinced that comprehensive development in the
Middle East will usher in stability, eradicate terrorism
and defuse conflicts.
My country is always working to cooperate, discuss
and peacefully settle all conflicts. Nevertheless, we must
reaffirm that calls for dialogue must go hand in hand
with an end to threats and interference in internal affairs,
such as attacks against, and attempted assassinations
of, diplomats and representatives, cyberattacks against
infrastructure, propaganda, sedition and support for,
and sponsoring of, militias and terrorist groups. If
those practices do not practically stop, all calls for
dialogue will be nothing more than talk and will serve
only hegemonic and expansionist aims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.

19-2582331/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to congratulate the Republic
of Poland on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. We thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important high-level
meeting, and we wish you every success.
The Middle East region is deeply divided, with
attempts to destroy its diverse ethnic, racial and
cultural fabric, with decades-long conflicts, new
conflicts, the emergence of terrorism and new forms
of violent extremism that undermine peace, sustainable
development and human rights. Countries’ safety and
their very existence are at risk. Millions of people have
been forcibly displaced from their homes, which in turn
has destabilized other countries.
We must recognize that the main reason for
racial, ideological and sectarian conflicts has been the
presence of political, social and economic problems
and the spread of hate speech, which has sparked
conflicts that have claimed the lives of millions of
innocent people. The region needs stability based on
a system of collective security, respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in internal affairs and the rejection of
violence and extremism. The security of our region is
both collective and interconnected.
Iraq, with its geopolitical significance, its potential
and its cultural diversity, could help build understanding
that strengthens security and political stability in the
region. We also believe that any clash in our region will
jeopardize the security of Iraq. We therefore suggest
holding constructive dialogues between the countries
concerned in order to defuse tensions and overcome
differences among all parties so as to avoid further
escalation and prevent more war in our region, with
negative repercussions for all.
The Government of my country reaffirms that the
Israeli occupation is the cause of tensions in our region.
We can hardly fathom stability and security in the
region without reaching a solution that renders justice
to the Palestinian people and meets their legitimate
aspirations to freedom and to establishing a viable,
independent State. We also reaffirm the need for further
consultations to reach a political solution that prevents
more despair and acts of violence and extremism in the
region and beyond. We must all work on creating the
necessary conditions to achieve comprehensive peace.
At the same time, the uniqueness of the Holy
City of Jerusalem must be addressed as part of a
32/47

20/08/2019

comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which must also include the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is the only way to achieve peace,
stability and security.
The pillars of lasting security and peace in the region
are not limited to security and political agreements, but
they also require combating corruption, enhancing the
role of women, supporting young people and meeting
their aspirations and addressing the challenges of
climate change.
Corruption is one of the root causes of political
crises and societal divides in countries. It is one of
the reasons for emerging conflicts, and it is also
linked to the illegal arms and drugs trafficking and
violent extremism. Countries must consolidate good
governance, combat corruption and adopt correct and
effective policies to combat money laundering and the
financing of terrorism.
Furthermore, we must support women so that they
can hold leadership positions in the economic, political
and administrative spheres. That is key to achieving
sustainable development in our countries, as modern
civic States that guarantee the rights and dignity of
all. We must also meet the aspirations of young people
for a better future so that they do not fall victim to
the grasp of extremist ideas and join armed groups.
Young people must be integrated in their societies and
become productive citizens. We must step up the level
of education and increase opportunities of employment
in order to meet their needs and allow them to build,
instead of destroying, their societies.
Lastly, one of the threats to peace and security is
the unequitable use of water resources and the spread
of desertification, which has had a negative impact on
the environment. It has led to wide displacement within
and outside national borders. We therefore need clear
regional frameworks that regulate the equitable and
reasonable use of water.
In conclusion, Iraq reaffirms that the best way to
maintain regional security is peace and cooperation
among the countries of the region and a joint stance
against terrorism and extremism, with a view to
achieving our collective security, while respecting the
sovereignty of countries and rejecting any intervention
in the internal affairs of States. We must strengthen the
ties of friendship and deepen economic and cultural
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8600

integration. Peace and harmony could help launch the
process of sustainable development in our countries.

States installations, which is the highest concentration
of foreign military installations in the world.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

In addition to the illegal withdrawal of the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
another destabilizing factor is the unbridled flow of
American weaponry into the region, which has turned
it into a powder keg. Unfortunately, some countries in
our region, such as Saudi Arabia, are recipients of that
deadly weaponry, with the illusion that they can buy
security by relying on the United States. In fact, the only
beneficiary of that accumulation of weaponry in the
region is the defence industry of exporting countries.

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank the Chef de Cabinet to the
Secretary-General for her input.
The main and longest-running conflict in the
Middle East is the question of Palestine. As long as it
remains unsolved, peace and security in the Middle
East cannot be restored. The unlawful occupation of
Palestine is the main cause; it can therefore end only by
an end to the occupation. There is no magic solution.
All initiatives so far have disregarded that principle and
failed. The so-called deal of the century is bound to
fail for the same reason. The land of Palestine is not
up for sale, and the aspirations, honour, dignity and
inalienable rights of an entire nation cannot be bought.
The United States, by supporting the occupation,
has been responsible for the prolongation of the
conflict. That is the case with respect to almost all
other conflicts in the region. One can easily track the
United States involvement in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria
and Yemen, supporting some terrorist groups and many
other unlawful acts, including cyberattacks in the
Middle East.
Yesterday marked the sixty-sixth anniversary of
a United States-United Kingdom-orchestrated coup
against the democratically elected Government of
Iran. After the Islamic revolution, instances of United
States interference in Iran include supporting Saddam
Hussein in his aggression against Iran; downing an
Iranian passenger flight, which killed all 290 on-board,
including 66 children; supporting several coup attempts;
and perpetrating economic terrorism that targets
ordinary and vulnerable Iranians, such as patients by
using food and medicine as a weapon against them.
One of the main causes of the instability and
insecurity in our sensitive region is the military presence
of the United States, which has deployed over 70,000
troops across the Middle East and maintains an active
military presence in all littoral States of the Persian
Gulf, except Iran. The number of foreign military
installations in the Middle East has increased from four
in 1990 to 41 in 2018, almost all of which are United

Likewise, we should not lose sight of the
destabilizing nature and impact of the divide-and-rule
strategy of the United States, through which it has
persistently sowed division among the countries of the
region. The Iranophobic statements of United States
officials also serve the same purpose. They disseminate
fabrications against Iran to justify their policy in the
region, with the aim of excluding Iran from playing
its role in the region. Iran has been in this region for
millenniums and will remain there for millenniums to
come. Any attempt to exclude or by-pass Iran from the
region is therefore an illusion and doomed to fail.
While we are not seeking confrontation, we cannot
and will not remain indifferent to the violation of our
sovereignty. In order to secure our borders and interests,
we will therefore vigorously exercise our inherent
right to self-defence. As a country with the longest
coastlines in the Persian Gulf and the Oman Sea, Iran
is determined to continue ensuring the safety and
security of maritime navigation in the area, particularly
the Strait of Hormuz. The interference of foreign forces
in that strategic waterway, under whatever pre-text, is
destabilizing and therefore unacceptable. Any attempt
at artificial coalition-building for securing navigation
in the area will fail.
We believe that the littoral States are responsible
for the security of the Persian Gulf. That is the basis of
our initiative to create a regional dialogue forum, which
is in line with paragraph 8 of resolution 598 (1987). We
will continue consultations with our brothers in the
region to realize such a lofty goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Poland

19-2582333/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

for organizing this debate to discuss the challenges to
peace and security in the Middle East. We thank you,
Madam President, for inviting the countries of the
region to participate in this important discussion.
The Middle East is suffering from many challenges
that for decades have prevented the peoples of the
region from meeting their aspirations and enjoying
peace, security and stability. Those challenges include
political, security and economic ones. The region has
also faced many wars since the middle of last century,
and that has depleted the capacity and resources of its
peoples.
The Arab-Israeli conflict, and at its core the
Palestinian question, is one of the oldest and most
notable crises in the region during last century. It has
been passed down through generations within the region
while preventing our peoples from enjoying security
and stability. That is happening despite the inherent
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of their independent State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy.
Double standards and the absence of justice
continue to plague the Palestinian question to this day.
That is one of the reasons underlying the absence of
security and stability in the region, while at the same
time the Palestinian people continue to suffer from the
exploitation of others so that they can achieve their
narrow self-interests. They also help to spread extremist
thinking and terrorism. Despite numerous initiatives
and rounds of negotiations to achieve comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region, we believe that it is
necessary to relaunch the Arab Peace Initiative and
its principles to achieve peace in the region, thereby
guaranteeing the rights of all parties and addressing
their concerns for a better future for generations
to come.
The Middle East has also suffered for years from
challenges that threaten the concept of a national
State and the intentions of some to promote sectarian,
racial and religious divisions to destroy the principle
of citizenship and national sovereignty. They have
also attempted to demolish other firm principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
which has increased the suffering of the people in the
region and led to the spread of armed conflicts, terrorist
groups and illegal armed groups.
34/47

20/08/2019

In that regard, I will mention several characteristics
and root causes that are common to conflicts in the
region despite the specific nature of every individual
case. We are committed to meeting the legitimate
aspirations of the peoples of those countries to achieve
decent lives, peace, security and social justice. We
reaffirm, however, that the only way to achieve that
goal is to reform and maintain a national State, not by
destroying it and creating chaos under any pretence.
Achieving security and stability in the Middle
East will be achieved only by sincerely adhering to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, ensuring
the security in the region, ending foreign interference,
respecting the principles of good-neighbourliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries and
halting the provocation of sectarian tensions that could
lead to further tensions and unrest at a time when the
region is in desperate need of security and stability.
As we address the goal of achieving security and
stability in the region, I can only reiterate the need
to take a serious stand against countries that provide
financing to terrorism and training and safe haven to
terrorists, and that use terrorists as a tool to interfere
in the countries of the region in order to achieve their
own ends, which only increases the suffering of, and
bloodshed among, innocent victims. That threatens
security and runs counter to international conventions.
It is difficult to imagine success of international efforts
to combat terrorism without standing firmly against
those countries.
One of the pillars of achieving stability in the
region is the implementation of the 1995 resolution
on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East, adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and resolutions
487 (1981) and 687 (1991). In that regard, we look
forward to the support of all parties concerned for the
holding of the conference to establish a Middle East free
of weapons of mass destruction, which will meet for the
first session in November under the chairmanship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. We urge the countries
invited to the conference to participate in good faith so
that we can begin to create a stable security system that
addresses the security concerns of all the countries in
the Middle East, leading to common security for all.
Egypt looks forward to making serious efforts to
enable the Security Council and the United Nations
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

to carry out their responsibilities in order to achieve
lasting security and peace in the Middle East and reach
political settlements of dangerous chronic and emerging
crises that plague our region, in accordance with
resolutions of international legitimacy, the principles
of the Charter and international law. Egypt reaffirms
its full readiness to spare no effort to achieve that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to thank
Poland for taking the initiative of convening this
important meeting.
Before I begin, I want to take a minute to highlight
the terror attacks that took place over the weekend,
which symbolize the real threats to peace and security
in the region. On Thursday, two young Palestinians
armed with knives suddenly began attacking police
officers in Jerusalem. One can look online at Youtube
and see the horrible images of young boys inciting and
attacking policemen. On Friday, a Palestinian drove his
car into two young Israeli adults as they were waiting
at a bus stop. On Saturday evening, the Israeli Defense
Forces stopped three armed terrorists from breaching
the Gaza security fence and attacking nearby civilian
communities. All of that happened in a matter of a
few days.
In addition, Hamas — an internationally recognized
terrorist organization — continues to hold hostage two
Israeli civilians and the abducted bodies of two fallen
Israeli soldiers, and refuses to return them home. They
also refuse to allow the International Committee of the
Red Cross to visit and provide information on their fate
and condition. The families of Lieutenant Hadar Goldin,
Sergeant Oron Shaul, Abera Mengistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed deserve to be reunited with their loved ones.
The international community cannot continue to stand
idly by as that evil ploy persists. The State of Israel will
not rest until all of its citizens are returned to our land.
We live in a historic age. Seventy years ago the world
bore witness to the greatest story in generations — the
re-establishment of the Jewish State in the Land of
Israel. That rebirth did not begin a new story. Instead,
it was the newest chapter in the continuing saga of
the Jewish people in the Middle East. Forty years ago
history was made yet again when a handshake between
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Prime Minister
Menachem Begin demonstrated to the world that Egypt
recognized the legitimacy of the Jewish State in the

S/PV. 8600

Middle East, proving to the entire Arab world how we
can all live together in peace and security.
Today an unprecedented wave of normalization
is sweeping the region as Israel continues to develop
and improve relations with its Arab neighbours. In
June, Bahraini Foreign Minister Khalid Bin Ahmed
Al-Khalifa declared,
“Israel is part of the heritage of this whole region
historically. The Jewish people have a place
among us”.
That is an extraordinary statement. The Foreign
Minister’s words affirmed what is self-evident — that
the Jews are a part of the region’s past, present and
future and that we have a right to sovereignty. That is
what sets the foundation for blossoming relations.
However, as I sit here today, the Palestinian
leadership has yet to recognize that historic right. On
the contrary, it keeps denying the Jewish historical
connection to the land of Israel and our right to
sovereignty. It is clear that the Palestinian leadership is
trying to prevent the normalization of relations within
the Middle East, which could unlock the great potential
of the region. This afternoon I direct my remarks to the
Palestinians and to all the Arab people throughout the
region. Here is my message: Israel is not their enemy.
We saw growing prospects for regional peace
and stability in the 1990s. In a climate of renewed
negotiations, Israel and Jordan reached another historic
peace agreement. Now, nearly three decades later,
Israel and our Arab neighbours find ourselves in a
similar environment. We have very good relations with
many countries in our region. More than that, Israel and
our Arab neighbours share a mutual understanding of
the region’s threats and opportunities. We are deeply
involved in confronting extremism and terrorism across
the Middle East.
Yet the climate of today’s relationship-building is
different in one large respect. Looming over us is a
dark cloud of the threat posed by the Islamic Republic
of Iran. The Islamic Republic of Iran’s blatant pursuit
of nuclear weapons for militant purposes, in violation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
should indicate to everyone in the Chamber that the
regime does not want nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. Iran’s ballistic missile arsenal, the largest in
the Middle East, violates numerous Security Council
resolutions. Just last month, the Islamic Republic of

19-2582335/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

Iran test-fired a medium-range missile over 1,000
kilometres. Members should look at a map and think
about where such missiles could reach. Previously fired
missiles were adorned with the phrase “Israel must be
wiped out” in bold letters in Hebrew on their sides.
The regime’s support for terrorism has a global
reach and is widely documented. Iran contributes more
than $7 billion annually to terrorist groups. Just two
weeks ago, the Islamic Republic of Iran announced
that it would increase its financial backing of Hamas
from $6 million to $30 million a month. Its support
of Hizbullah has contributed to the destabilization of
Lebanon. Its involvement in Syria has continued to
fuel the horrific civil war there, which has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of casualties. Such malicious
behaviour serves only one purpose — to export the
Iranian revolution.
Yet Tehran is succeeding only in one key
respect — bringing Israel closer to its Arab neighbours.
The Warsaw summit in February proved that Israel
and Arab countries can come together for regional
collaboration. In their statements, Arab Foreign
Ministers stood alongside Israel against the regime that
hijacked Iran and asserted our right to defend ourselves.
Behind closed doors, even here in this building, many
of the region’s leaders freely admit that the main
threat to the Middle East is Iran. Most of the violence,
terrorism and chaos engulfing the region leads back to
one place — Tehran. Our Arab neighbours understand
that Israel is the leading force in the fight against
radicalism and terrorism. And an increasing number
of Arab countries are forging new ties with Israel. The
common challenges require Arab leaders to tell their
public what they already know to be true: Israel can be
a partner.
We also see extremism within the Palestinian
leadership. As Tehran openly calls for Israel’s
destruction, Ramallah uses other means to undermine
the Jewish State’s right to exist. That was best
demonstrated just last week when, in response to
a report on racism and discrimination within the
Palestinian Authority (PA), instead of acknowledging
the facts — it was not us, it was the United Nations
Special Envoy — what did the representative of the PA
do? He quoted from an anti-Semitic and revoked United
Nations resolution that stated that Zionism was racism.
Such despicable language exposes the Palestinian
Authority’s anti-Semitism as it continues to incite
36/47

20/08/2019

hatred among its people against Jews and the Jewish
State. The extremism of both Tehran and Ramallah is
increasingly at odds with the growing sentiment among
Arabs that Israel is and will continue to be a part of the
region. Despite the situation, Israel remains interested
in a dialogue through bilateral direct negotiations. So
far, the Palestinian leadership refuses that path. Some
of the challenges between Israelis and Palestinians are
not only bilateral; they are regional. Regional problems
require regional solutions. Therefore, I call on regional
actors that no longer see Israel as the enemy to be
involved in finding a solution, just as they pledged at
the Bahrain summit. The Arab people must understand
that Israel is not the problem. In fact, Israel is part of
the solution. We can be partners in creating a better
future for the region. To that end, I want to address my
next statement to the Arab people. I shall speak to them
now directly.
(spoke in Arabic)
I say to Arab people throughout the region what
is already known in Egypt and Jordan. Israel is not
the enemy.
(spoke in English)
Normalization is in our mutual interests. I would
like to emphasize that it does not come at the expense
of promoting dialogue with the Palestinian people. We
are ready to engage in direct negotiations. However, I
must ask, will the Palestinians even come to the table?
In his ground-breaking speech in the Israeli Knesset,
our Parliament, President Sadat said,
“There are moments in the life of nations and
peoples when it is incumbent on those known for the
wisdom and clarity of vision to overlook the past,
with all its complexities and weighing memories, in
a bold drive towards new horizons”.
President Sadat’s words were as true then as they are
today. Israel eagerly awaits the time when a Palestinian
Sadat will emerge to join us in a bold drive toward
the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, I would like to sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important debate and
to congratulate you on your country’s presidency of the
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council this month. It gives me great honour
to deliver the following statement on behalf of the Arab
Group, with Iraq’s reservations on the language of
some of its paragraphs, followed by a statement in my
national capacity.
The Arab Group decided to participate in this
important debate because the issues deliberated today
strongly concern the Arab region. We wanted to ensure
that our positions on those issues, which threaten
security and stability in the region, are heard. Today
our region suffers from serious challenges posed
by several existing crises and conflicts, the spread
of extremism and terrorism and interference in the
internal affairs of Arab States. The current situation,
which has transformed the Arab region into an arena
for regional and international clashes, religious and
sectarian conflicts and a safe haven for terrorist groups,
cannot continue. All those issues led Arab leaders to
hold an emergency meeting in Mecca at the end of May.
The declaration of the thirtieth annual Arab Summit,
which was held in Tunisia on 31 March, underscored
the Arab efforts to addressing the region’s security,
economic and development issues in our mutual pursuit
of protecting our communities and shared interests. In
that context, allow me to underscore five measures that
Arab leaders determined must be implemented in order
to achieve regional security and stability.
First, they called for stepping up efforts to end all
forms of tension and conflict. We will continue our
mutual efforts in accordance with a unified vision to
strengthen Arab solidarity in securing security and
stability for Arab countries and peoples, as well as
improving their capacity to address political, security,
economic and cultural challenges. That requires taking
the lead in accelerating efforts aimed at reaching
comprehensive political settlements for the current crisis.
In that regard, we stress that establishing security,
peace and stability in the Middle East region depends
essentially on achieving a just and comprehensive
settlement to the Palestinian question and the entire
Arab-Israeli conflict. That requires Israel’s withdrawal
from all the territories it has occupied on June 1967.
It also requires the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the 4 June 1967 borders, as well as putting
an end to all forms of religious extremism exercised
by Israel, the occupying Power, in the holy sites of
Al-Quds, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and stopping

S/PV. 8600

its attempts to alter the existing historical and legal
status, which would increase tension in the region.
In that connection, the Arab Group affirms that
the Palestinian question remains central to collective
Arab action. The Arab Group is determined to continue
efforts to relaunch serious and effective negotiations
within a specific timeline, so as to address final-status
issues, including Palestinian refugees, in accordance
with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The Arab Group will also continue to work on
ending the crises and challenges facing Libya, Syria,
Yemen, the Sudan and Somalia, as well as supporting
reconstruction efforts in Iraq. In that context, we stress
the importance of compliance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as they are fundamental
to achieving peace in the region.
In that context, the Arab Group stresses the
importance of upholding international resolutions
relating to the occupied Syrian Golan. The Group
rejects any action aimed at changing the legal and
demographic status of the Golan.
Secondly, Arab leaders called for protecting the
region from foreign interference and ensuring that
all States in the region respect the principles of good
neighbourliness and refrain from the use or threat of
force and from violating the sovereignty of States.
The Arab Group reaffirms its rejection and
condemnation of targeting cities and territories of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles. We
also stress that the cooperation between Arab States
and the Islamic Republic of Iran must be based on the
principles of good neighbourliness, non-interference
in the internal affairs of States and the non-use or
threat to use force under international law, as well as
refraining from any practices or actions that undermine
confidence-building and threaten regional security
and stability.
The Arab Group therefore condemns the Iranian
Government’s policy and ongoing interference in
Arab affairs, which is fuelling religious and sectarian
conflicts. In that regard, I would like to stress the need
for Iran to refrain from supporting the groups that
fuel such conflicts, especially in Arab Gulf States.
We demand that Iran stop supporting and financing
militias and armed parties in Arab States, particularly

19-2582337/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

with regard to its interference in Yemen. We also
demand that Iran stop supporting the anti-Government
militias in Yemen and supplying them with weapons,
and refrain from turning Yemen into a platform for
launching missiles against Yemen’s neighbouring
States or threatening maritime navigation in the Bab
Al-Mandab Strait and the Red Sea. Those acts have had
a negative impact on the security and stability of Yemen
and of the region as a whole. They are also considered a
clear violation of resolution 2216 (2015).
Thirdly, Arab leaders have stressed strengthening
security coordination among Arab States and
intensifying international efforts aimed at combating
all forms of extremism and terrorism, including the
eradication of their sources of financing. The Arab
Group will continue to promote the values of tolerance,
moderation and human rights and will counter all forms
of sectarianism, exclusion and marginalization, which
are exploited by terrorist groups and their supporters
to disseminate their ideologies. Furthermore, we renew
our support for the promotion of interfaith dialogue as
a critical factor for spreading the values of tolerance,
human solidarity and the acceptance of the other.
Fourthly, Arab leaders have highlighted the
importance of taking concrete measures to implement
international resolutions relating to the establishment
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. We also support the major conference
that the United Nations will hold on that issue, the first
session of which will be held in November and chaired
by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. We urge all the
parties concerned to participate in the conference in
good faith so as to establish a stable security system
that achieves the collective security of the States of the
region, without discrimination.
Fifthly, Arab leaders have signalled the need to
focus on achieving inclusive development to improve
the situation of the region through intensified
collective efforts aimed at enhancing and stimulating
economic cooperation and by investing in the natural,
financial and human resources of Arab countries. We
also reaffirm the need to intensify efforts aimed at
increasing the volume of trade exchange and launching
investment projects, which could contribute to forming
an Arab economic bloc.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Arab Group, we
stress that the League of Arab States, as an incubator
of joint Arab action, is best positioned to contribute
38/47

20/08/2019

to achieving the desired settlement and reconciliation
for the crisis in the region. We therefore call on the
Security Council and on the Organization as a whole
to strengthen their consultations and meetings with
the Arab Group, especially when discussing Arab
issues, in order to reach the appropriate solutions and
settlements for the region’s crises and conflicts. The
Group expresses its deep appreciation for the diligent
efforts made by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy to resolve these crises and promote stability in
the region.
Allow me now to speak in my national capacity to
mention some points that require a response in order to
clarify the facts pertaining to them, as we believe that it
is important to do so in order to achieve the objectives
of this meeting.
We regret what we heard today, with regard to
claims and allegations against my country, on the
developments that took place in Aden. We categorically
reject those claims in their entirety. It is worth noting
that, in an official statement, my country has expressed
its deep concern about the armed clashes in Aden
between the legitimate Yemeni Government and the
Southern Transitional Council. My country has called
for calm and non-escalation and for safeguarding the
safety and security of Yemeni citizens. That is the same
position we adopted as a main partner in the coalition
led by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Moreover, the United Arab Emirates, as a partner
in the coalition, will make every effort to de-escalate
matters in southern Yemen. My country was part of the
joint team, in cooperation with the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, that sought to safeguard the national institutions
in Aden when the Southern Transitional Council was
formed. The team sought to coordinate and achieve
calm among the various parties. That is the expected
role from States that place the safety and security of the
region as their primary objective.
We flatly reject the allegations that were made
today. We would like to remind the Council that the
United Arab Emirates, based on an official request from
the legitimate Government of Yemen and as a member
of the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, led
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, has taken decisive
measures against Houthi hostilities and in support of
the legitimate Government. The United Arab Emirates
has made great sacrifices in that regard, which serves to
refute all the claims that, regretfully, were voiced today
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the context of disagreement and division that the
United Arab Emirates does not consider itself party to.
We must not forget the important role that my
country has played in the liberation of Aden and most of
the territories that were occupied following the Houthi
coup d’état. The United Arab Emirates has thereby
prevented terrorist groups from taking advantage of
the security vacuum during these critical and difficult
stages. My country has managed to play a great role
in rebuilding liberated areas, thereby compensating, in
many instances, for the weak performance, management
and governance that the Government has suffered from,
as attested by observers.
My country has also offered generous financial
and technical support and has managed to neutralize
the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.
We have also supported efforts made by the coalition to
protect the freedom of navigation in the Bab Al-Mandab
Strait and the Red Sea. We did all that despite the fact
that the legitimate Government in Yemen was unable
to manage its own affairs and to perform properly, as
well as despite the atmosphere of rampant political and
regional internal division that the Government was
unable to resolve through constructive dialogue and
reaching out to all Yemeni stakeholders.
We would like to reiterate our call to all the parties
involved to conduct a responsible and serious dialogue
in order to resolve all internal differences and to work on
preserving unity at this decisive stage, so as to maintain
security and stability. All those attending the meeting
today agree with that approach towards achieving peace
and security in Yemen and the region. We therefore do
not think it is appropriate for the Yemeni Government
to lay blame for its political and administrative failures
on the United Arab Emirates, as that is based on the
concept that offence is the best defence, which was
exemplified in its negative statement today.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates would like
once again to urge all the parties to focus on the joint
objectives in Yemen, as well as and to underscore our
support for the efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the League of Arab States.
Mrs. Elarja Flitti (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, in my personal capacity and on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-

S/PV. 8600

General of the League of Arab States, and Ambassador
Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of
the Arab League to the United Nations, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, on your wise
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to extend our highest appreciation
and thanks to you and your delegation for holding this
important debate, which comprehensively addresses
issues in the Arab region and the Middle East.
I want to underscore the importance of continued
coordination and cooperation between the Arab League
secretariat, with all its different departments, and the
United Nations and all of its relevant organs, including
the Security Council, in a way that serves and bolsters
the security, stability and safety of our region.
The Arab region is facing crises and challenges that
have dangerous security, economic and humanitarian
repercussions for its residents. Such repercussions
have spilled outside the region in some cases. There
is no doubt that Arab States are aware that they must
work towards addressing those crises in a spirit of
collective solidarity and responsibility and by reaching
long-term solutions that deal with the causes that led
to them in the first place. Arab States understand the
need to propose solutions that alleviate the suffering
of the people, especially women and children, which
results from civil upheavals, fabricated conflicts and
organized terrorist attacks.
Those crises and challenges have persisted in our
region for many years. We see some parties offering
help and assistance in different ways. At the same
time, we see that some parties in the region have
taken the crises as an opportunity to expand, by
fanning sectarian flames, financing armed militias and
escalating violence and extremism. That interference
has destabilized the region and led to menacing
consequences, most recently to the safety of waterways
and international navigation routes.
It is clear that Iranian interference in the affairs
of the Arab region has served to increase and prolong
crises in the area and created even more obstinacy and
extremism in the positions of some. Unfortunately,
such interference is not benign. And it must stop, as
it is a direct violation of a basic principle enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, namely, the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of its States
Members. That has been confirmed by statements and
resolutions emanating from the Arab summits, the

19-2582339/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

most recent of which being the statement issued at the
emergency summit convened in Mecca in May.
Through their regional organization — the Arab
League — Arab States continue to work diligently
to resolve the raging conflicts by offering more
opportunities for dialogue and allaying their dangerous
humanitarian repercussions, based on the principle
that the peoples of our region are historically wellknown as peace-loving and peaceful. Undoubtedly,
as the international community, including the
Security Council, we must spare no constructive
effort to help surmount this difficult phase in our
contemporary history.
The Palestinian question is a central concern for
all Arabs. We are all aware that the situation in the
Palestinian territories is increasingly deteriorating.
The Israeli Government recently announced the
construction of 3,000 settlement units in the occupied
West Bank. Before that, however, it demolished 100
residential units belonging to Palestinian civilians in
Sur Baher, in East Jerusalem. Those Israeli settlements
are illegal and violate resolution 2334 (2016), which
condemns settlement activity and the confiscation
of Palestinian land. Without a doubt, the continued
construction of those settlements in that illegitimate
and cancerous manner erodes the ability to establish
the two-State solution and limits attempts to establish
peace in the region.
The Council is therefore fully responsible for
upholding its credibility and role in safeguarding its
international legitimacy and the international rule of law
by holding Israel, as the occupying Power, responsible
and to account for its continuous violation of Security
Council resolutions, not to mention its violation of
international humanitarian law, which prohibits the
transfer of residents to occupied territories.
The unanimous international consensus on the
Palestinian question is very clear, especially in terms
of the two-State solution, which is the only possible
means to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It entails
putting an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Any attempt to seek solutions to the conflict in a
way that moves away from international legitimacy,
violates legal principles or marginalizes the United
Nations consensus will not succeed, as it would be based
40/47

20/08/2019

on a wrongful foundation that believes that military
force is the only means to secure rights. The Security
Council recognizes only the primacy of rights and law
as the foundation for any lasting and just settlement of
the Palestinian question.
The Arab Summit held in Tunisia in March
reaffirmed the importance of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East as a strategic Arab
option, embodied by the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was adopted by all Arab States at the Beirut Summit in
2002. It is the most comprehensive plan to address all
final-status issues, including the issue of refugees.
Moreover, at the Summit and in its outcome
document, Arab leaders reaffirmed their categorical
rejection of the recognition of Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel and stated that East Jerusalem is the capital of
the Arab Palestinian State. They furthermore warned
against any measures that could change the current
legal and political status of Jerusalem, which would
have dangerous repercussions for the peace, security
and stability of the entire Middle East.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
profound gratitude for the holding this important
meeting. On behalf of the Arab League and its
Secretary-General, I would like to express our deepest
appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and his team, as well as his envoys in the Arab
region, for their sincere and continuous efforts towards
arriving at a final settlement of all the crises there.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate Poland
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
convening this important debate.
I am honoured to represent the State of Palestine
and to join the other countries of the Middle East to
address the Security Council on the challenges to
peace and security in the Middle East. This matter is
urgent, as the peoples of the Middle East are enduring
recurrent crises and violent conflicts that are causing
immense human suffering and threatening international
peace and security. At the crux of this situation is
the Palestine question, the longest-standing issue on
the United Nations agenda and the core of the ArabIsraeli conflict.
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is impossible to truly examine, understand and
remedy the root causes of the situation in the Middle
East without addressing the Palestine question.
Attempts to side-step or downplay the ruinous impact
on the region of the uprooting of the Palestinian people
from their homeland, more than 70 years ago, of more
than a half-century of Israel’s military occupation
and of the ongoing denial and violation of Palestinian
rights are misleading and do a disservice to the aim
of achieving peace and security in the region. Absent
Palestinian-Israeli peace, that goal will remain elusive.
Moreover, such attempts ignore the depths of
distrust, anger and despair that that injustice has sown
across the region, have shaken belief in international law
and the fairness of the international system and continue
fuelling toxic narratives of double standards, including
among young people, who make up the majority of
populations across the Arab and Muslim world.
Despite persisting hopes and expectations,
confidence in the Security Council is in free fall,
as its efforts to halt violence, uphold international
humanitarian law, including to protect civilians, and
peacefully resolve conflicts are repeatedly obstructed,
with Israel’s blatant, long-running defiance of the
Council being the most glaring example.
No one can deny that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict’s protraction — chiefly due to a systemic failure
to hold Israel accountable and halt its gross violations
in occupied Palestine — has cultivated a destructive
culture of impunity. That, in turn, has fostered a climate
ripe for the proliferation of conflict in the region with,
a vast political, social, economic and security impact,
in many cases creating fertile conditions for the spread
of extremism and terror, as well as religious strife,
thereby undermining the potential of religion as a force
for social good, tolerance and coexistence.
In that regard, we must once again caution against
provoking religious conflict in Palestine. Reckless
Israeli provocations in occupied East Jerusalem,
including daily violations and incitement at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif by Israeli occupying forces, officials and
religious extremists, in disrespect of the historic legal
status quo and religious sensitivities at that holy site,
risk sparking a dangerous religious conflict, which
must be averted.
In that connection, we recall with horror and pain
the incidents of 50 years ago today involving attempts
by Israeli extremist settlers to burn down the Al-Aqsa

S/PV. 8600

Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which, among other
things, led to the creation of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. So we do not forget such horrific
terrorist incidents by the Israeli occupying authority.
Tragically, the human cost of such impunity has
also been profound, with humanitarian disasters
widespread throughout the region, including as a result
of the forced displacement of millions of civilians,
including 5.5 million Palestine refugees. I believe
that the Ambassador of Kuwait mentioned that one
third of today’s 70 million refugees are in the Arab
region and that, among the 24 million from the Arab
region, the 5.5 million Palestinians among them have
been refugees for more than 70 years. Unchecked,
such human insecurity, poverty and misery can only
continue to destabilize the region and cause an outflow
of desperate people seeking survival and a better life
for their families, as witnessed in the turmoil of the
past decade.
While the conflicts in our region are many,
and collective political efforts are urgently needed
to solve them, we are certain that forging a secure,
peaceful future in the Middle East requires at its core
a just solution to the question of Palestine in line with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, as many speakers before me indicated.
The path is well known, as long ago determined
by the Council in its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which clearly called for the intensification
of international and regional efforts to end the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map.
Those are not tired formulas or slogans. They
constitute the internationally endorsed basis for
reaching a peaceful solution. The problem is not
that the Council’s resolutions are unrealistic, vague
or unimplementable, as claimed by some. They are
wholly realistic and clearly and carefully articulated,
with due regard for the international consensus on the
two-State solution, which is based on compromise, not
extreme absolutes, and due respect for international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including
the prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force.
Some who come often to the Council are deaf and do

19-2582341/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

not want to hear what everyone here articulates all the
time — that we all know what the solution is, namely,
the end of the occupation, the two-State solution within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
our country, and a just solution to the refugee problem.
That is often repeated by all Council members, the
Europeans and by ministers. But some Ambassadors
who are sitting here are living in a fantasy land and
refuse to listen. Either they are deaf and should go see a
doctor to fix their ears, or they are unable to accept what
everyone else is articulating as to what the solution is.
And there is consensus based on that.
The problem is that those solutions have never been
given a fair chance to be implemented. The Council’s
authority has instead been met with flagrant contempt
by Israel, the occupying Power, which continues
entrenching the illegal occupation with its settlement
colonization campaign, oppressing the Palestinian
people in the most inhumane, cruel ways, and obstructing
every credible peace initiative. A Permanent member’s
use of the veto has further undermined the Council
and exacerbated the situation, blocking any attempt to
compel a halt to the occupation’s crimes and peacefully
resolve the conflict.
This is the dilemma that the international community
continues to face in the region. Overcoming the many
serious challenges that we face requires addressing
this central issue. There is no military solution to this
conflict or any other conflict in our region. Likewise,
the imposition of unjust solutions — such as the
“deal of deals” or the “deal of the century” — is not
peacemaking and will fail, with increased massive
political, security, economic, social and human costs.
What is needed is the immediate mobilization of the
political will to implement the Security Council’s
resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
remain committed to the path of peace and negotiations,
based on the relevant resolutions aimed at achieving a
peace agreement that resolves all final-status issues
and realizes the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination and
a life of freedom and dignity in an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with the State
of Israel within secure, internationally recognized
borders, based on the 1967 lines, and a just solution for
the Palestine refugees, based on resolution 194 (III) and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
42/47

20/08/2019

We reiterate our call for a multilateral political
process based on the long-standing parameters and
within a set time frame and reaffirm our readiness to
engage, including in an international peace conference.
We urge the Security Council to act and also call on
the members of the Quartet, in line with their Council
mandate, to exert serious efforts to that end, in
cooperation with all regional partners concerned, the
League of Arab States and all peace-loving nations.
Only through such a collective drive for peace can we
justly resolve the Palestine question, establish IsraeliPalestinian peace and truly contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East, which is so essential for a
more just, stable and peaceful world.
With your indulgence, Madam President, I would
like to take a minute to respond to the false assertions
from a speaker who took the floor not too long ago.
According to Israeli media, before he came to the United
Nations, that speaker had a reputation for being a big
liar in Israel. Today, and on many previous occasions,
he proved that he truly lives up to that reputation and
the characterization by the Israeli media. Although he
is not succeeding, he is trying to tell the Council that
we did not make the historical compromise to agree
to have the Palestinian State on 22 per cent of historic
Palestine, which is less than what is available to us
according to resolution 181 (II). It is a lie that we do not
want to have peace and the two-State solution. On the
other hand, the Government that he represents, which
is the most extreme in the history of Governments
in Israel, is creating a one-State apartheid reality in
historic Palestine. Who, then, is destroying the global
consensus of a two-State solution? Is it the Palestinian
leadership that he falsely attacks by spreading lies
against it? Or is it the extreme Israeli Government of
occupation that destroys any hope of peace based on
the global consensus that is reflected in many Security
Council resolutions and to which all members agreed?
I also challenge the liar to say whether or not
he accepts the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the conflict. We do, as do members. As
the German Ambassador said not too long ago, Security
Council resolutions are part of international law and they
need to be implemented. The Council has a responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations to ensure that
they are implemented. This deaf man is not listening
to the message that members keep repeating, repeating
and repeating, and yet he chooses not to listen to it. He
lives in a fantasy land, believing that he is opening the
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

doors for normalization with Arab countries — another
lie. All of the representatives of the Arab countries
who spoke, including the representative of the League
of Arab States, reiterated their commitment. That also
includes the representative of Bahrain, as he referred to
the statement made by the Foreign Minister of Bahrain.
They all said that they remain committed to the just
cause of Palestine and to the Arab Peace Initiative and
its implementation. He can listen to whatever noise is
in his head, but he is refusing to listen to the members
of the Security Council. Yet he comes here to abuse
the privilege the Council provides him to listen to his
statements. When we come here to speak, we are all
required to respect the Security Council and to work to
implement its resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting to address the challenges
facing the Middle East region and the means to
ensure its stability for the sake of international peace
and security.
Today’s meeting sheds light on the mounting
challenges in the Middle East, as well as on the vital
importance of achieving stability in that critical part
of the world. That requires the convergence of efforts
to allow for cooperation, wisdom and the language of
dialogue to prevail so as to prevent more deterioration,
which could jeopardize international peace and security.
A just and comprehensive settlement to the
Palestinian question is of critical importance to
achieving peace in the Middle East. All parties must
therefore respect their obligations under resolutions of
the international legitimacy and the benchmarks set out
by the international community, including acceptance
of the two-State solution and acknowledging the rights
of Palestine as an independent State within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Furthermore, Israel must cease its occupation of
all occupied Arab territories and end all settlement
activities immediately. International protection must
also be provided to the Palestinian people, refugees
must be able to return to their homes and Palestinians
must enjoy their inalienable rights.

S/PV. 8600

The link between the conflicts and crises plaguing
the Middle East and their direct implications on
stability in the region require urgent action and
effective initiatives in order to achieve peace in
Syria, Libya and Yemen. Despite the considerable
resources of the Middle East region and the need to
invest them in achieving development and prosperity
for all its peoples, in addition to cooperating to settle
current crises and conflicts and root out terrorism and
extremism, other very serious challenges exist that lead
to instability in the regional security system that is the
Gulf Cooperation Council, which has positively and
effectively contributed to the maintenance of regional
and international peace and security.
Achieving lasting peace in the Middle East calls for
abandoning threats and violations of State sovereignty
and the stoking of artificial crises to achieve illegitimate
objectives. At a time when our region is experiencing
tensions that constitute a threat to international peace
and security, the imposition of an unjust embargo on
the State of Qatar, now in its third year, contributes
to regional instability and undermines the efforts
undertaken by the Security Council to establish
international security.
That illegal embargo causes damages that are
not limited to the State of Qatar and other States in
the region. It sets a serious precedent in international
relations and constitutes a grave breach of international
law and the principle of friendly relations among States.
It is also a breach of the Charter of the United Nations,
which compels States to refrain from escalating
conflicts and requires them to settle disputes through
dialogue and peaceful means.
We welcome this opportunity to reaffirm the
position of the State of Qatar. We support dialogue to
resolve disputes and conflicts, and reiterate our support
and gratitude for the sincere efforts that have been
undertaken by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the sisterly State of Kuwait.
Cybersecurity is a tremendous challenge. When
it is used with ill will, it destabilizes international
relations and security. The world has already borne
witness to serious cyberattacks, and the State of Qatar
has been among the victims thereof. The absence of
international institutions and legislation for governing
this extremely serious and vital realm requires strict
measures against the perpetrators as well as those who
commit cybercrimes and piracy, including subjecting

19-2582343/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/08/2019

them to accountability and sanctions in addition to
making them fully responsible legally for such crimes.

the security and humanitarian situation in many parts
of our region.

The State of Qatar has closely followed recent
developments in the Strait of Hormuz, particularly
with regard to regional and international navigation.
Incidents of this type need to be addressed expeditiously.
We call upon all parties to exercise restraint. We call for
efforts to be undertaken to achieve a peaceful solution
for such incidents.

The situation in the Palestinian occupied territories
involves multiple challenges or, rather, deficits: a
political deficit, in the form of an absence of a credible
peace effort and the challenge of bringing about a
just solution; an economic deficit, where the financial
and economic situation of the Palestinian people is
desperate; a humanitarian deficit, where the needs of the
Palestinians under occupation and the refugees outside
are so enormous that the alarming deficit in security for
Palestinians everywhere is a natural consequence; and
a deficit in respect for international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. But the worst
deficit that the Palestinians are suffering from now is
the deficit of hope.

The State of Qatar has undertaken numerous
initiatives that reflect our commitment shared with the
international community to strengthen understanding
and dialogue so as to advance the premises of tolerance,
cooperation and the fight against extremism and
terrorism. The State of Qatar is one of the largest donors
to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Furthermore, our institutions have supported efforts to
provide education for 10 million children in more than
50 States. Many of those children are in areas plagued
by armed conflict and dire poverty, as well as by natural
disasters. Those efforts have been undertaken through
Qatari educational institutions and in cooperation with
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies.
In conclusion, The State of Qatar reaffirms
our commitment to working hand in hand with our
partners through the international system in order to
tackle shared challenges and to support the Security
Council mandate in maintaining international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Before I start, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and everybody
around the table, for your patience in waiting for us
to deliver our statement. I know that we are delaying
your dinner, I will do my best to be quick. I would
also like to thank the high-level visitors, Secretary of
State Pompeo, for his briefing and his presence at the
Security Council, as well as the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany, Mr. Michaelis,
and the Chef de Cabinet of the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti.
It is 20 August, late in the supposedly calmest
month of the year in the Security Council, and the
Council has held no fewer than 11 meetings on Middle
East issues so far. This reflects the increasing number
of challenges as well as the alarming deterioration of
44/47

The Israeli policy of continuing to create facts on the
ground is depriving the Palestinians of an independent
and sovereign future and a life of peace and dignity.
The most glaring examples of the challenges are the
continuing Israeli expansion of the settlements and
the continued unlawful confiscation and demolition
of Palestinian homes, and the Israeli violations of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, the third-holiest site in Islam. These
actions are heightening the tension in the occupied
territories, the region and the Muslim world. Holy sites
should be respected and their sanctity preserved. It is
the responsibility of the Organization and the Security
Council to make sure that United Nations resolutions,
the Geneva Conventions and international law are
respected in that regard.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is experiencing an existential crisis. As a major
host country, Lebanon is very concerned about the
implications of this crisis on Palestinian refugees and
host communities. While commending the countries
that provide much-needed financial contributions,
Lebanon calls on the international community to find a
sustainable solution to UNRWA’s financial ordeal.
Lebanon reiterates the Secretary-General’s strong
conviction that there is no plan B for the PalestinianIsraeli issue. There is one way out of this intractable
conflict, namely, a just and comprehensive peace
based on United Nations resolutions, the right to selfdetermination, a return to the pre-1967 borders, the
Arab Peace Initiative and a two-State solution that
gives rise to a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

its capital. The absence of such a settlement condemns
the whole region to continued conflict and bloodshed.
Despite these difficult times, Lebanon has
succeeded in shoring up its internal stability and is
putting itself on the path of an economic recovery. A
few days ago, Prime Minister Saad Hariri reiterated
Lebanon’s dedication to advancing key initiatives in
the Government’s reform agenda, such as the CEDRE
conference on economic development and reform and
the capital investment plan, which are essential to the
revival of the Lebanese economy and to bolstering
security and stability for Lebanon and the region.
On the peace and security issue, the Government
is doing its best to maintain Lebanon’s stability and
security, especially on its southern border, with the
help of the international community and the United
Nations. The Lebanese Government expressed its
commitment to promptly developing a plan to enhance
the naval capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
in accordance with resolution 2433 (2018). But this
situation will remain fragile as long as Israel continues
its occupation of Lebanese territories in south Lebanon
and its territorial waters.
Lebanon is committed to conflict resolution and
has sought the good offices of the United States in a
process aimed at finding such a solution. Last week,
Prime Minister Hariri confirmed to Secretary of State
Pompeo Lebanon’s commitment to continuing the
negotiations process on the land and maritime borders.
He called the process vital for Lebanon and viable.
The Prime Minister vowed to continue to support the
constitutional next step leading to a final decision in
the coming months, hopefully in September.
The Prime Minister reaffirmed Lebanon’s
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and its readiness
to move from cessation of hostilities to a ceasefire
under a United Nations mechanism. But for that to
happen, the Prime Minister emphasized, Israel has to
implement its part of the resolution.
In contrast to the Lebanese commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006), Israel continues its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty with impunity.
Those violations have taken a dangerous turn, because
Israel is continuing to use Lebanese air space to conduct
military operations against Syria. The latest such
operation from Lebanese air space happened on 1 July,
when nine Israeli military jets breached Lebanese
sovereignty to launch a rocket attack on Syria.

S/PV. 8600

In a few days, the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
will be upon us. In a letter to Council members, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, Mr. Gebran
Bassil, expressed Lebanon’s
“strong support to the existing UNIFIL mandate
and its full commitment to the implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) in its entirety, including the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Lebanese occupied territories
Kfar Shuba Hills, Shab’a farms and the northern
part of Ghajar village, without further delay”.
Lebanon
applauds
the
dedication
and
professionalism of UNIFIL’s peacekeepers, staff and
leadership, and its continued cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces. Lebanon is grateful for the
support of the troop-contributing countries and highly
values their efforts and sacrifices. UNIFIL is doing a
formidable job in maintaining stability in the south. We
hope that its make-up, mandate and role are renewed in
a spirit of understanding of the important role of this
peacekeeping mission and of the challenges in the area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Poland on its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I would also like to
thank you, Madam President, for holding this important
meeting relating to the challenges facing peace and
security in the Middle East. I would like as well to
thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.
The many challenges facing the world today call
for the international community to mobilize its efforts
to address them collectively and in a complete and
sustained manner. That would ensure dealing radically
with the circumstances and factors causing these
challenges, the most serious of threats to international
peace and security. There is broad agreement that
the Middle East is being hostage by these political,
economic, social and security challenges. The crises
are fuelled by political and social injustice and
sectarian clashes, which have unleashed the forces of
evil, bringing about death, destruction and terrorism.
As we gather here today, events in the Middle East
reflect a situation of increasing tension that is far from
stable. While the Palestinian question remains at the

19-2582345/47

S/PV.8600

Maintenance of international peace and security

centre of instability and the core issue in the Middle
East, no progress is being made in that regard. The
greatest challenge facing our region in particular that
concerns international peace and stability in general
is the continued Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
has met its responsibilities towards the Palestinian
question, which is central to us. This is in keeping with
the vision of our Palestinian and Arab brothers. We have
supported and will continue to support a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question based on
the two-State solution, establishing an independent and
viable Palestinian State, with the borders of 4 June 1967
and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which reflects a unified Arab and Islamic
position for bringing about just, comprehensive and
lasting peace. That is the only way to ensure security
and stability in the Middle East region.
In that regard, we must recall that His Majesty
King Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein has repeatedly
cautioned that delaying efforts to bring about peace
risks imperilling the entire region. It is imperative that
all of us assume our responsibilities to ensure that we
bring about just and comprehensive solution as well as
lasting peace.
Jordan has always called for peace and brotherliness
among peoples despite their linguistic, religious and
cultural differences. The city of peace, Jerusalem, is the
top priority of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, given
our religious responsibility as the historic guarantors of
the Holy Muslim and Christian sites in Jerusalem. That
responsibility is also part of our duty to the Arab and
Muslim nations. Jordan therefore has no other choice
but to oppose all practices that will have a negative
effect on the future of the city, its existence and identity,
as well as peace and future stability.
On top of those practices is the continued Israeli
violation against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The most recent violation was perpetrated
by Israeli forces against worshipers and administrators
of the Waqf Al-Quds. We categorically reject those
senseless actions and all unilateral attempts to change
the historic and legal status of the city. We call on the
international community to take effective measures
and apply pressure to Israel to ensure that it stops
the violations and assumes responsibility in line with
international law and international humanitarian law.
46/47

20/08/2019

The schools providing education to Palestinians and
centres providing them with health and social services
must remain open. The families of Palestinian refugees
and Palestinian communities need full and continuous
support until such a time as their status as refugees is
justly resolved. Funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) must therefore be continuous so as to
ensure the Agency’s ability to implement the mandate
accorded to it by the General Assembly. Moreover, we
reaffirm the need to pursue international, political and
financial support for UNRWA so that the Agency does
not find itself on the long list of victims of a lack of
collective action to bring peace to the Middle East.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has worked with the
international community to bring about a peaceful
solution to the crisis so as to spare the country
and its people suffering further death, destruction,
displacement and other humanitarian consequences, in
accordance with resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014).
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has consistently
called for a peaceful solution to the crisis through the
Geneva process and on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015), which is acceptable to the Syrian people and
preserves the unity and sovereignty of Syria.
Jordan was one of the leading States in the Middle
East welcoming refugees on behalf of the international
community. Jordan has had to deal with the effects of
those waves of refugees, which has meant that we in
turn have required assistance to alleviate the consequent
burden, particularly given our social and economic
situation as a receiving State alongside our hosting
local communities. In that regard, I would like to thank
our regional, international and United Nations partners
that have alleviated the burden of refugees on Jordan.
UNICEF recently reported that 15 million
children do not go to schools in the Middle East and
North Africa, which will lead them to illiteracy,
ignorance, hopelessness and a lack of opportunities for
development, which in turn could lead to despair and
provide fertile ground for recruitment to extremism.
This reality alone should make us think together in
order to address these challenges and ensure that we
can provide everyone with a bright future
The most important pillar of coexistence is achieving
stability for the peoples of the world. We need to open
up new horizons, provide opportunities and offer hope
19-25823

20/08/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

for achieving sustainable global development. We need
plans to improve infrastructure, provide education,
enable women and young people to develop, ensure
security, provide employment and energy supplies,
address the challenges posed by climate change and
support industrial and agricultural sectors. That would
necessarily lead to stability and social and economic
prosperity for the people.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Jordan
will continue to play its political and diplomatic role,
regionally and internationally, based on moderation
and mutual respect. Achieving peace in the Middle East
will remain the main focus of Jordanian diplomatic

S/PV. 8600

efforts until all rights and Palestinian and Arab
territories have been restored and an independent
Palestinian State has been created, with east Jerusalem
as its capital. It is high time to establish comprehensive,
lasting and just peace that opens up future horizons for
the coming generations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I would like to thank all participants for having
stayed until almost 8 p.m. and for their valuable
contributions to our discussion today.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

19-2582347/47
