98

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

and thus would constitute a serious violation of the
above-mentioned Security Council resolutions imposing
sanctions against the illegal régime in Southern Rhode-

sia,
l. Calls upan the Government of the United States
of America to take the necessary measures, in compliance with the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions 253 (1968), 277 (1970) and 288 (1970)
and bearing in mind its obligations under Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations, to prevent the
importation of chrome into the United States from
Southern Rhodesia;
2. Requests the Government of the United States to
inform the General Assembly at its current session of
the action taken or envisaged in the implementation
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to draw the attention of the Government of the United
States to the urgent need for the implementation of
the present resolution;
4. Reminds all Member States of their obligations
under the Charter to comply fully with the decisions
of the Security Council on mandatory sanctions against
the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
5. Decides to keep this and other aspects of the
question under continuous review.

1984th plenary meeting,
16 November 1971.
2769 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
question of Southern Rhodesia,
Having noted the statement made in the House of
Commons on Tuesday, 9 November 1971, by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, announcing his Government's decision to hold
the talks that are currently under way in Salisbury
with the illegal racist minority régime,
l. Reaffirms the principie that there should be no
independence befare majority rule in Southern Rhodesia;
2. Affirms that any settlement relating to the future
of that Territory must be worked out with the fullest
participation of ali nationalist Ieaders representing the
majority of the people of Zimbabwe and must be
endorsed freely by the people;
3. Decides to keep the situation in the Territory
under review.
1991st plenary meeting,
22 November 1971.
2795 (XXVI). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,

H aving examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,2
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General concerning the itero, 3
Having heard the statements of the petitioners4 and
bearing in mind the views expressed by representatives
of national liberation movements, 5
Reaffirming its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all previous resolutions concerning the
question of Territories under Portuguese administration
adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Deploring the persistent refusal of the Government
of Portugal to recognize the inalienable right of the
peoples in the Territories under its domination to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Gravely concerned at the critica} and explosive situation created by that Government's further intensification of its military operations and other oppressive
measures against the peoples in Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau) who are struggling to attain their
freedom and independence,
Deeply disturbed by the repeated occurrence of aggressive acts committed by Portugal against independent African States that border the Territories under
its domination,
Deeply concerned at the continued and intensified
activities of those foreign economic, financia} and other
interests which, contrary to the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, are directly and indirectly assisting the Government of Portugal in its colonial wars
and impeding the realization by the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Deploring the policies of those States which, in disregard of the repeated appeals addressed to them by
the United Nations, continue to provide Portugal with
military and other assistance, which it uses to pursue
its policies of colonial domination and oppression of
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau),
Deeply concerned about any use of chemical substances by Portugal in its colonial wars against the
peoples in the Territories under its domination,
Noting with concern that the constitutional changes
introduced by the Portuguese Government in 1971
are not intended to lead to the exercise of self-determination and the attainment of independence by the
African people of the Territories, but are designed to
perpetuate Portuguese domination,
2 /bid., chaps. V and VIII.
8 A/8348 and Add.1.
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Fourth Committee, 1930th, 1937th, 1938th and 1946th
meetings.
5 /bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.1), chap. V, annex.
