S/PV.8174

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8174th meeting

Monday, 5 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 1 February 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/84)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-03099 (E)
*1803099*

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
public meeting of the Security Council for the month
of February, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of January. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Umarov and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 1 February 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/84)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/84, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 February 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council once again on the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), on the elimination of the Syrian Arab
Republic’s chemical-weapons programme.
I remain in regular contact with the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to discuss matters related
2/17

05/02/2018

to this issue; I spoke to him last week. In addition, I met
with the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations this
past Friday.
At the time of my previous briefing, planning
was under way with regard to the destruction of the
remaining two stationary above-ground facilities of
the 27 declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. I am
informed that the OPCW, working with the United
Nations Office for Project Services, is currently at the
stage of finalizing a contract with a private company to
carry out the destruction, which I understand could be
completed within two months.
There have been some developments on the
issues related to Syria’s initial declaration and
subsequent amendments. The translation and analysis
of documents that were provided to the OPCW by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in November
have been completed. The OPCW has indicated that
this information provided clarifications on some
issues. However, the OPCW is continuing to follow
up with the Government of Syria on the remaining
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies. The DirectorGeneral will submit a report in that regard to the next
session of the OPCW Executive Council, which will
take place in March.
Further to its routine inspections in Syria, samples
taken by the OPCW team during its second inspection
at the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre
are currently being analysed by two OPCW-designated
laboratories. The Executive Council will be informed
of the results of the inspection via a separate note
from the Director-General to the next session of the
Executive Council.
The OPCW Fact-finding Mission continues to look
into all allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, the majority of which involve the use of toxic
chemicals, such a chlorine, in areas not under the
control of the Government. The Fact-finding Mission
expects to submit a report on the allegations very soon.
In addition, another Fact-finding Mission team has
been looking into allegations of the use of chemical
weapons brought to the attention of the OPCW by
the Government of Syria. At the time of our previous
briefing, a Fact-finding Mission team was in Damascus,
at the invitation of the Government, to look into several
of those allegations. I am informed that a report in that
regard is also pending.
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

There is still work to do before resolution 2118 (2013)
can be considered to have been fully implemented,
and for the international community to have shared
confidence that the chemical-weapons programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic has been fully eliminated.
Moreover, allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria have continued, including just this past weekend
in the town of Saraqeb. That makes abundantly clear
our continuing and collective responsibility to ensure
that those responsible are held to account.
New reports by the Fact-finding Mission are
pending. Should they conclude that there has been the
use, or likely use, of chemical weapons in any of those
alleged incidents, our obligation to enact a meaningful
response will be further intensified. It is my hope, and
the hope of the Secretary-General, that such a response
will favour unity, not impunity. As always, the Office
for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide
whatever support and assistance it can.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The news
out of Syria this morning is following a troubling pattern.
There are reports of yet another chemical-weapon attack
on Sunday. Victims of what appears to be chlorine gas
are pouring into hospitals. Few things have horrified
my country and the world as much as the Al-Assad
regime’s use of chemical weapons against its people.
The Security Council has been outspoken on ending
Syria’s use of chemical weapons, and yet they continue.
Under the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013), the Al-Assad regime’s obligations
are clear: it must immediately stop using all chemical
weapons. It must address the gaps and inconsistencies
in its Chemical Weapons Convention declaration. And
it must destroy all of its remaining chemical weapons
under the supervision of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). These are
worthy goals. These are urgent goals. Yet we spent
much of last year in the Council watching one country
protect the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons
by refusing to hold them responsible.
What do the American people see? What do people
of all countries see? They see a Council that cannot
agree to take action, even after the OPCW-United

S/PV. 8174

Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, created by the
Council, found that the Al-Assad regime used chemical
weapons. Now we have reports that the Al-Assad
regime has used chlorine gas against its people multiple
times in recent weeks, including just yesterday. There is
obvious evidence from dozens of victims, and therefore
we proposed a draft press statement by the Security
Council condemning these attacks. So far, Russia has
delayed the adoption of the draft statement — a simple
condemnation of Syrian children being suffocated by
chlorine gas. I hope Russia takes the appropriate step
to adopt the draft text, thus showing that the Council is
unified in condemning chemical-weapon attacks.
Accountability is a fundamental principle, but it is
just the first step. Our goal must be to end the use of
these evil, unjustifiable weapons. When actions have
consequences — when perpetrators are identified and
punished — we come closer to reaching our goal. But
if we cannot even take the first step of establishing
accountability for the use of chemical weapons,
we have to seriously ask ourselves why we are here.
The requirements for establishing accountability for
the use of chemical weapons have not changed since
the Council voted unanimously to create the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, in 2015. They have not
changed since Russia acted alone to kill the Mechanism
last year. Such a mechanism must be independent
and impartial. It must be free of politics. It must be
controlled by experts, not politicians or diplomats. And
it must be definitive.
The latest Russian draft resolution does not
meet any of those criteria. Russia’s draft resolution
completely ignores the findings of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was an investigation that Russia
supported until the investigators found the Al-Assad
regime to be responsible. That should already be enough
to make us sceptical. However, there are other deep
problems. For their new investigation, Russia wants to
be able to cherry-pick the investigators. It wants to insert
unnecessary and arbitrary investigative standards.
And it wants the Security Council to be able to review
all the findings of this investigation and decide what
makes it into the final report. That is not an impartial
mechanism; it is a way to whitewash the findings of the
last investigation that Russia desperately wants to bury.
No one should believe that the draft resolution is a good
basis for discussion, when it is designed to undermine
our core principles on chemical weapons. We cannot

18-030993/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

hope to end the use of chemical weapons if those who
use them escape the consequences of their actions.
Therefore, while we regret the need for its
creation, we applaud the efforts of France to launch
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons. That is yet another way to
hold accountable the Al-Assad regime and any group
that uses chemical weapons. The United States has also
announced that we will contribute to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011. The United States strongly supports the
Mechanism as a valuable tool to hold the Al-Assad
regime accountable for its atrocities, including its
repeated and ongoing use of chemical weapons.
It is a true tragedy that Russia has sent us back
to square one in the effort to end the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. But we will not cease in our efforts
to know the truth of the Al-Assad regime — and ensure
that the truth is known and acted on by the international
community. That is why we hosted all 15 members of
the Council at the United States Holocaust Museum last
week. The exhibit was called “Syria: Please Don’t Forget
Us”. All of us saw undeniable evidence of the Al-Assad
regime’s atrocities and human rights violations. We
cannot, and should not, forget the Syrian people. The
United States will not forget them. While the Council
has not yet been able to act to provide real accountability
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria, the United
States will not give up on the responsibility to do so.
That is the sincere wish of the American people, and
I know that it is shared by many on the Council. We
are not motivated by score-settling, payback or power
politics. We are motivated by the urgent need to end the
unique and horrible suffering that chemical weapons
have inflicted on innocent men, women and children in
Syria. The Syrian people are counting on us.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We are holding this meeting in the open Chamber
today after reports of a series of chemical attacks in
eastern Ghouta within the past month, as the Al-Assad
regime continues its merciless bombing and killing
of civilians. Over the weekend, there were further
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Idlib, as
well as air strikes by pro-regime forces that reportedly
4/17

05/02/2018

hit three hospitals, leaving doctors scrambling to
remove premature babies from their incubators in order
to move them. I cannot say that they were moving them
to safety, because the reality is that for the citizens of
Idlib and eastern Ghouta, nowhere is safe.
We are appalled by this violence and the reports
of deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, and we call on all parties to the conflict
to uphold international humanitarian law and protect
civilians. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is already investigating
reports of the use of chemical weapons in recent weeks,
but establishing who is responsible for that use will
be much more difficult, because Russia has vetoed
the continuation of the independent, expert OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
three times, in order to protect the Al-Assad regime.
We would welcome any serious attempt to re-establish
a properly independent investigative and attribution
mechanism for continuing the JIM’s meticulous work.
Sadly, we do not yet see that in the Russian proposal.
Any successor investigation must be empowered to
investigate all use of chemical weapons, whoever the
perpetrator may be. Yet the Russian proposal focuses
only on non-State actors. We have repeatedly condemned
Da’esh for its use of chemical weapons, which the JIM
clearly reported. But given Al-Assad’s track record of
chemical-weapon use and its failure to comply with
the Chemical Weapons Convention, it is imperative to
ensure that any new mechanism also investigates the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime.
A second objection is the proposal that experts
would merely gather evidence, leaving the Council to
decide what it meant. No other United Nations expert
panel that I know of is specifically prohibited from
reaching conclusions and reporting to the Council on its
findings on what has happened. We are not specialists
on chemical weapons around this table. We rely on
independent, United Nations-selected expert panels.
The entire purpose of the JIM was that an independent
panel would reach conclusions on the basis of the
evidence, taking the issue out of the hands of us, the
Member States and Council members, because we have
been unable to agree. Russia’s proposal looks as if it is
designed to avoid the political embarrassment of having
to use its veto power to defend the indefensible when
independent bodies report on what has truly happened.
The underlying intent seems to be to ensure that there
are no clear conclusions in future reports.
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, we object to the proposal’s demands that the
standard of proof should be beyond reasonable doubt.
That standard has not been used in any other comparable
past or current United Nations investigation. It is used
in relation to criminal prosecutions in courts of law,
which have significantly greater investigative powers
and independence than those envisaged in Russia’s text.
Finally, the proposal insists on site visits, despite the
explicit provision in the Chemical Weapons Convention
for other ways to gather relevant evidence, recognizing
the difficulty of safe and timely visits. There is no
scientific basis for this proposal. It is simply an attempt
to hamstring future investigations and discredit the JIM.
Of course, Russia made much of the lack of a site visit
to Khan Shaykhun, despite the fact that the Al-Assad
regime handed over to the United Nations samples from
the site that contained chemical signatures unique to
regime sarin, obviating the need for such a visit. It is for
those reasons that the current text is unacceptable. The
JIM set a high standard of impartiality and expertise.
We expect that standard from any future mechanism.
The Syrian regime, of course, claims not to have
used chemical weapons. Yet over the years two separate
reports from the JIM, under separate leadership panels,
drawing on a broad range of respected independent
international experts, concluded that the regime had
used chlorine at least three times — in Talmenes in April
2014 and in Sarmin and Qmenas in March 2015 — and
had used sarin to attack Khan Shaykhun in April 2017.
We should also remember the infamous attack in eastern
Ghouta in August 2013, when a separate United Nations
investigation found that sarin was used to kill hundreds
and injure thousands. That attack brought nearuniversal international condemnation, and following
our concerted international pressure, Syria joined the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Syria promised, as it
was legally obliged to do, to destroy and abandon its
chemical-weapon programme. Yet it has been unable to
satisfy inspectors that it has done so. We have to ask
ourselves why that is. In 2013 Russia promised to act as
a guarantor for the Al-Assad regime’s compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Yet month after
month we all sit here and hear that Al-Assad has not
done so. Why does Russia not compel the Syrian regime
to comply with its obligations and make it impossible
for it to use chemical weapons?
Tragically, for the people of Syria, the regime
continues to use chemical weapons with impunity. If
it is confirmed that Al-Assad has again used chemical

S/PV. 8174

weapons on his own people, it would not only be
another entry in the catalogue of his war crimes, it
would also be another attack on us all, Members of
the United Nations who have worked for decades — in
the words of the Chemical Weapons Convention, for
the sake of all mankind — to completely exclude the
possibility of the use of chemical weapons. Throughout
history, our peoples have said “never again” — among
others, starting with the First World War battlefields,
in Ethiopia, in Manchuria and in Saddam Hussein’s
attacks on Iran and on Iraqi Kurds. Let us, the members
of the Council, stand up for the peoples of the United
Nations, determined that such abhorrent chemical
weapons should never be used. Let us stand up for the
people of Syria and give them a real investigation into
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons — an
investigation that pursues justice for the horrific crimes
committed against them. Let us signal our determination
to pursue accountability by all means available, even
if one member of the Security Council is currently
preventing us from taking action here.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate Kuwait through you,
Mr. President, on the start of its presidency of the
Security Council. You can rely on France’s support in
the month to come. I would also like to thank Izumi
Nakamitsu for her usual very informative briefing.
This is the second time we have met in less than
two weeks after reports of four new cases of the use
of chlorine against Syria’s civilian population, some of
them in Idlib province, which is a de-escalation zone.
We are examining the information that is available
and waiting for the conclusions of the investigative
mechanism, but the reality is that resorting to toxic
substances as weapons has never ended in Syria. I
would like to remind the Council that the Syrian regime
has already been identified as the perpetrator in four
such cases, one of which involved the use of sarin, in
violation of international humanitarian law and the
obligations that Syria assumed when it acceded to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
The challenges go beyond the Syrian issue. A
century after the end of the First World War, in which
mustard gas was used on a massive scale against
civilians, what we are seeing is shocking. These
weapons, which we had thought were a thing of the
past, are once again being used methodically and
systematically by the Syrian regime against its own
people. Furthermore, there is a real threat of such

18-030995/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

05/02/2018

weapons falling into the hands of terrorists. The threat
is all the greater given the fact that the dismantling
of the Syrian chemical-weapon programme remains
at a deadlock. The cooperation of the Syrian regime
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has for months taken place in a
piecemeal manner, and suspicions remain about the
status of Syrian stockpiles.

recreated as soon as possible. However, any sincere
and credible effort to that end must align with the
basic standards of independence, impartiality and
professionalism that underpinned the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, as the very reason for the establishment
of such a regime is to determine the truth. Within the
Council, France will be very vigilant with respect to the
principles listed and will not accept a lesser mechanism.

I would recall that OPCW expert teams have
repeatedly found at Syrian sites indicators of
undeclared substances, without any convincing
explanation being provided by the country. Given that
chemical weapons continue to be used, it seems that
Syria has lied and maintained clandestine capacities.
The situation is aggravating regional instability,
undermining the non-proliferation regime and
weakening the international security architecture, as
well as jeopardizing the security of each of our States.
It represents a violation of the law and flouts the most
fundamental principles of humanity.

Impunity in Syria is not an option. The perpetrators
of all of the crimes committed in Syria will be held
accountable, sooner or later. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria, which
we support, is a part of that process. That is the only way
to ensure lasting peace in Syria, and this can come about
only in the framework of an inclusive political solution
in Geneva, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which
more than ever before represents our shared compass.

The international community cannot downplay the
situation and allow the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes to remain unpunished. It is the responsibility of
the Security Council to prevent this; it is our shared
responsibility. The criminals who chose to design and
use these barbaric weapons must be punished. At stake
is the future of our collective security system; no one
can be allowed to undermine its foundations without
facing consequences.
The hindrances and obstructions facing the
international community’s initiatives within existing
bodies contribute to promoting impunity, and this we
cannot accept. For that reason, France launched in Paris
an open, pragmatic partnership that brings together
States that reject impunity for individuals involved
in chemical-weapon attacks or in the development of
chemical-weapon programmes. It brings together all
the States concerned about the threat of erosion of the
non-proliferation regime and of strategic stability. It
was designed to support all international bodies and
investigative mechanisms in their efforts. This universal
partnership applies to all instances of the use of such
weapons throughout the world by all perpetrators, be
they State or non-State actors. The partnership is open,
and States that embrace these principles are invited
to join.
Like everyone else here, we hope that a mechanism
for the identification of those responsible will be
6/17

The repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria
has been proved. We cannot turn a blind eye to
this, for no one can now say that they did not know.
Denial or hypocrisy, or a combination of of the two,
cannot be presented as a strategy. The persistent use
of chemical weapons in Syria represents a violation
of the universal conscience as well as the most
fundamental principles of international law. It also
poses a potentially lethal threat to the sustainability
of the international non-proliferation regime, which
is the most comprehensive and successful of all of the
international non-proliferation regimes. To allow it to
be undermined without any response would be to accept
the erosion of the entire international regime for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction that
we have built together, stone by stone, over the course
of decades and which constitutes the very backbone of
the international security architecture as well as one of
the paramount gains of multilateralism.
On behalf of France, I call on all members of the
Security Council to shift their attitudes and adjust their
focus. The heavy responsibility that we all bear requires
that we join together and take action.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to congratulate
you once again, Sir, as well as the Permanent Mission
of Kuwait, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February.
We are also grateful for the briefing provided by the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu. We also
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8174

wish to acknowledge the letter sent by the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/84) concerning the periodic report
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

create a new, transparent accountability mechanism,
we have the major challenge and the responsibility
of not instrumentalizing the Security Council for
political ends.

Bolivia believes that there can be no justification
for the use of chemical weapons, regardless of
circumstances and by whomsoever committed, as such
use is a serious violation of international law and poses
a grave threat to international peace and security. We
therefore categorically condemn the use of chemical
weapons or substances as weapons, as we deem this an
unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever, whenever and
by whomsoever committed.

In that vein, we view the Russian proposal as a
new and positive opportunity to reach this goal. We
therefore call on the members of the Council to commit
themselves to a process of purposeful negotiation, and
we echo the words of the Secretary-General in his letter
transmitting the current report, calling on the Security
Council to demonstrate unity on this issue, which is so
vital for the international community.

In that context, we express our grave concern about
the ongoing reports of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic, especially in eastern
Ghouta. If that is confirmed, the Council should remain
united in order to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable and brought to justice, so that there is no
impunity for their actions.
We commend the coordination between the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services in
all of the arrangements aimed at making possible the
destruction of the two remaining facilities as well as
the preparedness of the Syrian Government to achieve
this end. We call on the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate with the OPCW on this initiative,
as well as during the second inspection of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre.
We encourage the Fact-finding Mission to continue
its investigation so that, in accordance with its mandate,
it can investigate, in the most objective, methodical
and technical manner, reports of the use of chemicals
weapons on Syrian territory. In that regard, we highlight
the latest visit to the city of Damascus during January,
and we will await the results thereof.
We call on all parties involved to cooperate fully
as well as to provide viable and reliable information,
so that an effective investigation of all of the ongoing
cases can be conducted as soon as possible.
Concerned about the reports of the use of chemical
weapons, we deem it essential to establish as soon as
possible an independent, impartial and representative
mechanism to carry out a full, reliable and conclusive
investigation of the cases referred by the Fact-finding
Mission that will make it possible to identify those
responsible for such acts. Nevertheless, if we want to

Finally, we reiterate that the only option for
resolving the conflict in Syria and prevent more people
from becoming victims is through an inclusive political
transition led by and benefiting the Syrian people
that respects their sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Since this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of February, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of Kuwait on the commencement of its
presidency and wish it great success in implementing
its ambitious programme of work. I am grateful to High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
Our position on this issue remains unchanged.
We strongly condemn any use of chemical weapons
and advocate that such threats must be eliminated
in the future. We firmly believe that there must be
accountability for perpetrators of such crimes. Today I
would like to concentrate on three major points.
First, we support the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as
reflected in its fifty-second report (S/2018/84, annex).
The speedy destruction, probably in two months, of
the remaining chemical-weapon production facilities
and resolving all outstanding issues relating to the
declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic are of the utmost
importance. That would help to dispel all existing
doubts on many principal issues and to comprehend
the real situation in the country. It is commendable
that, during the inspection of Barzah and Jamrayah, all
samples were sealed, packaged and shipped to OPCW’s
laboratory and were received there in the presence of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, observing
all established rules. We look forward to the follow-up
to the OPCW’s work, and we will also await the results

18-030997/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

05/02/2018

of a thorough analysis of the documents submitted by
Syria by the Declaration Assessment Team.

the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in the
elimination of all of its chemical weapons.

Secondly, the continuing reports on the alleged use
of chemical weapons in Syria are extremely alarming.
But the most alarming fact is that the Council has not yet
restored its investigative potential to properly respond to
such cases. I recall the words of the Secretary-General,
who pointed to the serious gap that had arisen at the
end of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which leaves one with the feeling that
impunity will continue without any strict monitoring.

We take note of some recent progress, such as
the imminent destruction of the last two declared
chemical-weapon production facilities, as verified
preliminarily by the OPCW last November, and the
allocation of new financial resources to that end.
Nevertheless, we are concerned that key points of
the Syrian Government’s declaration have yet to be
verified, more than four years after its accession to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. We hope that the 19 recently
translated documents that were provided to the OPCW
will help rectify errors and omissions and clear up
discrepancies. We reaffirm our commitment and
support to the OPCW, whose Executive Council Peru is
honoured to be a member of.

Thirdly, and lastly, considering the current
developments, it is also most critical that a new
mechanism be established as soon as possible. We
here in the Council are not experts on chemical
weapons — neither to judge or blame anyone — but
must act on the basis of credible evidence provided
to us by an independent, impartial and representative
investigative body we can all trust. In that regard, we
support the ongoing consultations on creating a new
investigative instrument, in order to prevent any further
use of chemical weapons and to bring perpetrators
to justice. We are ready to participate actively and
contribute to the earliest revival and ultimate realization
of our investigative potential.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in congratulating your delegation, Sir,
on having assumed the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We support you in
discharging your tasks, which we are sure you will do
in full. We welcome the holding of this meeting and
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her valuable briefing
on this topic.
Peru condemns the use of chemical weapons by
any actor, in any place and under any circumstance.
Their use against the civilian population in Syria is a
war crime and a flagrant violation of international law,
international humanitarian law and the non-proliferation
regimes. In that regard, Peru believes it is essential
for the international community, and in particular
the Security Council, to remain resolute and united
in its support for the non-proliferation regime and in
ensuring that those responsible for these atrocious
crimes — which are also threats to international
peace and security — be held accountable. We must
continue to demand that the Syrian Government fulfil
its commitment to cooperate with the Organization for
8/17

In the face of new reports of chemical-weapon
attacks in eastern Ghouta and Idlib, Peru expresses
its solidarity with the victims and reiterates the urgent
need to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators
of such atrocities. Like a majority of Council
members, we believe that accountability is essential
to safeguarding the international non-proliferation
regimes. Preventing this threat requires a credible
deterrent. With that goal in mind, we believe it is urgent
to establish an attributive mechanism with the highest
standards of professionalism, objectivity, transparency
and, primarily, independence in order to fill the gap
left by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. My delegation will continue to work
constructively to create a new mechanism that addresses
the legitimate concerns of all Council members and of
the international community.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I also want to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
In recent weeks there have been new, alarming
reports of alleged chemical-weapon attacks in Syria.
The most recent allegation was this weekend in
Idlib. These reported attacks must be immediately
investigated by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission, to
which we offer our full and unreserved support.
We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons. It is a serious violation
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of international law and it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Their use in armed
conflict amounts to a war crime. Perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable. We cannot
accept impunity.
That is why Sweden joined the International
Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical
Weapons, initiated by France. As a member of the
Security Council and of the OPCW Executive Council,
we support all international efforts to combat the use
and proliferation of chemical weapons by State and
non-State actors alike anywhere in the world. We
count on this initiative to complement and support
our collective work in multilateral forums, as well as
the existing multilateral mechanisms to achieve unity
around those important goals. That also includes the
Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry
and the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, both of which have important mandates in
collecting information.
I again thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing today. She reminded us that work remains
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The
outstanding issues relating to Syria’s initial declaration
must be resolved without further delay. We again call
upon the Syrian authorities to fully cooperate with the
OPCW in that regard.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the continuing
allegations highlight yet again our shared obligation
to identify and hold to account those responsible for
the use chemical weapons on Syria. We need to heed
his call, come together and act. That is why Sweden
has engaged in the negotiations on establishing a new
independent and impartial attributive mechanism. The
Council has a responsibility to protect the international
disarmament and non-proliferation regimes and for
ensuring accountability. Negotiations need to be in
good faith, but with the objective of establishing a
truly independent, impartial and effective mechanism
for accountability.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to wish the delegation of
Kuwait every success in implementing the programme
of work for this month.
(spoke in English)
Let me thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her informative briefing. We appreciate

S/PV. 8174

the ongoing work of the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Fact-finding Mission. We welcome
the cooperation between the secretariat and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, which facilitated
the destruction of the two remaining chemical-weapon
production facilities. We look forward to the results of
the analysis by the Declaration Assessment Team of a
set of documents and declarations submitted by Syria.
Chemical weapons continue to pose a threat to
the people of Syria. Repeated allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, including the recent
ones, serve to underline the fact that there is still a
challenge to international peace and security, as well as
to the credibility of the Chemical Weapons Convention
regime. In that context, there is a genuine need for a
clear message that impunity for perpetrators is not
an option.
We have clearly stated in various forums that the use
of chemical weapons by anyone — State and non-State
actors alike — anywhere and under any circumstances
must be rigorously condemned and those responsible
for such acts must be held accountable. We agree that
the Security Council needs to take steps in order to
establish a credible, professional and independent
investigative mechanism. We have therefore engaged in
the discussions to find the best solution for the future
mechanism. I would like to focus on three points.
First, Poland has supported the work of the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
and continues to support the establishment of an
independent and credible investigative mechanism
aimed at holding accountable the perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. However, a future
mechanism will not operate in a void. The instrument
must build on the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Not
only should it build on the significant achievements
of the JIM, but its mandate must not deviate from
resolution 2235 (2015).
Secondly, the mandate of the mechanism should
be balanced. There is a need to identify not only
the individuals, entities and groups but also the
Governments responsible for any use of chemicals
as weapons.
Thirdly, one of the most important elements of
the mandate must be to ensure that the mechanism is
independent in its proceedings and conclusions and

18-030999/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

free from the pressure of political verification of its
conclusions by the Council.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me once again to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the State of Kuwait on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I wish you every success
and assure you of our full support. Allow me also
to express my congratulations and appreciation to
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
her team for the presentation of the comprehensive
and detailed briefing on the current political and
humanitarian situation with regard to chemical weapons
in Syria.
The political — and in particular the
humanitarian — crisis in Syria is reaching alarming
proportions. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its solidarity with the families of the countless
victims, as well as with the thousands of displaced
people trapped by the hostilities and the more than
13 million people who currently need humanitarian
assistance as a result of the continuing conflict.
I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
the loss of numerous civilian lives in this conflict, and
I call on all parties to comply with international law on
the protection of civilians and to distinguish between
military and civilian objectives and refrain from firing
rocket launchers into populated areas, as is being
reported in eastern Ghouta.
Equatorial Guinea can only express its satisfaction
at the destruction of almost all the chemical-weapon
production facilities declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic thanks to the technical assistance of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). However, while we welcome the cooperation
between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the OPCW, it is necessary to be vigilant and
to continue to condemn in the strongest terms any
possible use, development, acquisition or manufacture
of chemical weapons in the country or transfers of such
weapons to other States or non-State actors. In that
regard, we vigorously condemn the recent use of toxic
chemical weapons by whomsoever. The perpetrators
of such horrendous acts must be brought to justice and
sentenced appropriately.
For seven years already, Syria has been a war
scenario that crystallizes internal, regional and, even,
10/17

05/02/2018

international divisions. The primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
bestowed upon the Security Council by the Charter
of the United Nations should lead the 15 member
countries of this principal organ of the United Nations
to overcome their differences regarding the situation
in Syria and to renounce their political and strategic
interests in favour of the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people to achieve well-being and prosperity.
In that regard, it is appropriate that, as Russia has
already proposed, another mechanism be established to
replace the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism so that it can carry out the necessary
investigations on the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and thereby arrive at a result that garners consensus
among the members of the Council in order to again
unify our criteria for an objective examination of
the situation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, at the beginning of your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
wish you every success. We also thank Ms. Nakamitsu
for her briefing.
We trust that, with the assistance of the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the
two remaining above-ground Syrian chemical-weapon
facilities will be promptly destroyed. The Syrian
side has repeatedly demonstrated its interest in that.
The pending issues related to the initial declarations
should be dealt with as part of the dialogue between
the OPCW and the Syrian Government. We welcome
such cooperation, by which Syria, as a conscientious
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, provides
the necessary assistance, complies with its obligations
and facilitates access to the relevant documents.
Many people have raised false issues that should
now be closed and put aside. Syria’s chemical-weapon
capacity was destroyed under the oversight of the
OPCW. However, it seems that there are some who wish
to contrive to fan the flames on the issue. The Syrians
have provided exhaustive explanations. However,
issues are being raised and questions are being asked
in a endless cycle. The Syrian side consistently
reports to the international community, including the
Security Council, about the detection of toxic chemical
substances in areas liberated from the terrorists. There
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

are reports from Syria about possible provocations that
may be used by representatives of foreign intelligence
services. All such reports must be investigated
immediately by the experts of the OPCW.
However, we note that, in general, tremendous
efforts are necessary for The Hague to duly respond
to the important message. There are numerous pretexts
being put forward not to travel there and decisions
are being delayed. In the light of last year’s story of
Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat air base, such conduct
suggests deliberate sabotage.
However, the statements today have left us with
the impression that it is not Syria that some delegations
are interested in. The United States and the United
Kingdom have used today’s meeting to slander Russia,
and it is quite clear why that is happening. Someone
cannot tolerate the success of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi and the prospects it offers
for injecting new momentum into the political process
in Syria. That requires launching a major campaign
of slander against Russia in order to try, not for the
first time, to cast doubt on Russia’s role in the Syrian
political settlement. As always, the statements of these
representatives contain a grain of truth mixed with
mountains of lies. Russia has never contested the use
of sarin in Khan Shaykhun. But who it was used by is
still a mystery, because the absurd conclusions of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) have not convinced us.
In the past few days there has been general uproar
about alleged incidents involving the use of chlorine
in some Damascus suburbs. There has already been
talk of the use of sarin. Where? When? By whom?
The outlines of this propaganda campaign are not new.
The terrorists, through the social associations that
are closely linked to them, foremost among them the
notorious White Helmets, spread rumours via social
networks. These are instantly picked up by the Western
press, and then we get representatives speechifying in
the Security Council, making unproved accusations
about the so-called Syrian regime and spreading
slander about Russia. I have said it before and I will say
it again: has anyone thought to ask the basic question as
to why the Syrian Government needs to use chemical
weapons? What do we suppose that could do for it?
The first thing we should do, and various speakers
today, particularly the representative of Sweden,
have discussed this, is to send an OPCW fact-finding

S/PV. 8174

mission to those areas to investigate. Where is the
presumption of innocence? The speakers are blaming
the so-called regime for everything in advance, before
any investigation. What do they want an independent
investigative mechanism for? Surely at least they know
that an investigation has to precede any conclusions.
But apparently they do not need one. In my opinion,
it should be completely clear to everyone that that
the capitals that these representatives represent in the
Council have absolutely no interest in any investigation.
They do not need facts or precise evidence. They need
to see a political order carried out.
On 23 January, Russia announced the launch in the
Security Council of expert efforts to draft a resolution
establishing a new investigative entity for incidents
involving the use of chemical weapons to replace the
defunct OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was killed by the United States
and its allies when they blocked the draft resolution
(S/2017/968) that we proposed, together with China and
Bolivia, designed to ensure that the Mechanism could
be genuinely independent and professional. Not only do
they not recall that episode, they have made strenuous
attempts to convince the Security Council and the world
community of the opposite. It has become clear that
some of our partners are not prepared to consider this
possibility. They want a second JIM that would continue
to rubber-stamp the scientifically and technically
ridiculous anti-Damascus conclusions on the basis of
disinformation generously supplied by militant groups.
They have long had a persistent allergy to the pressing
need to pay close attention to the activities of terrorist
groups, both in Syria and beyond its borders, in the
context of manipulating toxic substances.
In the realization that we will not allow the
now entirely discredited JIM to be revived, Syria’s
opponents are now attempting to take alternative
routes, cobbling together narrow groups of like-minded
people. However, they are forgetting that in doing that
they are undermining the authority of international
bodies, particularly the United Nations and the OPCW,
and destroying the international architecture on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Any
initiatives in the context of the use of chemical weapons
that circumvent the OPCW would be illegitimate. We
certainly hope that the leadership of the United Nations
Secretariat and the OPCW Technical Secretariat will
make a firm show of will and distance themselves from
such dubious projects.

18-0309911/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

We are ready to accept a press statement on the
Syrian chemical issue, but not the one proposed by
its sponsors, because in its current form its purpose
is quite clearly to blame the Government of Syria for
what is so far the unproved use of chemical weapons.
Somehow the draft statement does not say anything
about the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, but
the reference to Article 7 of the Charter of the United
Nations leaves no doubt as to its essence. We cannot
accept any still unconfirmed references to the use of
chemical weapons without a credible investigation,
nor can we accept any threats to a sovereign State for
unproved actions. For some reason, eastern Ghouta
has been dragged into the statement. I would like to
remind the Council that last week we were prepared
to accept an agreed-on draft presidential statement on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. But our partners
preferred to reject it. We are ready to accept a press
statement, but not as it is proposed by our colleagues.
We have proposed amendments to it that we are ready
to circulate and agree on in that form.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I would like to congratulate Kuwait through
you, Mr. President, on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February, to
wish it every success and assure it of Côte d’Ivoire’s
cooperation. I would also like to thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her excellent briefing.
My delegation commends the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
through its Fact-finding Mission with regard to the
dismantling of Syria’s chemical-weapon stocks.
We encourage the Syrian Government to comply
with decisions regarding the destruction of its
chemical arsenal.
My delegation is seriously concerned about the
reports in the past week once again alleging the
possible use of chemical weapons in the conflict in
Syria, particularly in eastern Ghouta, where 21 cases
of suffocation have been reported. They represent a
significant reversal in our efforts to combat impunity
with regard to the use of chemical weapons in Syria. The
suffering inflicted on the Syrian people is intolerable
and must be ended. In that regard, my country calls for
continued efforts to implement resolution 2118 (2013),
which provides for the complete dismantling of the
Syrian chemical-weapons arsenal.
12/17

05/02/2018

These new allegations of the use of chemical
weapons once again call into question the Council’s
responsibility, particularly in terms of putting an end to
these acts as soon as possible and of clearly identifying
the perpetrators of such criminal acts. In its latest
statement on the issue of chemical weapons in Syria
(see S/PV.8164), my delegation warned against the
Council’s failure to act, which could be interpreted by
those involved in the use of such weapons in Syria as a
weakness of this organ and licence to act with impunity.
Clearly, those who commit these despicable acts will
continue to do so as long as the Council remains divided
about the need to set up a consensus-based framework
capable of identifying perpetrators and bringing them
to justice. My delegation therefore encourages all
ongoing initiatives that support the establishment of an
accountability mechanism acceptable to all.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and calls upon the relevant United Nations mechanisms
to shed light on the new allegations of the use of such
weapons. My delegation eagerly awaits the conclusions
of the report that will be submitted after the second
round of inspections conducted at the Scientific Studies
and Research Centre in Syria.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates Kuwait on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. We also
commend Kazakhstan for its accomplishments during
its presidency last month. I wish to thank the High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China welcomes the progress achieved in the
verification and destruction of the two remaining
chemical-weapon facilities within Syria’s borders. We
support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in continuing its coordination
and cooperation with the Syrian Government so as
to properly settle all the questions revolving around
the initial declarations of chemical weapons by Syria
through the OPCW platform.
China expresses its deepest sympathy to the Syrian
people for their suffering as the result of chemical
weapons. No use of chemical weapons will be tolerated.
Lately, there have been some media reports of suspected
use of chlorine and other poisonous chemicals as
weapons within Syria’s borders, over which China
wishes to register its deepest concern. It is hoped that
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the parties will carry out verification of the related
incidents as soon as possible.
When it comes to the question of chemical weapons,
China’s position is as clear cut as it is consistent. We
stand firmly against the use of chemical weapons by
any country, organization or individual for whatever
purpose and under any circumstances. China supports
conducting comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigations into any alleged use of chemical weapons
within Syrian borders so as to come up with results that
withstand the test of time, square with the facts and
help bring the perpetrators to justice.
Establishing a new chemical-weapon investigative
mechanism is critical to getting to the bottom of the
chemical-weapon incidents as well as warding off any
future recurrences in Syria. All Council parties should
work together to that end. China supports the efforts
on the part of Russia to promote the establishment
of a new investigative mechanism into the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We hope that the members
of the Council will continue to engage in constructive
consultations so as to achieve consensus at an early date.
The chemical-weapon issue in Syria is closely
related to a political settlement to the Syrian situation.
Major achievements have been made at the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress, held recently in Sochi,
which played a positive role in advancing the Syrian
political process, while lending impetus to relaunching
the Geneva talks. It is China’s hope that relevant parties
will support the Security Council and the OPCW in
continuing to act as the main channel for tackling the
Syrian chemical-weapon issue, adopt a constructive
attitude, seek proper solutions through consultation,
maintain the unity of the Council and work with
the United Nations and with the relevant parties in
advancing the political process in Syria.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): As this is
the first time that I take the floor under the Kuwaiti
presidency of the Security Council, I would like to
congratulate and honour Kuwait’s assumption of the
presidency by trying to offer my thanks in Arabic:
(spoke in Arabic)
Thank you, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her
comprehensive and clear briefing.

S/PV. 8174

I will address three issues today: first, reports
of the renewed use of chemical weapons in Syria;
secondly, the need for accountability; and, thirdly, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) report at hand (S/2018/84, annex).
With respect to the renewed use of chemical
weapons in the past weeks, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is shocked at the recent reports of chemical
attacks in Syria, including this weekend and last night.
We are outraged. In Douma, in eastern Ghouta, and last
night in Saraqeb, in Idlib, innocent civilians, including
children, have become victims once again of horrible
chemical-weapon attacks. Such attacks deserve the
strongest condemnation of the Security Council as
violations of international law. Furthermore, recent
OPCW laboratory tests show that samples of the
chemical attack on Ghouta in August 2013 correspond
to the chemical-weapons arsenal declared by the Syrian
regime in 2014 and the Khan Shaykun attack in 2017.
This confirms once again that the Al-Assad regime
uses chemical weapons against its own population. We
pay tribute to the work of the White Helmets, who have
saved more a 100,000 civilians from the rubble of the
Syrian war.
The use of chemical weapons should never go
unpunished. Impunity erodes the important prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons. It is inconceivable
that impunity now reigns, which brings me to my
second point, namely, the need for accountability.
As others have said, we had a well-functioning
and professional mechanism to ensure accountability
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria, the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The JIM repeatedly
determined the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime and by Da’esh. It had a strong mandate to
investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics of the Security Council. And it did so
accordingly, but the renewal of its mandate fell victim
to the repeated use of the veto.
However, that does not mean that we now need
to settle for less. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
is prepared to work together on any proposal that
strengthens accountability and the international rule of
law. But let me emphasize that a weak accountability
mechanism is not an option. For us, the fundamental
characteristics of any accountability mechanism
are the principles of impartiality, independence,
comprehensiveness and effectiveness.

18-0309913/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

In order to uphold those principles, a mechanism
should at least meet the following requirements. First,
it should operate independently from the Security
Council, including when it comes to the attribution of
guilt. It should be impartial. The separation of powers is
necessary to prevent undue politicization. Secondly, the
mechanism should be effective; it should independently
decide how it will conduct its investigations, including
when it comes to analysing facts and assessing the
quality of evidence. Lastly, it should be comprehensive
and investigate and identify perpetrators among all
parties to the armed conflict — both State and non-State
actors. The draft resolution that is currently being
discussed has not yet met those important principles.
That brings me to my third point, namely, the
fifty-second OPCW report (S/2018/84, annex), which
the High Representative presented very clearly in her
briefing. The report points out that, unfortunately, too
little progress has been made by the Syrian authorities
in addressing the outstanding questions that the OPCW
posed about the declaration of the Syrian authorities.
It is essential that the Syrian authorities cooperate
seriously with the OPCW. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the continuation of the work of
OPCW Fact-finding Mission. We call on all States to
ensure that the Fact-finding Mission can continue its
work independently.
In conclusion, we stand ready to adopt the draft
press statement, as circulated before. We are convinced
that the Security Council cannot allow the continued
use of chemical weapons to go unpunished. Impunity
is a curse; accountability is a must. The Council has to
act. As long as the Council is blocked from achieving
accountability by the use of the veto, we will also continue
our efforts outside the Council. We therefore strongly
support other accountability initiatives for Syria,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
We also support the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, which was
just highlighted by our French colleague. However, let
me repeat what I have said in the Chamber before, the
Council should refer the situation in Syria, especially
the mass atrocities committed in the conflict, to the
International Criminal Court in The Hague.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to see
you, Mr. President, assuming responsibility for the
14/17

05/02/2018

presidency. I wish to thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing, which, as always, we found
to be balanced, and therefore useful. We are in need
of that kind of approach. Frankly speaking, we need
that very desperately. During times such as this, when
we seem to be so deeply divided, the role of United
Nations officials like her becomes all the more critical.
We thank her.
We remain deeply concerned by the continued
reports on the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons
by any actor, State and non-State alike, in Syria or
anywhere else. As we have stated repeatedly, the use
of chemical weapons is totally unjustifiable under any
circumstances. It constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and undermines the international
non-proliferation architecture. We cannot agree
more with what the Secretary-General stated in the
concluding paragraph of his letter of 1 February:
“The fact of these continuing allegations again
highlights the shared obligation to identify and
hold to account those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons.”
That is why the unity of the Council is absolutely
important. Without it, the Council’s ability to respond to
grave threats to international peace and security, such
as the use of chemicals as weapons, will be seriously
hampered. In that regard, what High Representative
Nakamitsu said a while ago is most relevant: “unity,
not impunity”.
Let me say that we regret that the Council was not
able to renew the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. If we are not able to address
this institutional gap by drawing lessons from last year
and forge the necessary unity and compromise, we
will be sending the wrong message and encouraging
impunity. The fact that chemical-weapon attacks have
continued as recently as yesterday worries us very
much. That is why it is so critical that we seek an
independent way of establishing accountability.
We appreciate the initiative taken by the Russian
Federation to propose a draft resolution on the
establishment of a new mechanism, which has been
the basis for discussion in recent days. This is a
conversation that we welcome. As we continue to
discuss this very important matter, our consultations
should be constructive and forward-looking. Of course,
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

we are not naive; we have no illusions about how
matters are becoming more and more complicated by
the day. However, we still hope that the Council will
restore its unity to reach common ground and create
an independent, impartial and professional mechanism
that will be able to identify those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, based on robust evidence.
We welcome that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has
continued to assist the Syrian Government in destroying
the remaining stationary above-ground facilities. As
the High Representative stated, we hope the facilities
will be totally eliminated in the coming month. We
have just heard a very encouraging statement from the
High Representative.
We note that the OPCW has translated and finalized
its analysis of the 19 documents submitted by the Syrian
Government. While we look forward to the final report,
we encourage continued cooperation and meaningful
communication between the Syrian Government and
the OPCW that leads to tangible results to address the
outstanding issues. We also note that its Fact-finding
Mission has continued its investigation related to
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
look forward to its reports.
Let me conclude by again reiterating, at the risk of
sounding naive, how the unity of the Council is vital to
ensuring accountability and deterring and stopping the
use of chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere. We
only hope that the challenge we face in this area is not a
reflection of the growing lack of trust that characterizes
international relations today, making joint action in
most critical areas more complicated than it should be.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.
At the outset, I would like to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for the briefing she gave at the beginning
of this meeting.
We had hoped that the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), in September
2013 following the first incident involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, would have resolved this
matter, since the Council had demonstrated unity
and determination in confronting that crime with a
view to ensuring that it not be repeated and that its

S/PV. 8174

perpetrators be held accountable. Consequently, we
regret the substantial regression in addressing the
chemical-weapon issue in Syria, which is a result of the
divisions among Council members after the Council was
unable to extend the mandate of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria, which we feel
carried out its tasks in a very professional, impartial
and independent manner.
We express our deep concern about the allegations
of the continued use of chemical weapons in Syria, most
recently during the attack in Douma, in eastern Ghouta,
last week and during the attack that took place in Saraqeb,
in Idlib, yesterday. This is the third such attack during
the past few weeks, which means that the perpetrators
of those crimes will go unpunished and that there is no
guarantee that they, or anyone else, who commits such
crimes in the future will be held accountable, after we
lost the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
The position of the State of Kuwait is a principled
and steadfast one that strongly condemns any use
of chemical weapons, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever, as this is considered a grave violation
of international law. We reiterate the need to hold
accountable those responsible for such use, be they
individuals, entities, non-State groups or Governments.
In that context, we condemn the use of heavy and
destructive weapons as well as the targeting civilians
and residential areas killing dozens of innocent victims.
These weapons target health facilities and civilian
locations in eastern Ghouta, Idlib and other areas.
We therefore support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria in its quest to gather
evidence and investigate the crimes committed against
civilians in order to hold the perpetrators accountable.
The State of Kuwait will support any alternative or
mechanism that enjoys the consensus of all members
of the Security Council and ensures the independence,
neutrality and professionalism of any new future
mechanism. In that regard, we reaffirm that the
primary responsibility of any mechanism must be to
determine the identity of those using chemical weapons
in Syria, provided that the Security Council would then
play its role and hold the perpetrators accountable, in
implementation of the principle of ending impunity and
of resolution 2118 (2013), which undoubtedly stipulates
the imperative need for, and importance of, holding
accountable those responsible for the use of chemical

18-0309915/17

S/PV.8174

The situation in the Middle East

weapons in Syria. We also look forward to receiving
the report that will soon be submitted by the Factfinding Mission, as mentioned by Ms. Nakamitsu in her
earlier briefing on the most recent incidents, as well as
her reports on the use of chlorine gas in Saraqib.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full readiness to take
part in any efforts that are aimed at reaching consensus
among Security Council members and at holding
accountable the perpetrators of such internationally
prohibited crimes. We assert that a political solution
in Syria is the only way to arrive at a comprehensive
settlement of the crisis, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I disagree with a
lot of what my Russian colleague said, but I will not
stretch my colleagues’ patience. But I do feel compelled
briefly to respond to several of the points that he made.
The first point is to say that this is not political
for us. Preventing the use of these abhorrent weapons
should transcend political disagreements. We do not
oppose Russia’s important role in Syria at all. We noted
the outcomes of Sochi, and we look forward to the
proposal for a constitutional committee returning to the
next round of Geneva talks, with the full participation
of Russia and the Syrian authorities, as was laid out in
resolution 2254 (2015).
The second point I would simply make is that
the notion that it was anyone other than Russia that
ended the Joint Investigative Mechanism is absurd.
The voting records of the Council are clear and are
available to all. Russia vetoed three different proposals
for the extension of the Mechanism, the last of which
simply extended it for a short period and requested the
Secretary-General to make recommendations, but even
that was unacceptable.
Finally, on a note of agreement, I just want, like
my Dutch colleague, to praise the incredible work of
the White Helmets, who risk their own lives on a daily
basis to save thousands of Syrians civilians.
16/17

05/02/2018

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My country condemns and rejects in the
strongest possible terms any use of chemical weapons
or of any other weapon of mass destruction, as this
constitutes a crime against humanity and an unethical
and unjustifiable act, under any circumstances. The
real target of such weapons is the Syrian people, who
remain the primary victims of the crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups, which have not hesitated to
use chemical weapons against them. I reaffirm before
the Security Council that my country has sought, and
continues to seek, to identify the real perpetrators
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in my
country, Syria.
Based on those steadfast principles, my Government
joined the Chemical Weapons Convention and has
honoured all of its commitments thereunder. My
country achieved an unprecedented and definitive feat
in the history of the Organization by ending the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme in record time. That was
corroborated in the report of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism to the Council in June 2014.
My country is the party most desirous of uncovering
the truth. We have always supported, and will continue
to support, in principle any initiative by the Council
whose aim is to establish the truth, identify those who
are really trading in the blood of the Syrian people and
using toxic chemical substances against Syrian civilians,
including armed terrorist groups, as well as levelling
false accusations against the Syrian Government.
In that regard, on behalf of the Government of my
country, I once again reiterate our condemnation of
all American and Western allegations accusing us of
committing chemical-weapon attacks in our country.
I reaffirm that those accusations are groundless and
cheap lies. International public opinion and the majority
of United Nations Members now know that this is but
standard procedure for the United States and its allies
in the Council each and every time they learn that the
armed terrorist groups that they finance, arm and support
on the ground in Syria are at an impasse and losing
ground to the advancing Syrian army and its allies. The
latter are today waging a war, on behalf of the entire
world, against terrorism, which, unfortunately, is being
supported by certain Governments that have no interest
18-03099

05/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8174

in ensuring international peace and security and are
solely seeking to advance their own political agendas.

evidence and, instead, limiting itself to scientific and
legally sound and reasonable proof.

My Government reaffirms once again that the
United States, the United Kingdom and France are
fully responsible for the paralysis of international
investigative mechanisms concerning the use of toxic
chemical substances, as the Governments of those States
are seeking to shield the armed terrorist groups that they
support. We recall before all present here that it is Syria
that originally called for an investigation into instances
of the use of toxic gas by armed terrorist groups.

My country continues to honour all of its
commitments — the ones we assumed when we joined
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. We shall persevere in our fight
against terrorism — a war that we will wage despite
any political or media blackmail or any exploitation of
the blood of innocent civilians in Syria. The Permanent
Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic will today
circulate a letter of the National Committee for the
Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
in response to the United States allegations vis-à-vis
the work of the JIM and the Fact-finding Mission of
the OPCW. The letter proves with scientific and legal
evidence that the accusations against my country are
false and that Syria has never used such chemicals, and
will we ever use them, because we do not possess them.
Let us recall that those who level such false accusations
against Syria are the Governments of the same States
with a dark history of using such internationally
prohibited weapons against millions of innocent
people — in Viet Nam, Cambodia, Algeria and the list
goes on.

False accusations against my Government of using
toxic chemical substances are attempts to cover up its
efforts to reveal to the world that certain armed terrorist
groups and their sponsors have continued to perpetrate
crimes against innocent civilians through the use, more
than once, of toxic substances. The Syrian Government
has provided the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) with
evidence that proves that such groups possess banned
toxic substances. We have repeatedly called for the
carrying out of investigations to corroborate such
evidence. However, our calls have been ignored.
All of my colleagues here recall that the United
States and its allies destroyed the JIM. Through their
practices here in the Council, they put an end to the
Mechanism. They brought pressure to bear on its
Chair and its members by pressuring them to refuse
to visit Khan Shaykhun. Rather than conduct a field
visit to collect real evidence, they merely sought to
level accusations and offered up evidence trumped up
by Western countries to undermine Syria, to support
terrorist groups and to cover up their responsibility for
this incident. That occurred after the United States and
its partners rejected the call by the Russian Federation
to stop the politicization of the work of the JIM and to
rectify its methodology by refraining from using false

Finally, on behalf of my Government, I would like
to extend our gratitude to the Russian Federation and
to friendly countries in the Council, countries that seek
to establish truth based on their awareness about the
pernicious aims behind the false accusations. They
have demonstrated their commitment to the supremacy
of the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as their conviction that
such abnormal practices undermine the credibility of
international actions and institutions and jeopardize
international peace and security.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

18-0309917/17
