United Nations

S/PV.5353

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5353

rd meeting
Tuesday, 24 January 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahiga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Republic of Tanzania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Li Junhua
Mr. Okio
Ms. Løj
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Tachie-Menson
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-21913 (E)

*0621913*

S/PV.5353

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. António Manuel de Oliveira Guterres,
High Commissioner for Refugees.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. António Manuel de Oliveira Guterres
to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. António Manuel de Oliveira Guterres,
High Commissioner for Refugees, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Guterres: The United Republic of Tanzania
has been an extremely generous country, hosting
hundreds of thousands refugees for decades. That is
remarkable proof of solidarity, for which the world
should be grateful. I thank you, Mr. President, for
having given me the opportunity to be here today. The
Security Council and its resolutions are key
instruments to address forced population displacement
and its impact on peace and security.
Seven years ago, as Prime Minister of Portugal, I
had the opportunity to work closely with the Security
Council in advocating for a strong international
response to ensure respect for the rights of the East
Timorese. Those were the most compelling moments of
my political life, and the Council’s engagement on that
occasion confirmed for me the power of this body as an
agent for positive change.
With that in mind, I wish to express the strong
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for resolution
1625 (2005) on strengthening the effectiveness of the

2

Council’s role in conflict prevention by addressing the
root causes of conflict, promoting development and
good governance, eradicating poverty, supporting
national reconciliation and protecting human rights.
My Office deals only with the symptoms of a
disease; the Security Council may have the power to
cure it. That is both a significant ability and a weighty
responsibility.
I would like to start by briefing the Council on
two urgent challenges that UNHCR faces today: the
Sudan and the Great Lakes region, where we are
dealing with many of the cross-cutting issues on the
Council’s agenda.
Sudan-Chad is probably the largest and most
complex humanitarian problem on the globe. Six
months ago, during my first visit to the region as High
Commissioner, the situation appeared to be moving in
the right direction. A peace deal had been reached in
southern Sudan. It held even after John Garang’s death,
and had the potential for a positive impact in Darfur
and the east. International scrutiny appeared to have a
stabilizing effect in the former, with hopes that the
Abuja talks would reach a peace agreement before the
end of the year. I pay full tribute to the efforts of the
African Union, but, unfortunately, we did not have the
positive outcome that some may have taken for
granted. The situation has taken a turn for the worse,
and there is a risk that talks might face an impasse.
Today, violence and impunity, never completely
in check, are again everyday occurrences in Darfur.
Humanitarian workers are regularly cut off from the
displaced and those they are trying to help. This month
we were forced to raise the threat level for staff in
areas of western Darfur, even as staff observe the
systematic destruction of crops and rising gender-based
violence.
The insecurity has now spread across the border
into Chad. Just a few days ago, armed rebels took
several Government officials hostage and attacked the
village of Guéréda, where UNHCR cares for over
25,000 Sudanese refugees. The increasingly unstable
conditions in the border area, which is home to
200,000 refugees, have compelled us to relocate part of
our staff without prejudice to the services for the
refugees themselves.
The international community could face a
catastrophe in Darfur. Averting it will require bold

S/PV.5353

measures and the full involvement of the African
Union and the United Nations. If we fail, if there is no
physical protection for those in need of aid, we risk a
much greater calamity than what we have seen so far.
I appeal to this body today in the strongest terms.
I am aware of the discussions under way on the
evolution of a more robust security force and the
delicate question of its nature and composition. But
preventing a disastrous human toll in Darfur requires a
peace agreement, not as a solution to the problem, but
as a start to a complex process of reconciliation. To
reach that peace agreement, we need the full
commitment of the Council and all its members,
working together in support of peace and putting
pressure on all the parties involved. Who can defy you
if you act together?
To the South, the voluntary repatriation of
Sudanese refugees began last month with a first group
of returnees from Kenya. Tripartite agreements for
repatriation are being signed with the Governments of
Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic. Movements from Ethiopia
and Uganda will begin in February and March, and our
aim is to return — or help to return — 50,000
Sudanese from refugee camps in neighbouring
countries in the coming months. Given the dimensions
of the operation, we estimate it will take three to four
years to help all refugees return home to South Sudan.
Repatriation is strictly voluntary. But even with
the fragile situation in areas of the South, we cannot
overlook the courage and determination of the
estimated 75,000 refugees who have already come
home spontaneously. Tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons have also returned to the South,
mainly from Khartoum.
International assistance is crucial for the
sustainability of returns to the South. When I spoke
with Sudanese refugees in Kenya, Uganda and
Ethiopia, I saw how much they wanted to go back. I
will never forget listening to people of all ages talk
about their hopes — for a home of their own, for
education, for peace. But in South Sudan there are only
14 kilometres of paved road, almost no schools, almost
no hospitals and a civil administration that is extremely
thin on the ground. We cannot wait to answer the
refugees’ wishes to return. Massive economic and
political support to the transition is necessary now —

not when everything is in place and all the rules of
conditionality are met. By then it could be too late.
Eastern Sudan is less noticed by international
observers. But its security situation is deteriorating
rapidly. A peace agreement is also imperative, even if
we know that stability in the region is closely tied to
developments in Eritrea and Ethiopia. More than
100,000 Eritreans remain as refugees in Sudan, one of
the oldest refugee groups cared for by UNHCR.
Tensions between Eritrea and Ethiopia last year drove
several thousand new Eritrean refugees into Sudan and
Ethiopia. Any deterioration in relations between the
two countries clearly threatens a sizeable population
displacement.
The Great Lakes region features similarly
complex challenges for humanitarian agencies such as
UNHCR. Two situations the Council is following
closely are of particular importance to my Office —
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Last year, 66,000 people went home to Burundi
with our help. But the rate of refugee returns has
slowed significantly over the past few months, and
movement may stop altogether unless every measure is
taken to build the confidence of prospective returnees
in their reintegration. And let us be honest, those
conditions are not present yet. Economic support to
Burundi and to the humanitarian agencies is crucial
now for security and consolidation of the peace process
and success in repatriation.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo finds
itself in a similar situation after years of unrest.
Repatriation has started and continues from several
neighbouring States, particularly Tanzania. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has also been
selected as one of three countries to pilot a new, interagency cluster approach to internal displacement,
through which UNHCR has been asked to assume the
lead in the areas of protection and shelter. This will be
a pioneering approach in protection, with UNHCR
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).
Stability and international support are paramount
to the success of these humanitarian efforts. But just
last week, up to 20,000 people, mostly women and
children, fled from conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and crossed into Uganda at three border
points. Different displacement movements are still

3

S/PV.5353

going on in every direction. This scene is the type of
recurrent insecurity that has made humanitarian
interventions next to impossible. UNHCR has sent
relief aid and staff to the border areas — assistance, in
fact, that was destined for repatriating Sudanese. The
tragic killing of the peacekeepers in Garamba Park by
elements of the Ugandan Lord’s Resistance Army is a
clear demonstration of the complexity of the problems
we face.
As with Sudan, threats to peace and development
in the Great Lakes region do not end with a single
country, or two, or even three. Security and solutions
cannot be parcelled out one nation at a time. Both
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
underline how crucial it is to employ, and for this body
to support, a regional approach to peacekeeping and
political missions. The Security Council’s forthcoming
debate on peace and security in the Great Lakes is very
timely in this regard. These two situations are also a
good reminder of the importance of and the problems
associated with the conceptual framework of the
responsibility to protect.
The number of refugees worldwide is at its lowest
level in almost a quarter of a century. Unfortunately,
the same does not apply to internal displacement.
Several sizeable repatriation operations have
contributed to the decrease in refugees, led by
Afghanistan, where more than four million people have
returned home since 2002. Returns to African nations,
such as Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia, and
countries of the former Yugoslavia have also been or
are becoming very successful. Refugees and internally
displaced are among the most obvious beneficiaries of
the end of conflict. When the gunfire stops and wars
fade, millions of them seize the opportunity to begin
life over again in their countries of origin.
But that picture is incomplete. What the past
decade has demonstrated is that refugees must not be
seen as uninvolved beneficiaries of a peace and
recovery process, or simply as an afterthought.
Refugees return with schooling and new skills, and this
in itself is a critical factor in any post-conflict
situation. Over and over, we see that their participation
is necessary for the consolidation of both peace and
post-conflict economic recovery. True, sustainable
peace and recovery are necessary to allow refugee
returns, but refugee returns are every bit as essential to
sustained peace and recovery.

4

These are also our objectives in other parts of the
world, such as in Iraq. UNHCR remains engaged in
close coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to find durable solutions
through return and reintegration, as soon as conditions
permit, for some 1.3 million internally displaced
persons in Iraq and another estimated one million Iraqi
refugees in the region. Resolving land and property
issues is one of the priorities that will help this process.
UNHCR hopes, circumstances permitting, to enhance
its presence and capacity inside Iraq.
Given the unbroken line from population
displacement to peace and recovery, the failure to
follow that line steadily from relief to development
ranks as one of the international community’s most
consistent failures. Links between humanitarian aid
and development efforts are simply not working in
most cases.
Humanitarian aid is not a guarantee against the
recurrence of violence or of displacement. The absence
of an effective transition from short- to longer-term
assistance reduces the life expectancy of solutions.
Large-scale population returns are difficult to sustain if
development stalls and instability grows. Without
adequate resources for development, institutionbuilding and reconciliation, societies can again
unravel, dormant conflicts can reignite and civilians
can be forcibly displaced once more.
UNHCR is not a development agency and does
not intend to become one. But we are raising awareness
of the need to include refugees and the displaced in
national development programmes, and we will be a
reliable partner in the United Nations Development
Group. Afghanistan has shown us that there is both the
need for and the possibility of engaging in new ways
with recovery actors. If we do not work from both
sides to forge the links, relief and development will
never sustain each other.
That is why from our perspective the decision to
create a Peacebuilding Commission was one of the
most significant events of 2005. Too little of the
international community’s attention and resources have
traditionally been devoted to rebuilding societies torn
apart by war and violence. I look forward to working
closely with the Peacebuilding Commission to address
not only the relief-to-development gap, but also the
complex needs of societies emerging from conflict.
UNHCR will appreciate being seen by the future

S/PV.5353

Commission as a relevant partner. We also intend to
play an active part in its Support Office.
This is an appropriate moment to recall the vital
role of women in peacebuilding. More than five years
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), it is also time to note that we have a long way
to go to reach the goal of equal participation by
women.
Furthermore, I strongly hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission will ensure that recovery
processes continue long after the attention of the
international
media
has
moved
elsewhere.
Humanitarian relief and development support must
follow the real needs of the people, not the agendas of
television networks.
The best remedy is prevention, and vigilance is
essential in all parts of the world. UNHCR is closely
watching developments in the Central African
Republic, where the spread of armed gangs and general
lawlessness in the north have forced thousands of
people to flee to Chad and Cameroon. There is still
time to act and, with limited resources, to prevent
another major crisis in the near future.
Prevention is not an easy job; the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire proves that. The outrageous attacks on
United Nations offices in Guiglo are a clear
demonstration of the crucial need to find an effective
solution to the four-year-old crisis. The population
displacement that would result from open conflict in
Côte d’Ivoire is unpredictable in scale and impact.
The Security Council’s actions related to the
protection of civilians and of displaced persons in
particular are of great importance to our Office. The
mandates
of
peacekeeping
operations
and
peacebuilding strategies must include solutions for
displaced populations. The safety of humanitarian
workers must be ensured too. I take this opportunity to
welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of the
Optional Protocol to the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
As a protection agency, we face two major
challenges today: preserving asylum in an age of mixed
population flows, and stopping the rise of intolerance
in modern societies.
The reasons for many migratory movements are
complex but can be dramatic, like the serious socioeconomic decline in many countries of sub-Saharan

Africa, which leaves no other alternative for survival.
Preserving asylum requires that we be able to find
those in genuine need of protection when they are
concealed by mixed flows. The challenge of
identifying such individuals grows along with their
numbers and the risks they are willing to take, as we
have seen in the Mediterranean and, tragically, again
last weekend and even yesterday in the Gulf of Aden.
Credible protection must incorporate measures
against fraud and abuse to safeguard the credibility of
the asylum system. UNHCR stands ready to work with
all Governments to support their efforts to improve
legislation and asylum procedures. I appeal strongly
for a concerted crackdown on human trafficking and
smuggling. Protecting refugees requires tough
punishment for those who profit from these irregular
movements.
UNHCR fully recognizes the right of countries to
responsibly manage their borders and define their
migration policies. But it is essential that such
measures do not preclude the right of those in need of
international protection to physical access to asylum
procedures and adequate refugee status determination,
in accordance with international law.
Addressing intolerance is perhaps an even greater
challenge. Intolerance is the rejection of strangers, of
people from elsewhere, of those who are different.
Intolerance is fostered by populism, both in politics
and in the media. As a result, the public is often led to
view terrorism, security problems and asylum and
migration issues as shades of the same motif.
Terrorism
must
be
fought
with
total
determination. We need to make certain that terrorists
are not granted asylum. But we need to make just as
certain that asking for asylum in itself is not a crime.
Racism, xenophobia, ethnic conflict, violent
nationalism and religious fundamentalism are
unfortunately still very much alive and are serious
threats both to social cohesion in societies and to peace
and security throughout the world. Preserving peace
and security means fighting the ills rooted in populism
and intolerance. I appeal to all members to join
together in confronting them.
The President: I thank Mr. Guterres for his
briefing.
As there is no list of speakers, I invite Council
members who wish to make comments or address

5

S/PV.5353

questions to the High Commissioner to so indicate to
the Secretariat as from now.
I shall now give the floor to those who have
indicated their wish to speak.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): As I am
the first speaker, I would like to make some general
comments before posing some questions to the High
Commissioner for Refugees.
I believe that we were all extremely interested in
Mr. Guterres’s briefing. We very much welcome his
contribution for at least two reasons. First, we are very
well aware of the crucial importance of the High
Commissioner for Refugees. We know perfectly well
that we all have a duty, an obligation, to assist the High
Commissioner and, more generally, a duty towards
displaced persons throughout the world.
Secondly, as the Security Council, we must have
a strategic vision of crises in the world. I believe that
the parameters for refugees and displaced persons are
very important. In that regard, Mr. Guterres’s briefing
supplements the briefing by Jan Egeland, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
I often say that if we are to carry out our work in
a serious manner, we must be mindful of several
geopolitical world maps. Of course, we need a map of
the relationship of forces and a crisis map, but
experience has taught us that maps relating to the
protection of populations and to the situation of
refugees and displaced persons provide us with crucial
information giving us an accurate picture of the
situation to help us in our work.
In addition to those general comments, I should
like now to address the heart of the matter and some of
Mr. Guterres’ points.
First, with respect to the Sudan and Chad, I
believe that Mr. Guterres’ analysis was interesting and
troubling. I should like to refer to a specific case. With
regard to the refugee camps in Chad, where we are
largely responsible for security, we are seeing growing
tensions between the camps and the local populations. I
would ask the High Commissioner if he has specific
solutions already being implemented or under
consideration to address that problem.
Secondly, with respect to the Sudan, Mr. Guterres
mentioned the return of a large number of refugees,
thanks inter alia to the agreement concluded between

6

the Sudan, Kenya and UNHCR. Is he contemplating
other agreements of that type with other neighbours of
the Sudan?
My third and fourth questions are more structural
in nature. The High Commissioner spoke of the
problem of refugees and the role played by UNHCR in
rebuilding countries in crisis. He referred, inter alia, to
the
relationship
between
UNHCR
and
the
Peacebuilding Commission. In that context, it is very
important to develop links between UNHCR and other
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and others. Does Mr. Guterres believe
that such cooperation is sufficiently developed and that
there are prospects for such development, particularly
in the context of what we hope will be the increasing
powers enjoyed by the Peacebuilding Commission?
Finally, I wish to ask about the link between
UNHCR and peacekeeping operations. We note a major
agreement between UNHCR and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with respect to the UNHCR mission to that
country, referred to by Mr. Guterres. I would imagine
that, as often happens in humanitarian affairs, one
ought to be cautious in structuring the relationship
between military activities and humanitarian
assistance. Does Mr. Guterres believe that there is a
role for similar forms of cooperation between UNHCR
and United Nations peacekeeping operations?
I am sorry to have spoken at such length, but the
subject is so fascinating that I should have wished to
ask far more questions.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation
is most grateful to Mr. Guterres for his presence today
and also for his thoughtful and powerful statement. I
should like to acknowledge in particular his comments
at the end about the importance of values as we tackle
the challenge of refugee flows and migration.
I want to use the opportunity of this discussion
with Mr. Guterres to signal the value we in the United
Kingdom attach to the important work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in providing refugee protection and in
promoting durable solutions. I would also use the
occasion to record once more the United Kingdom’s
recognition of the importance of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967

S/PV.5353

Protocol, as well as the need for States to comply fully
with the provisions contained therein.
I want to thank Mr. Guterres for the active
leadership that he has shown on behalf of UNHCR in
taking a key role in protection and support for
internally displaced persons, which is now being
addressed through the collaborative approach and the
cluster system. It would be interesting to hear his
thoughts on how well that is working so far.
The linkages between flows of refugees and
internally displaced persons, on the one hand, and
peace and security, on the other, are clear and of direct
concern to the work of this Council. Mr. Guterres made
that point very well this morning, I think. It underlines
our own view about the Council’s interests. That
extends not just to the country-specific situations that
the Council finds itself addressing, but also to our work
both on conflict management and on conflict
prevention. I should like to make just one or two
remarks and ask one or two questions in those two
categories.
First, on post-conflict management, I want to
underline our welcome of Mr. Guterres’ undertaking
that UNHCR will play an active role in the Support
Office of the Peacebuilding Commission and in the
Commission itself.
Secondly, we very much welcome the work that
UNHCR is doing to ensure that refugees and displaced
persons are incorporated into recovery strategies.
Mr. Guterres is absolutely right, in our view, that
returns of internally displaced persons and refugees are
integral to the solution, as well as being part of the
problem. That perception and Mr. Guterres’ support
will help us, I think, as we look at peacekeeping
missions and the increasing role that they are playing
in facilitating refugee returns. My point, really, is in
the same area as my French colleague’s question just
now.
I, too, want to ask whether there are any lessons
that we can learn from UNHCR’s experiences in
ensuring the safety and the sustainability of refugee
returns. I would sharpen that question by focusing
particularly on Mr. Guterres’ remarks about the
challenges in Darfur and Chad — an issue which we
are, of course, addressing and will have to continue to
address, and on which his points only add to our sense
of urgency about the situation.

One issue in the context of post-conflict
management that I want to raise — and that I am not
sure Mr. Guterres touched on greatly but would
welcome his thoughts on — is the fundamental
importance we attach to maintaining the civilian
character of refugee camps and settlements. As we see
it, the presence of armed elements in such camps,
especially where they themselves are seeking sanctuary
in a neighbouring country, poses a number of grave
consequences for the security and welfare of refugees,
including, of course, the potential for sexual abuse and
for forced recruitment. Those factors create an unstable
and insecure operating environment for humanitarian
workers and give rise to security concerns for host
communities and receiving States. There is thus an
impact on regional peace and security.
Turning to conflict prevention, I want very much
to welcome Mr. Guterres’s reference to resolution 1625
(2005). We believe that UNHCR has an important role
to play in the area of early warning and in helping both
to signal and to address root causes of conflict,
especially where these trigger displacement. I think
that we, as a Council, are going to have to take note
carefully of his remarks both about eastern Sudan and
about the Central African Republic. I should like here
to signal my delegation’s appreciation for his having
raised those issues.
Mr. Guterres also spoke about the regional
dynamics, something to which I think the Council is
paying increasing attention, but which poses challenges
both for us as a Council and for UNHCR in this sort of
warning role.
I wanted to conclude by asking whether UNHCR
believes that it has sufficient capacity to do the sort of
monitoring that Mr. Guterres’s comments must have
been based on, and what systems are in place to ensure
that its efforts in this area are coordinated with those of
other relevant actors in the United Nations and outside
it, and not just dependent on the occasional appearance
before the Security Council.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): It gives me great
pleasure to welcome the High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. António Guterres, who has been on the
job a few months now. I wish to thank him for his very
informative and comprehensive briefing on the
important issue of refugees and internally displaced
persons. As we all know, the Security Council is

7

S/PV.5353

paying particular attention to these issues, which form
part of all the crises that we have on our agenda.
We all are committed to the need for the survival
and absolute protection of refugees from attacks,
forced recruitment and sexual violence, especially
against women and children. We support the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and deeply respect the
dedication of its staff, many of whom have even
sacrificed their lives while carrying out their tasks in
perilous circumstances.
Armed conflicts in general result in the creation
of large numbers of refugees seeking asylum in other
countries, mainly neighbouring ones. We have seen this
scenario of human suffering play out again and again
throughout the world.
Africa has a considerable share of conflicts,
tensions and victims. The Sudan is the most recent
example, with more than 200,000 people fleeing the
country and almost 2 million internally displaced
persons in Darfur. UNHCR’s assistance is vital because
it is lifesaving.
In that respect, my question to the High
Commissioner is whether we in the United Nations
system have the potential to devise and implement a
mechanism for responding to crises as they emerge in
order to dispatch immediately available humanitarian
aid to the population under threat.
I have another question regarding protracted
refugee situations. Can he tell us to what extent
intensifying cooperation between UNHCR and regional
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has given, or could
give, new impetus to the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees?
Another significant issue is how we identify and
deal with actual refugees seeking asylum. Greece is
very much interested and involved in this area, because
every year we receive a large number of illegal
immigrants and refugees. The truth is that we live in a
changing, challenging and complex world. In our
national capacity, we have to protect our borders and
security, in particular against the threat of terrorism,
while ensuring that we provide asylum protection to
those who are entitled to it under international law.

8

In that framework, and as a European Union
member State, Greece looks forward to the
establishment of a common European asylum system
by 2010, as set out in The Hague programme.
On the other hand, we are encouraged by recent
positive indications of a decrease in the total number of
refugees in past years and of an increase in the number
of voluntary repatriations, especially in Afghanistan,
Liberia, Rwanda and southern Sudan. We, too, believe
that repatriation is the best solution, but only when
linked to an environment of stability, security,
reconstruction and development. We hope that the
newly established Peacebuilding Commission will
provide a unique opportunity to ensure, along with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
protection of refugees and their reintegration into postconflict societies.
Refugees’ humanitarian needs cover the whole
spectrum of protecting the essence of human life — the
dignity and human rights of every person.
In closing, I should like, therefore, to commend
once again the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and Mr. Guterres
personally for their tremendous work, which benefits
millions of people.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, at the outset let me thank you for having
convened this informative open meeting with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. António Guterres. We would like to thank
Mr. Guterres for his briefing on the situation of world
refugees and internally displaced persons worldwide. I
would like also to express the appreciation of the
Government of Argentina for the important work
undertaken daily by his organization and by
Mr. Guterres himself, for we believe that in order to
carry out the functions he is charged with, one must
have in-depth knowledge of international realities as
well as a clear militant spirit in favour of those who
have no voice.
Recent reports indicate that there is reason for
hope as concerns some conflicts. Indeed, we have
heard from Mr. Guterres that the current number of
refugees is the lowest in the last 25 years and that in
some conflicts, in particular in Africa, the situation
seems to have improved.

S/PV.5353

However, conflicts and human rights violations
continue to prevail that trigger the displacement of
many persons in other areas.
We are concerned by the issue of internal
displacements due to conflicts, and we believe that it
should receive appropriate attention from the Council,
given that refugees and internally displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable in the context of armed conflict,
as the Council has said in the past.
The recent debate held by the Council on
9 December on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict eloquently underlined the difficult situation of
displaced persons in many of those conflicts.
From that perspective, there are certainly
important areas of common concern for the Office of
the High Commissioner and for the Council. The
mandates contained in thematic and country-specific
Council resolutions in areas such as access of
humanitarian personnel to populations in need; safety
and security of humanitarian personnel; the situation of
children and women in armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians are particularly relevant to the
work of the Office of the High Commissioner and can
have a significant impact on that Office’s protection
mandate.
We believe that the interaction between those
various dimensions should be taken into account,
especially in the design, deployment and functioning of
integrated missions.
It is important that there be clear mandates
concerning the protection of camps for displaced
persons and that these be included in the establishment
or renewal of peacekeeping missions.
Reports of the use of rape against refugees as a
weapon of conflict and the abduction and humiliation
of refugee children continue to be routine features of
displacement situations. The violation of the human
rights of displaced persons is especially relevant in the
context of the Council’s mandate when it comes to
assessing situations in which civilians are attacked or
in which humanitarian assistance to them is
deliberately obstructed. Special attention should be
paid to situations constituting war crimes, crimes
against humanity and other crimes with regard to
which the Council has been given the responsibility to
protect.

We have already expressed our hopes with regard
to reports about the return of many refugees to their
countries of origin, especially in Africa. The contexts
in which those returns are taking place are very
diverse. They include a variety of factors — including
security considerations — that positively or negatively
affect the sustainability of those returns. Although
some of those factors fall within competence of the
Council, it is clear that the broad involvement of the
various bodies of the Organization, including the
recently established Peacebuilding Commission, is
truly crucial.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. António Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing, which
provided a valuable update on the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in the conflict areas of the Sudan
and the Great Lakes region.
We very much appreciate the relentless efforts of
UNHCR staff and missions in providing protection and
assistance to the 19.2 million refugees and internally
displaced persons around the world. In that context, we
support UNHCR’s global strategic objectives as
formulated in its ninth global appeal, with special
emphasis on enhancing the quality, effectiveness and
efficiency
of
the
agency’s
operations
by
institutionalizing results-based management.
Strengthening the international community’s
overall capacity to protect civilians affected by armed
conflict is one of my Government’s priorities. In that
context, we commend the efforts of UNHCR to address
one of the biggest challenges of the current refugee
regime: the problem of people internally displaced by
conflict. We agree with Mr. Guterres’s past statement
that the treatment of people internally displaced by
conflict has been one of the biggest failures of the
international community in the past. In that connection,
we welcome the strengthening of UNHCR’s support
for collaborative efforts to comprehensively address
situations of internal displacement, which is defined as
one of UNHCR’s global strategic objectives. We would
like to hear Mr. Guterres’s views about the progress
and challenges in that area.
We highly commend UNHCR for its remarkable
success in helping more than 4 million refugees in
Afghanistan to return to their homes. We also welcome
the information provided by Mr. Guterres regarding the

9

S/PV.5353

progress made in the repatriation of 66,000 refugees to
Burundi last year; more than 38,000 Liberians have
also been repatriated. This has been made possible by
the improved security situation in those countries. In
that connection, we share Mr. Guterres’s belief that
UNHCR should become an important partner and
participant in the future activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peace Support Office. We believe
that the Commission will provide us with an effective
tool for securing post-conflict stability and
development. We also believe that UNHCR can
contribute to its work by virtue of its unique potential
and the experience it has gathered in areas of conflict
over the years.
In conclusion, I would like to ask Mr. Guterres a
question concerning recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the safety of
refugee returns to that country from neighbouring
countries, especially Uganda. According to the latest
news, having fled fighting in the Kivu region of the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Congolese refugees in Uganda have begun to return
home in recent days. As we have heard, the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is very volatile,
with military activity having resumed in that country in
recent days. We have also heard that 15,000 refugees
are living in the open at the airfield in Kisoro, waiting
for the situation to improve. Can the High
Commissioner provide us with some details about the
current situation of Congolese refugees on the
Ugandan border, as well as about the possible actions
of UNHCR to assist that group of refugees, who are
eager to return home but who are trapped at the border?
We have heard that, according to current UNHCR
practices, the agency can only provide water for
refugees who are in the border area, and nothing more.
We wonder whether that practice can somehow be
changed in the future.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, we welcome High
Commissioner António Guterres to the Security
Council. We would like to express our great
appreciation for his insightful presentation on the work
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and on its link
to the work of the Security Council.
The decreasing trend in the overall number of
refugees worldwide is itself a most welcome
development. But, at the same time, we remain deeply
concerned that, in a number of refugee situations,

10

particularly in Africa, heavy refugee case loads persist,
with millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) continuing to suffer due to protracted
conflict, without prospects for a better future. In those
situations the United Nations and the international
community must ensure that adequate life-saving
assistance and protection are provided for them and
that the security of people in refugee camps is ensured.
In that connection, I commend UNHCR for its
dedication and hard work.
In order to provide such assistance and security,
practical cooperation on the ground between refugee
agencies, other humanitarian actors, peacekeeping
operations and troops from regional organizations
where such forces are deployed is sometimes critically
important. In that connection, I have a question to ask
of the High Commissioner. In UNHCR’s recent
experience on the ground, has the agency encountered
difficulties in that regard? How does the High
Commissioner for Refugees assess the level and
quality of cooperation between humanitarian agencies
such as UNHCR and military actors on the ground: the
peacekeepers involved?
Secondly, assisting communities hosting large
numbers of refugees should not be forgotten. The High
Commissioner made a reference to Tanzania’s laudable
efforts in that regard. Local communities in Chad bear
a considerable burden as a result of having received
many refugees from the Darfur region. There are many
other similar examples. The international community
should assist refugee-hosting communities, in the spirit
of burden-sharing, in order that the flow of refugees
does not lead to the destabilization of a region. In that
regard, it is important to recall that the principle of
solidarity and burden-sharing was reaffirmed in the
outcome document of the September summit (General
Assembly resolution 60/1). The donor community must
renew its resolve to support nations in assisting refugee
populations and their host communities.
Whenever the prerequisites for the return of
refugees are met, it is important to ensure the
sustainable voluntary return and integration of refugees
and the resumption of normal life. This year we expect
that a large number of refugees are likely to return,
especially in southern Sudan. The international
community should assist with a seamless transition
from emergency relief to reconstruction in the Sudan
and elsewhere.

S/PV.5353

In that connection, the High Commissioner
emphasized the importance of the link between refugee
returns and sustainability. We agree. In his statement
this morning, the High Commissioner said that
“refugees must not be seen as uninvolved
beneficiaries of a peace and recovery process, or
simply as an afterthought. Refugees return with
schooling and new skills, and this in itself is a
critical factor in any post-conflict situation”.
(Supra)
In that regard, we have argued that the notion of
human security should play an important role. Under
the concept of human security, refugees are not and
should not be regarded as a burden on the communities
to which they return, but should be seen as potential
contributors to enhancing the welfare of the
communities they belong to. Based on that idea, Japan
has taken the initiative on the sustainable return of
refugees in Afghanistan and elsewhere. We also expect
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission to
make a contribution to that end.
While there has been a global decline in refugee
populations, the number of internally displaced persons
continues to rise, reaching more than twice the number
of refugees. The plight of IDPs, as observed in many
parts of the world, including in northern Uganda, is
disturbing. It is nonetheless a welcome development
that the September 2005 summit outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) recognized the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an
important international framework. The United Nations
needs to strengthen its capacity to protect and assist
IDPs as a priority on its humanitarian agenda. We
therefore follow with interest the ongoing discussion in
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee on this matter,
including the cluster approach. We hope that interested
States will engage in active debate to that end.
In Geneva, Ambassador Fujisaki of Japan now
chairs the UNHCR Executive Committee. Let me
express our expectation that the close cooperation
between the Executive Committee and High
Commissioner Guterres will lead to even more
effective implementation of the UNHCR mandate.
I wish to conclude by expressing to Mr. Guterres
Japan’s great respect for his leadership. We wish him
well. I wish also to congratulate Ms. Judy ChengHopkins on her appointment as Assistant High
Commissioner and to wish her much good luck.

Ms. Løj (Denmark): I too would like to express
my gratitude to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Guterres, for his comprehensive and
very informative report to the Council on the effects
which a number of conflicts on the Council’s agenda
have on refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in conflict zones.
Without spending too much time on each of the
conflicts mentioned, I wish to offer a few comments
and pose a few questions which address some points of
importance for the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
vis-à-vis the protection of refugees and IDPs.
First, let me offer a few thoughts on UNHCR’s
role in the United Nations reform process. Denmark
supports the ongoing humanitarian reform process
aimed at improving the capacity and preparedness of
the humanitarian system. In particular, IDPs, as the
largest vulnerable group globally, must be better
protected. That point, unfortunately, is being
underlined every day by the ongoing events in Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern
Uganda, et cetera. For that reason, Denmark welcomes
the decision of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
to implement a cluster approach, and we compliment
UNHCR for taking on some major tasks in that regard.
However, the financial implications of the new cluster
approach to IDP situations still seem uncertain.
Denmark has taken note of UNHCR’s appeal to
donors to rapidly provide contributions to start IDP
interventions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia and Uganda. We fully recognize this and will
be considering additional funding. Furthermore, we
understand that UNHCR currently faces financial
difficulties because it cannot get up-front money from
the Central Emergency Response Fund before the Fund
is operational, which will occur by mid-March.
How does the High Commissioner assess the
prospects for the financing of his additional activities?
Secondly, on the issue of peacebuilding, refugees
and IDPs are victims of conflict, and their safe return
must be a priority in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Security Council, for instance, has a specific
responsibility to include protection of civilians in the
mandates of its missions. However, to find a
sustainable solution, all relevant actors must be
involved. Denmark thus fully agrees with UNHCR that
durable solutions for displaced populations must be

11

S/PV.5353

integrated into the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
once their work commences.
We regard UNHCR’s partnership with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to create
better conditions for the safe return of displaced
populations in integrated peacekeeping missions as an
important step towards more sustainable peacebuilding.
However, we have also noted that on earlier occasions
the High Commissioner has stated that many of the
voluntary repatriations that UNHCR is carrying out
today may not be durable.
How do we ensure more durable activities?
Thirdly, on the Convention Plus project, Denmark
has been a strong supporter of bringing about durable
solutions for refugees through Convention Plus. We see
Convention Plus as a major instrument in ensuring the
transition from relief to development assistance. It is,
however, also important that more donors commit
themselves to support Convention Plus projects in the
field. We count on UNHCR to continue its advocacy
role vis-à-vis donors. It is, in that regard, a very
positive development that UNHCR has started
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) on a Framework for Durable
Solutions in Africa.
How does the High Commissioner assess
progress in getting other development agencies
involved?
Fourthly, on the transition from relief to
development assistance, the early recovery cluster,
under UNDP lead, will play a key role in building a
bridge between relief and development. The early
recovery cluster should also help UNHCR to deliver
durable solutions and protection in post-conflict and
post-disaster situations. United Nations organizations
with a longer-term development mandate must take
over from UNHCR. We need to ensure that return of
refugees and IDPs is made sustainable. The Sudan,
Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
examples of where we rapidly need to see a stronger
presence of development agencies in the field.
Let me, in that regard, mention that UNHCR is a
key partner in the Danish Regions of Origin initiative,
which supports a number of UNHCR programmes to
improve protection and ensure durable solutions. We
regard the Regions of Origin initiative as a key

12

instrument in tackling some of the transition issues
arising from repatriation and in reintegrating refugees
and IDPs. The experience gained from Danish support
to the transition programme in Sri Lanka has revealed
difficulties experienced by United Nations agencies in
working on transition in an integrated manner.
I would therefore like, in conclusion, to
encourage UNHCR and other United Nations agencies
to improve the coordination of their activities in the
field.
Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open briefing on a topic that particularly affects
Africa, our continent. I would also like to thank
Mr. Guterres, the High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his briefing, which made very clear the importance that
he attaches to the issue of refugees and displaced
persons in Africa — an issue that he highlighted when
he took up his duties.
We are aware of the magnitude of the task and the
difficulties involved in such a delicate and complex
area, which includes humanitarian assistance and the
return of refugees and displaced persons. His efforts
thus far are commendable; his first working visit to the
Great Lakes region is a case in point.
Despite some progress that has been made here
and there, the overall situation for refugees remains
troubling and is not improving in any significant way,
which can only be a cause for concern for my
delegation. That is why my delegation would like to
ask that particular attention be focused on what
Mr. Guterres described as emergency situations — the
Sudan and the Great Lakes region, where every day
violence coexists with impunity. In that context, we
support his appeal with respect to bringing
international pressure to bear on the various actors
involved, which could help us to reverse the current
negative trends.
We welcome the efforts made by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) with regard to refugee return in certain
countries, including Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Liberia, and we encourage the
consolidation of processes under way in those
countries — in particular in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, where the situation is very unstable. We also
know that particular attention needs to given to the
situation of persons returning to their countries so as to

S/PV.5353

facilitate their integration into everyday life. We must
provide the optimal conditions for such returns, and in
that respect we call for donor support for the important
activities being carried out by UNHCR.
In his briefing, Mr. Guterres also highlighted
security
problems,
including
those
affecting
humanitarian workers, and we would like to express
our concern in that regard. We know — and this has
been mentioned by previous speakers — that the
problem of refugees and displaced persons often
originates in the recurrent conflicts in Africa.
Resolution 1625 (2005) is quite eloquent on that
subject. My delegation would therefore like to stress
that, while we need to deal with the problem of
displaced persons and refugees, special attention
should be given to the causes of conflict in Africa.
We would like to ask Mr. Guterres a few
questions for the purpose of clarification. The first is
simply a request for information. We would like to
know where we stand with regard to the “Convention
Plus” initiative, which has been the subject of many
discussions in recent years, in Geneva in particular. He
also raised the issue of the sustainable settlement of
refugees within the host countries and the possibility of
their participating in development activities. My
delegation would like to know something more about
his expectations are in that regard.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supports the
activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees as the lead international
agency providing international protection to refugees.
We believe that this meeting of the Security
Council, initiated by the Tanzanian presidency, is
extremely important. That is borne out by the
comments of Mr. Guterres, to whom we are grateful for
his comprehensive briefing. The information that he
gave us and the figures that he cited were truly
enlightening.
The High Commissioner gave us a far-fromexhaustive list of countries in which hundreds of
thousands — indeed, millions — of people have been
compelled to flee their homes, seeking asylum and
protection in areas of their own country that are not
always safe, or in neighbouring States. That massive
displacement of people is, of course, having a very
negative impact on the economies of the recipient
countries, and often becomes a dangerous element of

destabilization in the domestic political life of such
countries.
Banditry, looting, murder and rape are
characteristic of virtually all conflict areas, particularly
those where illegal armed groups are active. We are all
well aware of the criminal activities of such groups of
thugs. In those situations, it is becoming increasingly
important, especially in Africa, to coordinate the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
within the context of their mandates as endorsed by the
Security Council, with the country presence of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. UNHCR can identify the most vulnerable
segments of the population, including refugees, and
give them the assistance and protection that they need.
We believe that a good example of such coordinated
work is that of the African Union mission in the Sudan,
where, despite all of the complexities and problems,
with which we are all familiar, it has been possible to
reduce the level of violence against refugees and
internally displaced persons in the areas in which they
are concentrated in Darfur.
The Russian Federation supports the initiatives of
the top management of UNHCR, which is seeking to
enhance the effectiveness of the organization, and we
favour the retention of the existing principles for the
voluntary funding of its programmes. In 2005, Russia
made a further voluntary contribution to the budget of
UNHCR, and we hope in the future to continue that
practice. If possible, we will try to expand our
participation in international humanitarian activities.
Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I should like first
of all to thank the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. António Guterres, for his comprehensive briefing.
The achievements of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
established in December 1950, are unequalled. It is,
without doubt, the biggest and most effective
humanitarian agency in the world. Working with
countless
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations, it has given hope to millions of
vulnerable people displaced by war, famine and natural
disasters. Today, 19.2 million people receive assistance
from that Office. The number of vulnerable people in
need of assistance, and the list of areas needing
humanitarian relief, are almost endless. These include
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

13

S/PV.5353

Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo and Afghanistan, to
mention only a few.
The question now is how well placed UNHCR is
to handle these new challenges. UNHCR’s core
mandate is to lead and coordinate action, to protect
refugees and to resolve refugee problems worldwide.
Two main objectives can be distilled from this core
mandate: to safeguard the rights and well-being of
refugees and to ensure that everyone has the right to
seek asylum and find safe haven in another State.
At the heart of this mandate is the following
issue: Who is a refugee? The 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol define a
refugee as a person who is outside the country of his or
her nationality and is unable or unwilling to return to
it, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for
reason of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular group or political opinion. That definition is
the basis of international refugee law.
In this era, one in which conflicts can cause
massive refugee flows that overwhelm the facilities of
host countries, the tolerance level is very low. Illegal
migration is another complicating factor. There is,
therefore, a tendency on the part of some Governments
overburdened with the reality of illegal migration to
consider refugee issues in the same light. The
challenge for UNHCR is to seek the cooperation of
Member countries in ensuring recognition of the fact
that the problem of refugees is a distinct human rights
issue, and not one of migration.
The abuse of refugee status by some illegal aliens
does more than just raise the question of the denial of
this most basic right — recognized under international
humanitarian law and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights — to vulnerable groups. UNHCR has to
work with States to combat the gradual erosion of
refugee rights under the guise of law enforcement and
anti-illegal-immigration measures. It is also important
that Member States live up to their obligations and
commitments under the 1951 Convention on Refugees.
Mr. Brencick (United States of America): My
delegation too would like to thank High Commissioner
Guterres for his incisive and forceful briefing this
morning. We believe that he is off to a very strong start
in his very challenging position; rather than add to
those challenges by lengthening the daunting list of
good questions already posed by my colleagues, I will
confine myself to a few remarks.

14

The United States is a strong supporter of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the multilateral approach to
serving refugees. We rely heavily on UNHCR to ensure
that the protection and assistance needs of refugees are
met, in coordination with other United Nations,
international and non-governmental organization
partners in the field. For that reason, we plan to
continue our generous financial support for the work of
UNHCR.
As other Council members have noted, we are
following closely the efforts to reinvigorate the
collaborative approach of the United Nations to
meeting the needs of internally displaced persons
through the designation of agencies as cluster leads for
various sectors. Such reform is long overdue. I would
like to note, however, our concern that UNHCR work
to ensure that its involvement with internally displaced
persons not detract in any way from its mission to
assist refugees.
We look forward to continuing to work with the
Office of the High Commissioner in order to improve
the United Nations response to humanitarian crises,
including greater accountability in its work.
Mr. Gallardo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António Guterres, for
his important briefing. The problem of refugees and
displaced persons is one of the most complicated
matters currently facing the international community.
Peru is grateful to him for the work he is doing to
protect refugees and displaced persons throughout the
world, as well as for his ongoing search for solutions to
problems they face. Peru would also like to point out
its profound respect for humanitarian workers who
have been injured or killed while carrying out their
duties.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) still has very
challenging tasks ahead of it. It must face numerous
prolonged refugee situations, which have increased in
number due to new emergencies that have arisen in
various parts of the world. It must face ever-growing
signs of intolerance and mistrust in our societies, as a
result of which the status of asylum is losing ground. It
must deal with migration flows, and must continue to
manage various humanitarian crises, such as the
situation in Darfur.

S/PV.5353

Against this backdrop, Peru encourages UNHCR
to continue to find imaginative ways to ensure a life
with dignity for all the refugees and displaced persons
in the world. We support UNHCR’s cooperation with
other United Nations organizations, non-governmental
organizations and Governments. We welcome the
recent agreement signed between the UNHCR and the
Governments of the Sudan and Kenya to facilitate the
repatriation of more than 70,000 Sudanese in the first
quarter of this year. We understand that the repatriation
operation will be based on voluntary returns, and that
this is the first of seven agreements that in the coming
months UNHCR will negotiate to the same end with
the countries neighbouring the Sudan.
We can conclude that the refugee situation has
changed and has become an example of
interdependence. This situation shows how the
problems of one country can have immediate
consequences for other countries. It also exemplifies
the interdependence between refugee problems and
human rights questions. Human rights violations are
not only one of the main causes of massive exodus;
they also rule out the option of voluntary repatriation
as long as the violations continue. Another
phenomenon that has been on the rise in recent years is
that of internally displaced persons: people who have
been forced to flee their homes but who remain on the
territory of their own country, thereby excluding them
from the refugee protection system.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania.
I thank Mr. António Guterres, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for his very
elaborate and informative presentation on the
commendable work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
protecting and assisting refugees around the world. I
also wish to recognize the presence of Ms. Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and congratulate her on her recent
appointment as Assistant High Commissioner for
Refugees.
We have received, hosted and protected refugees
from neighbouring countries in the Great Lakes region
and southern Africa continuously for the past 45 years.
Tanzania has been working with UNHCR since 1964.
Currently, there are a total of 532,240 refugees —
mainly from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the

Congo and Somalia — in the United Republic of
Tanzania. This is still the highest number in Africa,
despite the limited voluntary repatriation to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi that
has started.
Tanzania grants asylum as a humanitarian
imperative to our neighbours and as an international
obligation. We have learned the importance of
tolerance and compassion for strangers and those in
distress. At the same time, as a host country, we have
experienced the challenges of mixed flows and the
need to separate genuine asylum-seekers from those
with ulterior motives, such as criminals, and those
misusing the asylum channel for social and economic
reasons. In a region of growing demographic pressures,
this can be a very complicated exercise.
For us as a host country, areas of concern on
refugee issues include dwindling levels of assistance to
refugees, pressure on the environment and
infrastructure in the refugee hosting areas, the
deterioration of public safety and security due to arms
and light weapons carried by some refugees,
inadequate funding for UNHCR repatriation operations
and poor receiving capacity for returnees in countries
of return, which are impeding voluntary repatriation.
In our region, where we have witnessed a
genocide in Rwanda, we need to embrace the concept
of the responsibility to protect civilian populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We also reiterate the need to
strengthen the protection of humanitarian workers in
zones of conflict.
The refugee problem can be eased and effectively
resolved by addressing its root causes, in order to
prevent conflicts, including by heeding early warning
signals, such as those given by UNHCR in eastern
Sudan. The resolution of residual conflicts in our
region — including through the Great Lakes process —
by the countries of the region should be encouraged
and supported in the context of Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005). We must rise up to address the
unfolding crisis in Darfur. We commend the work done
there by humanitarian agencies, such as UNHCR, but
humanitarian action has to be accompanied by
sustained and coordinated political and security-related
actions carried out by the Council in partnership with
the African Union.

15

S/PV.5353

I recall that UNHCR was one of the agencies that
pioneered, and advocated the need for, a seamless
transition from relief to development in post-conflict
situations. The recently established Peacebuilding
Commission, therefore, is a much-needed institution
for the consolidation of peace and security for
countries emerging from conflict in our Great Lakes
region. It is our hope that it will be adequately
resourced to fill the development gap in post-conflict
countries and to stabilize nascent Governments and
shattered societies.
We wish to reaffirm the commitment made by our
leaders at the summit last September to safeguard the
principle of refugee protection. We urge shared
responsibility in protecting refugees and in finding
durable solutions to the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and we endorse the idea
of burden-sharing with host countries. We concur fully
with the observations made by the representative of
Japan.
Finally, like our Danish colleague, we would like
to know the status of UNHCR’s funding for its
programmes for refugees, especially in the light of the
newly acquired responsibility of the cluster approach to
responding to situations involving internally displaced
persons. We would also like to hear about the
constraints faced in meeting the requirements of
returnees, specifically in countries such as Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Guterres: I thank all members of the
Council for their excellent interventions and for the
very relevant questions that were raised here today.
(spoke in French)
I would like to begin by thanking the
representative of France for his observations and by
trying to respond briefly to his questions.
First, it is true that in Chad, because of the
extreme shortage of natural resources, particularly
water and wood, there is an inevitable tension between
the local population, which is very poor, and the very
numerous — more than 200,000 — refugees who are

16

sharing the same resources, which are very, very
limited.
In that regard, we have had two types of
initiatives. First, we have created joint populationrefugee commissions to try to manage conflicts,
difficulties and problems and address them together.
Secondly, we have taken a number of initiatives to
lessen the impact of refugee camps on the natural
resources involved — particularly water, through new
uses, and wood, by introducing techniques that enable
us to substantially reduce the quantities of wood
necessary, inter alia, to prepare food for refugees, with
a view to preservation.
Tripartite agreements are now being negotiated
with all the neighbouring countries. Unfortunately, we
began too late, because it was very difficult to decide
who could sign on the Sudanese side: the Khartoum
Government or the regional government of the south.
We unfortunately lost months, which also shows the
difficulty and complexity of finally finding a solution
to the Sudanese problem — a solution that is now
enabling us to establish these agreements.
Recently, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, we developed a new
cooperation framework that we will try to build on the
ground, including by planning joint activities aimed at
sustainable solutions in Africa. But I must say in all
sincerity that the problem of the gap between
humanitarian assistance activities and development
assistance activities will not be easily brigaded through
inter-agency cooperation alone: it is a major issue for
the international community. Countries themselves
must display leadership and show the will to contribute
decisively to resolving the problem.
Indeed, when we look at the various actors on the
humanitarian and development sides, we see that they
have different cultures and different time scales, and
that they encounter extreme difficulties working
together on joint programmes to address problems that
are, in my view, joint problems. That is a key issue that
must prompt all of us to become involved.
Sometimes, even in a country such as mine,
international activities have been shared between
sectors dealing with humanitarian issues and sectors
concerned with development issues, and the internal
dialogue has not worked. That dilemma — which I
myself have seen in my national administration —
exists everywhere. It is a key issue, and I believe that

S/PV.5353

for all of us, resolving that key issue is an essential
condition for success, particularly when it comes to
preserving the peace after conflicts have been resolved
and ensuring support for refugee return operations.
The representative of France raised a central
issue: the relationship between humanitarian agencies
and peacekeeping operations. That is an issue that we
have never hesitated to address. We recognize the need
to preserve the civilian character of humanitarian
action, but we have always engaged in very significant
and strong cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and we are prepared to
cooperate with peacekeeping forces in keeping with the
autonomy of our mandate. But we understand that,
without a minimum of guaranteed security in the
regions, it is absolutely impossible to have effective
humanitarian action. What is happening in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a good example
of a more systematic approach to such cooperation in
the area of protection. We expect good results in
keeping with the basic principles of humanitarian
action.
(spoke in English)
I thank the representative of the United Kingdom
for his comments. His first question was about the
cluster approach and the first results of its
implementation. I think it is fair to say that it is a new
approach; it needs a lot of flexibility in order to be
successful. It must not be transformed into a
cumbersome and bureaucratic approach; it needs a lot
of flexibility and must be effective on the ground as
quickly as possible. That is our main concern.
I believe that very relevant work was done at the
headquarters level in the various agencies to establish
an overall framework for the various clusters. But it is
on the ground that we now face difficulties. Just one
example is camp management in Pakistan. Although
our cluster is not supposed to deal with natural
disasters, it would be inconceivable for us not to be
involved in Pakistan, given the more than 3 million
refugees hosted by that country.
Now, there is a cluster for camp management and
a cluster for water and sanitation. If there is a water
problem in a camp, who is responsible? Who is the
provider of last resort? Only by confronting that
approach with the reality in the field will we be able to
solve the problems and to find the adequate
mechanisms to address them without bureaucracy in a

simplified way and with a basic concept. Action should
be conducted, in each situation, by those who have the
capacity to do so. That, I think, is the crucial element
for making the cluster approach work. If we stick to a
rigid framework even when it does not fit reality, of
course we will fail. That, I think, is the lesson we
should draw from the early stages of the Pakistan
operation, and I do believe that we have learned the
lesson and are going to improve our capacity to make it
work.
The representative of the United Kingdom raised
a lot of very relevant considerations about prevention
and conflict resolution. Of course, his intervention was
to a large extent centred on Darfur and Chad. I would
like to stress again that, in our opinion, the Sudan/Chad
problem is the biggest humanitarian problem we will
potentially face in the world today. In my opinion,
today the key element to making it move in the right
direction is to achieve, as soon as possible, a peace
agreement in Darfur. I do believe that all the efforts of
the international community and all the pressures
exerted by all countries that could and are willing to be
involved in the situation should be focused now on that
very clear and concrete objective. We should lose no
more time in ensuring that there is a peace agreement
for Darfur. Because the differences are so big among
the various actors, unless there is a lot of concerted
pressure and everybody acts together, there is a risk
that a peace agreement may not be made. If the peace
agreement is not made, I do believe that the situation
may trigger much worse developments in the near
future.
Now, a peace agreement is the beginning of a
solution to the large and complex problem of reengineering the society of Darfur. It will require a lot
of reconciliation afterwards. Without that, it will be
impossible to do it. I also believe that afterwards,
unless it has an adequate mandate, a force which needs
to be endowed with resources — and let us be honest
in acknowledging that the African Union has not been
provided with enough resources for the mission that it
was supposed to accomplish — and with credibility as
a deterrent — in the sense that those who violate the
peace and the ceasefire agreements will understand that
they risk severe punishment by that force — the risk of
failure is very big.
In our opinion, a peace agreement is absolutely
crucial. I think everybody should be involved and exert
pressure if that is to be possible. Secondly, the

17

S/PV.5353

credibility of a force — independent of the decisions
that this Council and other bodies will take on its
leadership, composition and nature — will be
absolutely crucial, as will a sustained effort to
reconstruct a society that will require a lot of reengineering, as I said.
The representative of the United Kingdom spoke
about the civilian character of the camps. That is
absolutely crucial and one of the biggest factors in
humanitarian action. It is very difficult to ensure,
because, as members know, we are not a State. We
have no army and no police force. In many countries,
we are effectively giving strong support to the local
police force to enable it to do its job; in others, the
situation is so difficult that we ourselves consider that
the conditions no longer exist for us to act in those
circumstances and that those camps should no longer
be considered refugee camps. We have done that in
Pakistan and are now in very strenuous discussions
with our partners, for instance, on the situation in
Makhmour Camp in Iraq.
As to the question of early warning, we have our
own early warning and monitoring mechanisms. They
are, of course, slim, but we have a very good dialogue
with other United Nations agencies and I do believe
that they can make a small but, hopefully, useful
contribution to creating a more effective capacity to
detect problems before they explode in today’s world.
I should also like very much to thank the
representative of Greece for his comments about the
reform of the United Nations system and our role in
that and about the need for effective cooperation in
solving protracted refugee situations and for effective
responsibility-sharing in order to make that possible.
The representative of Greece made a very
relevant observation about repatriation and the need for
conditions of security and development to be present if
repatriation is to be successful. I would like to provide
information on the results of different surveys we have
conducted in several parts of the world. Contrary to my
expectations, even more important than the solution of
the security problem if repatriation is to be effectively
triggered and successful, the main concern of refugees
is related to livelihood conditions — to jobs, to
development, to schools, to health care and to other
conditions that will allow a dignified life.
Unfortunately for us all, the insecurity problems are so
big that the aforementioned considerations sometimes

18

come second in the concerns of many refugees when
they consider the prospect of going back home.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to thank the Ambassador of Argentina for
his very positive words on our work. I also wish to
note our great interest in the recent decision taken by
Argentina to become a host country in the context of
shared responsibility in the resolution of refugeerelated problems. Argentina played an important role in
developing the Mexico Plan of Action, the framework
agreement for Latin American cooperation in the
support and protection of refugees and the resolution of
their problems. I believe that the exemplary Mexico
Plan of Action should be supported not only by us, but
by the entire international community as well,
especially in the resolution of certain acute
displacement crises in Latin America, above all in
Colombia.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the representative of
Slovakia for his comments and his interest in internally
displaced persons and the efforts we are making.
Effectively, there has been progress. We have
established a global framework. We are now in the
process of starting work in three pilot-project countries
that have been selected: the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia and Uganda. I do believe that —
progressively, carefully and without ambitions that
cannot be met by our own resources and capacities —
we will be able gradually to respond to that very
dramatic issue of today’s world.
There has been effective progress in repatriation
everywhere and, as the representative of Slovakia
noted very accurately, Afghanistan is probably the
most successful repatriation movement ever to have
been supported by UNHCR.
The representative of Slovakia raised some
concrete questions about the situation along the border
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
There are two main points of concern. One to which he
referred specifically is in relation to the people in
Kisoro, now numbering only 80,000. Many have
already gone back, but they were living along the
border without any real shelter. Today, we are building
a small clinic and 10 large temporary shelters. We are
introducing, together with the World Food Programme,
a programme of high-protein food support for those

S/PV.5353

people. We consider that the solution, of course, is not
to keep them in those circumstances and we have
agreed with the Government of Uganda that the best
place further inland — because refugees should not be
kept on the border — is in Nakivale, where we already
have 16,000 refugees and where preparations are being
made for people who may want to go. A certain
number — exactly 5,278 — have registered to go to
Nakivale and we will now promote that movement in
order to make sure that conditions are effectively
provided for dignified support. Unfortunately, many
others are still looking into the possibility of going
back, and providing assistance to them in their current
location is much more difficult, but we are doing our
best.
Another place, in the Kanungu district, has a
group of about 5,000 people which is more interested
in going back to the Congo. A few hundred of them
have agreed to be relocated, and we are once again
preparing, with the Government of Uganda, a
relocation programme. What I can guarantee is that as
soon as it happens, we send people there and we start
to determine, situation by situation and person by
person, what the solution could be. Of course, this kind
of thing is a nightmare for any organization, because it
is erupting at every moment, here and there, and we are
constantly needing to divert resources and people from
one operation to the other to be able to give an
effective answer to concerns such as the ones that have
been expressed here.
I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
representative of Japan and to say that I fully support his
observations on burden-sharing and on the sustainability
of voluntary return. I should like to pay tribute to the
contribution of Japan and of Mrs. Ogata — my
predecessor — in particular in support of the concept of
human security, which is probably one of the richest
concepts in terms of helping to bridge the gap between
relief and development and to create conditions for
sustainable return. I can assure the Council that
cooperation with Ambassador Fujisaki is excellent and
that we truly are working together very enthusiastically
in order to enable UNHCR to be much more effective
and relevant in the humanitarian community.
I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
Ambassador of Denmark. Denmark has been extremely
active in the humanitarian reform process and a very
staunch and permanent supporter of UNHCR’s
activities all over the world. Let me answer her first

question about the financial implications of internally
displaced persons in a very candid way. I said at the
beginning of the process that we wanted to be fully
engaged, in a predictable way, with internal
displacement all over the world, according to the
framework that was established through the cluster
approach, but that we considered that it would not
make sense to divert resources from refugees to
support internally displaced persons.
That is clearly our approach. But there is — and I
am going to be very frank in this respect — a double
accountability: the accountability of the agencies and
the accountability of the donors. The donors must be
very clear when they take decisions on where the
money is going and on where it is coming from. We
had the experience in Pakistan of funds diverted from
operations in Africa to the operation in that country.
The problem is even bigger, because when we try
to make sure that no resources are diverted from
refugees to internal displacement situations, we cannot
even ensure that, if we do not involve ourselves in
internal displacement, the funds are guaranteed for
refugees. Indeed, what happens in some circumstances —
what has, in fact, happened in some circumstances — is
that the money then goes from traditional refugee
operations to other agencies involved with internally
displaced persons in other circumstances. I believe,
therefore, that there must be a very frank, open and
transparent dialogue between agencies and donors to
make sure that additionality is a reality. If that is not
the case, we would be pretending that we are dealing
with additionality, but, in fact, we would be
undermining the needs of some to try to benefit others
who are, of course, in a very dramatic situation.
Our financial prospects are difficult. We faced a
very difficult exchange rate problem in 2005; that is a
technical question I should like to move through. We
are now making a very strong effort so that we are able
to conduct our operations in 2006 with a minimum of
negative impact on our operations, but it is also
obvious from our side — the result of the meeting we
had last week with representatives from all over the
world — that we also need to reform ourselves very
strongly in order to be able to deliver better and to be
able to adapt better to today’s realities.
Unfortunately, many agencies of many kinds —
not only United Nations agencies — operate in
circumstances that do not favour the best cost-benefit

19

S/PV.5353

analysis, as the Council is aware. We will do our best
to address this problem in a very forceful way, because
we really must ensure that funds that are scarce are
fully used to meet the needs of those who require
support. We must minimize as much as possible all of
the other costs that international organizations as a
whole tend to have.

assistance, as a guarantee, within our limited sphere of
activity, of the success of, inter alia, return operations
and of specific initiatives on the ground, including the
plan of action for Somalia, which endeavours to
translate into specific actions the work done on
irregular flows — one of the pillars of the “Convention
Plus” idea.

I should like to express my deepest appreciation
for Denmark’s initiatives, namely in the area of
development assistance to refugees, and in some very
relevant programmes across the world, for instance in
Uganda. In those operations, the idea of the
sustainability of durable solutions is very much
present.

(spoke in English)

I am confident about our enhanced cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme, but,
as I said earlier, the problem is a much bigger one. The
problem, which is global if all the international
community acts, is to establish the linkage between
relief and development. To be honest, my assessment is
that that linkage is not yet there yet and that the
process does not really work sufficiently well in
today’s world.
The early recovery cluster will be very important,
and the difficulties in that cluster are proof of that. I do
not blame anyone for those difficulties. We face the
same difficulties in our cluster. I wish only to stress
that the problem goes beyond the creation of a cluster
with a certain number of agencies. The problem is in
the way that the international community addresses the
situation.
(spoke in French)
I wish to thank the Ambassador of the Congo for
his statement, particularly with respect to his concern
for humanitarian workers. They suffer the
consequences of lack of security with outstanding
courage and determination. I see this in my colleagues
themselves, I see this in other circumstances, other
agencies, other countries, other institutions. It is one
aspect that is very important to us.
I should like to note that the “Convention Plus”
initiative is now mainstreamed in our work; it is no
longer just a specific area for UNHCR’s work but is
present in all its aspects: in the development of our
reintegration support capacity as one solution in the
context of shared responsibility for the promotion of
lasting solutions and in the area of development

20

I would like to express my deep gratitude to the
representative of the Russian Federation and to say that
I will be visiting his country very soon. I look forward
to the development of our cooperation. I would like
mainly to stress his very relevant words about the
reforms in our own Organization and his support for
those reforms. I think they are quite in line with what I
said to the Ambassador of Denmark: that we, too, need
to reform ourselves to be able better to deliver. It is not
only about asking for more money to do more things; it
is about making sure that we are more cost-effective
and more humanistic in our approaches to refugees and
other persons of concern.
I should like to thank very much the Ambassador
of Ghana. Ghana has had remarkable success in the
way it has handled the crisis of refugees from Togo in
the recent past, and we were very impressed with the
quality of and the capacities for protection already in
place in Ghana and with the effectiveness of the
authorities of Ghana in that field. He posed a very
relevant question: the credibility of the process of the
determination of refugee status in the present context. I
can assure him that this is one of the main concerns of
my Office, and I thank him very much for his
comments.
I would like also to thank very much the
representative of the United States for his comments,
especially for his support for our involvement in the
area of internal displacement. It is indeed very
important — and I would stress again what I said to the
Permanent Representative of Denmark — that, acting
together in a transparent way, donor countries — and
the United States is the biggest donor country in
support of the activities of UNHCR — and the
agencies can effectively work to make sure that
resources are not diverted. It is only through open
dialogue about, and knowledge of, what each party is
doing that we can guarantee that. That is a basic
condition for the accountability that the United States
so strongly supports.

S/PV.5353

(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to express my great appreciation for
the comments made by the representative of Peru. As I
have said, Mexico’s plan of action, regarding which
Peru has been one of the countries to show the greatest
support and interest, is one of the groundbreaking areas
in which UNHCR is active. For us, the appreciation for
all the refugee work done in Latin America is
extremely important. Latin America is a continent with
a very significant asylum tradition. That tradition
continues and is evolving, and we view it as very
positive and as an example that we believe will be
replicated throughout the world.
(spoke in English)
Finally, Mr. President, allow me to express to you
my deep gratitude for your comments and for what was
in fact a very comprehensive analysis of the problems
we face. There is a very easy explanation for that: you,
Sir, have been dealing with these problems yourself.
Allow me to say that, when I look at you, I do not see
the President of the Security Council; I see one of us.
What I see is your contribution and that of your
country, along with the knowledge you yourself bring
and that gained from the extreme generosity with
which your country has addressed these problems —
sometimes in circumstances that are extremely difficult
even for us to bear. You know better than I do how
difficult it was for us and the World Food Programme,
working together, to make sure that the nutritional
situation in camps in Tanzania did not become
completely unacceptable. As I said, it is a great honour
to see you as one of us.
With regard to returns, all I can say is that this
has always been a major concern for me. The decision
I always take is not to interrupt support for returns,
even in the absence of funding. We would go into the
red to do so, assuming all the consequences of doing
so. Because, if there is something noble in our work, it
is to help people to go home. If there is something
rewarding, it is to see the smiles of children and the
determination of people, as well as the desire of the
overwhelming majority of refugees to want to go
home.

Let me end with this observation. There is an idea
in the developed world that there are refugees
everywhere whose main objective is to migrate to the
developed world. In the complex population flows we
are witnessing everywhere, it is true that that we have
people in need of international protection; we have true
refugees. But my experience is that the main concern
of the millions of refugees in Afghanistan and the
hundreds of thousands of refugees hosted in Tanzania
is to go home. That was a surprise to me. We must
ensure that voluntary repatriation is possible and that
the conditions are met for returns to be sustainable. It
is important that, when addressing the problems of
refugees in the world, public opinion be fully aware
that the main objective of the overwhelming majority
of refugees throughout the world is to go home. We
should all do our best to help them to go home.
For that, prevention is crucial. For that, a regional
approach in dealing with crises is crucial. And for that,
bridging the gap between relief and development is
crucial. I believe the Council has a key role to play in
making those three things work.
The President: I can assure you, Mr. Guterres,
that after 11 years of my life working with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, I shall continue to be one of you, and among
the refugees and for the refugee cause.
I want to thank you very much, Mr. Guterres, for
all the kind words you have addressed to my country,
as well as to individual countries of the membership of
the Council. More so, I want to thank you for the great
confidence you have expressed to the Security Council
in its past, present and future work, especially that
related to refugees. I also want to thank you very much
for the words of hope that you have conveyed from this
Chamber to all the refugees and internally displaced
persons around the world.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21
