A /75/PV.23

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

23rd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 11 November 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 93
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/303)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.9)
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly decision 75/506, of 13 October 2020, I now
introduce the pre-recorded statement of Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to introduce the report of the
Agency for the year 2019.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see A/75/843).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.9.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I am pleased and honoured
to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/75/L.9, entitled “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency”, in Canada’s capacity as Chair of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board
of Governors for the period from September 2020 to
September 2021.
Canada’s tenure as Chair of the IAEA is a reflection
of our unyielding support to the Agency and a testament
to both the priority afforded by the Government of
Canada to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
the shared responsibility of nuclear security.

Following consultations held in Vienna on
13 October, this year’s draft resolution was unanimously
approved for transmission to the General Assembly.
This year’s text welcomes the resolution on the approval
of the appointment of Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi as
Director General of the Agency from 3 December
2019 to 2 December 2023, and expresses appreciation
for the leadership of the Director General and the
professionalization of the staff of the Agency during the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
As in previous years, the draft resolution
reaffirms the strong support of Member States for the
indispensable role of the Agency in encouraging and
assisting the development and practical application
of atomic energy for peaceful uses — in technology
transfer to development countries and in nuclear safety,
verification and security.
(spoke in French)
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
emanates from a requirement in the IAEA statute as
well as a cooperation agreement signed by the United
Nations and the Agency in 1957. Following the usual
practice, the text of the draft resolution takes note of the
resolutions adopted and decisions taken by the IAEA
General Conference at its sixty-fourth regular session
and reiterates the strong support of Member States for
the Agency and its mandated activities.
We hope that the General Assembly will adopt the
draft resolution without a vote, thereby stressing the
importance the international community attaches to the
IAEA and the wide scope of its work.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-30703 (E)

*2030703*

A/75/PV.23

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Tolstoi (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country and member
of the European Economic Area Liechtenstein, as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
We are very pleased to support the draft
resolution (A/75/L.9) on the report (see A/75/303) of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a
report that again reaffirms the indispensable role of the
Agency with regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and assisting the development and practical
application of atomic energy for peaceful uses, as well
as in technology transfer and nuclear verification,
safety and security.
We note with satisfaction the strong crossregional support expressed for the Agency’s work and
underline the importance of respecting the authority
and integrity of international organizations such as the
IAEA, which are fulfilling their duties in the service
of the international community in a very professional,
objective and impartial manner.
The EU commends IAEA Director General Grossi
for leading the secretariat’s response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In these difficult times
of COVID-19, we highly appreciate the secretariat’s
quick action and thank the staff for ensuring the
continued implementation of IAEA activities, in
particular in the area of safeguards.
The EU considers the empowerment of women and
gender mainstreaming to be important objectives, and
we welcome the Director General’s commitment in
that regard. We hope that the new Marie SkłodowskaCurie Fellowship Programme will contribute to the
emergence of a new generation of female leaders in
nuclear sciences, technologies and non-proliferation
around the world, and we note that a number of EU
member States are contributing to the programme.
The EU remains fully committed to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. Ahead of the
next Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
2/31

11/11/2020

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
we reiterate our firm support for the full, complete
and effective implementation of the NPT as the
cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime, the essential foundation for the pursuit of
nuclear disarmament in accordance with its article
VI and an important element in the development of
nuclear applications for peaceful purposes. We will
continue to promote its universalization and enhance
its implementation across all three pillars.
The EU also reaffirms its full support for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear and all other
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems
in the Middle East, and is funding a dedicated United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research project for
that purpose.
The IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the
NPT. We underline the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in cases of non-compliance. We recall
the serious proliferation challenges that continue to be
a threat to international security and the need to find
peaceful and diplomatic solutions to them.
The EU reaffirms its resolute commitment to,
and continued support for, the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), unanimously endorsed by
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). We deeply
regret the withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA and the reimposed sanctions, and we call on all
countries to refrain from taking actions that impede the
implementation of the agreement. The EU continues
to uphold its JCPOA commitments, including on the
lifting of sanctions. We remain gravely concerned
about Iran’s continued accumulation of low-enriched
uranium, now more than tenfold in excess of the JCPOA
limit, and the fact that its maximum enrichment level is
above the limit set by the JCPOA. We also remain very
concerned about the continued enrichment at Fordow
and the expansion of Iran’s centrifuge research and
development activities, as such activities significantly
increase Iran’s enrichment capacity.
All the activities mentioned are inconsistent with
the JCPOA and have severe proliferation implications.
We strongly urge Iran to refrain from any further actions
that are inconsistent with its JCPOA commitments
and to return to full JCPOA implementation without
delay. We support the efforts of JCPOA participants in
20-30703

11/11/2020

addressing these issues within the JCPOA, including
through the Joint Commission. The EU welcomes the
IAEA’s updates on the implementation in Iran of the
NPT Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol,
and the efforts undertaken to clarify all open questions.
The EU remains gravely concerned by the
continued development of the nuclear programme of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and urges
it to embark upon a credible path towards complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization by taking
concrete steps in that direction. Until then, the EU
will continue to strictly enforce existing sanctions. We
encourage the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to engage in meaningful discussions with all relevant
parties as the international community works towards
lasting peace and security on the Korean peninsula. The
EU urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
comply with all relevant Security Council resolutions,
to return to the NPT and to IAEA safeguards at an early
date and to sign and ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.
The EU urges the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate
promptly and transparently with the Agency to resolve
all outstanding issues, including through the conclusion
and implementation of an additional protocol as soon
as possible.
The EU continues to call for the universalization
of comprehensive safeguards agreements, together
with the additional protocols, without delay. We urge
the remaining States, especially those that are already
building a nuclear power plant or a research reactor,
to amend their small quantities protocols or to apply
their comprehensive safeguards agreement in full.
The EU strongly supports the continued improvement
in the effectiveness and efficiency of safeguards
implementation through State-level approaches.
Furthermore, we actively support the Agency’s
safeguards system through the European Commission’s
Safeguards Support Programme, the Instrument for
Nuclear Safety Cooperation and through EU member
States’ own support programmes.
The EU and its Member States attach the utmost
importance to the worldwide implementation and
continuous improvement of nuclear safety. Over the past
decades, we have established and further developed an
advanced, legally binding and enforceable nuclear legal
and regulatory framework applicable in all EU member
States. We stand ready to share our experience during

A/75/PV.23

the eighth Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties
to the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The EU has also
continued to provide its expertise via so-called stress
tests in a number of neighbouring countries with a view
to building a more robust, sustainable and transparent
nuclear safety framework worldwide. We support the
implementation of the Joint Convention on the Safety of
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive
Waste Management, and invite all the States Members
of the United Nations to demonstrate their commitment
to developing and implementing disposal as a safe
solution for radioactive waste management.
The EU stresses the need to continue strengthening
nuclear security worldwide in order to prevent nuclear
terrorism and the misuse of nuclear and radioactive
material. To that end, we highlight the importance of
becoming party to and fully implementing the relevant
treaties, the amended Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, and underline the importance of Security
Council resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016). The
EU strongly supports the central role of the IAEA
in improving the global nuclear security framework
by strengthening international cooperation, offering
advisory services and providing direct assistance to
Member States. We welcome the outcomes of the 2020
International Conference on Nuclear Security, including
the related ministerial declaration. We further call
on IAEA member States to ensure the availability of
sufficient resources for IAEA nuclear security activities.
Together with its member States, the EU remains a major
donor to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund. Our funding
has helped the Agency assist countries to upgrade and
ensure the physical protection of selected facilities and
to improve their national regulatory infrastructure. In
the context of the EU strategy against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, we also support other
international initiatives that contribute to strengthening
nuclear security. For the 2014-2020 period, the EU has
allocated more than €145 million to the EU’s regional
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear centres
of excellence initiative.
The EU highlights the benefits of multilateral
approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle and ensuring that
high standards of safety, security and safeguards are
implemented to protect our collective non-proliferation
interests. The EU has provided around €25 million for
the establishment of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium

20-307033/31

A/75/PV.23

Bank. We note with satisfaction that the Bank became
operational in October 2019, with the successful delivery
of low-enriched uranium by France and Kazakhstan,
and we look forward to the successful operation of the
Bank for the benefit of all IAEA member States.
Finally, the EU strongly supports the Agency’s
activities to raise awareness on all aspects of peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technologies. We positively
note its continuous engagement in the global dialogue
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the role
it plays in climate-change adaptation and mitigation.
Nuclear technologies can make life-changing
contributions to the health and well-being of people
around the world, in line with the SDGs. In that context,
the IAEA’s assistance to Member States to combat
zoonotic disease outbreaks needs to continue. Again,
we commend the work of the IAEA in addressing the
current COVID-19 pandemic and encourage further
close cooperation with the World Health Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and other relevant international organizations.
The EU continues to be a strong supporter of the
IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme, to which it
is the second-largest contributor. The EU also supports
the peaceful use of nuclear energy and technology
through the provision of technical expertise and an
average annual contribution of €20 million.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I wish to once again express our warmest congratulations
to Mr. Rafael Grossi on his election to the position of
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Egypt stands ready to cooperate with
him in support of all the Agency’s activities.
We also express our appreciation to the IAEA
secretariat, which, under the leadership of the
Director General, has made colossal efforts to address
unprecedented challenges during the (COVID-19)
pandemic, including by supporting more than 120
countries in confronting the disease. This is one of the
success stories on how international organizations deal
with international crises.
Egypt supports the General Assembly’s unanimous
adoption of the annual report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency for 2019 (see A/75/303) and its
adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.9, of which Egypt
is a co-sponsor. We welcome the efforts of the IAEA
secretariat in preparing the report as well as those of
4/31

11/11/2020

Canada, which, as the Chair of the IAEA Board of
Governors, guided the drafting of the draft resolution.
Egypt is one of the founding members of the IAEA.
It is also one of the first countries to have used nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, when it installed nuclear
reactors. Accordingly, we attach great importance
to the IAEA’s activities in the field of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy and in promoting international
cooperation and technical support while upholding
guarantees, safeguards, verification and nuclear safety.
Egypt continues to support the Agency and its
Secretariat in all fields of its work, particularly at a time
when it is preparing to start up the El Dabaa nuclear
power plant for the production of electricity. Egypt calls
once again for an increase in the efforts to ensure that
the IAEA has the necessary funding and resources to
fulfil its mandate in the field of technical cooperation
and strike a balance among the three pillars of its work,
in line with its Statute.
We also strive to strengthen the role of the IAEA
in terms of nuclear technology transfer and promote the
role of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially in the
area of nuclear applications. This would serve to meet
the goals that were set when the Agency was created
and to reject the notion that the IAEA is a specialized
agency only for nuclear verification.
We underscore the importance of guaranteeing
the continuity and stability of the IAEA’s activities
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in all its forms,
particularly in developing countries. The peaceful use
of nuclear energy is an inalienable sovereign right. As
a member of the IAEA Board of Governors, Egypt is
continuing its efforts to support the Agency and its
activities on technical cooperation and nuclear safety
and security.
We attach particular importance to the interests
of African countries and of the States members of the
Group of 77 and China in strengthening the development
role that the IAEA can play and in preventing the abuse
of nuclear safety considerations that might be a pretext
for restricting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We
would support the voluntary nature of contributions to
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund because responsibility
for nuclear safety is incumbent upon the State concerned.
Egypt emphasizes that the IAEA is the technically
competent and internationally mandated body to issue
reports that verify States’ respect for their commitments
20-30703

11/11/2020

on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Egypt affirms
that, in line with the IAEA Statute, the Agency plays
a key role in promoting efforts aimed at nuclear
disarmament and the verification of the elimination of
nuclear weapons. It therefore plays an important role
in keeping international peace and security and in the
implementation of all commitments set forth in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), including the Treaty’s article VI.
Egypt attaches great importance to the IAEA’s
activities for the implementation of the safeguards and
for enabling it to impartially verify if nuclear material
is used for non-peaceful purposes. This is in line with
the comprehensive safeguards agreements that form
the legal basis of the IAEA’s work in accordance with
article III of the NPT. We must therefore ensure that
these agreements are universalized. We also stress that
the development of the IAEA safeguards system should
not lead to additional commitments that go beyond
the contractual commitments and sovereign decisions
made by member States.
In conclusion, Egypt aspires to achieving progress
in the implementation of the mandate attributed to the
IAEA, in accordance with the resolution on applying
IAEA safeguards in the Middle East. The objective
is to create a zone free from nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction in that region with
the aim also to take related executive measures. This
approach is even more important especially in the
light of the important development of holding the first
session of the Conference on the Establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and other
Weapons of Mass Destruction, during the period from
18 to 22 November 2019 presided by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, in which the IAEA secretariat
participated as an international organization invited
by the General Assembly in order to contribute to the
work of that important conference. The session yielded
positive results.
Ms. Kharashun (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Belarus, I
would like to thank Mr. Rafael Grassi for his briefing on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on its activities in 2019 (see A/75/303), as
well as the information he provided on the work being
carried out in the current challenging environment.
We are convinced that sustainable development
and the well-being of present and future generations

A/75/PV.23

are inextricably linked to nuclear technology. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic further
confirms this point. It is now clear to everyone that,
without nuclear science and technology, it would not be
possible to address this great challenge of our times. We
also believe that the IAEA’s efforts aimed at building
the capacity of States to detect COVID-19 infections
deserve our full approval and support.
There is also a growing demand around the world
for nuclear technology to be used for energy generation.
We are convinced that nuclear power has the potential
to provide reliable and affordable low-carbon energy
production. We highly value the technical and advisory
support from the Agency in creating a national nuclear
sector in Belarus and in ensuring the highest standards
of nuclear safety.
Belarus has hosted seven IAEA missions directly
associated with the construction of nuclear power
plants. We believe that the results of those missions
have been very useful, and we are fully implementing
the recommendations that we received. Our experience
demonstrates the need to develop a tool kit for the
Agency to support countries that are developing nuclear
power plants.
The IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme
is as important and relevant as ever. It makes a great
contribution to the development of national institutional
capacity and of human resources, not only in the areas
of nuclear power and nuclear safety and security but
also, inter alia, to fight cancer, support food security
and protect the environment.
Belarus fully supports the IAEA safeguards
system and attaches great importance to its further
strengthening and improvement. This work should
continue to be carried out in strict compliance with
international treaties in force for the benefit of peace
and security, taking into account the interests of
member States of the Agency.
Belarus fully supports the activities of the IAEA
and is pleased to be one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution before the General Assembly on the 2019
IAEA report (A/75/L.9).
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea categorically rejects the 2019 report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

20-307035/31

A/75/PV.23

(see A/75/303), which contains distorted information
about my country.
Since it is not a member of the IAEA, my country
does not care about what is discussed at the Agency’s
meetings, let alone what appears in its annual reports.
However, we cannot overlook the fact that the IAEA
makes absurd remarks about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in the context of the United Nations
and unreasonably associates misleading information
with it.
Content that touches upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in the report is of no value at all, as
it is completely laden with guesswork and fabrication.
It is motivated by nefarious political purposes and a
desire to give credence to false information by forces
hostile to my country. Its lack of basic impartiality
in its activities as an international organization has
rendered the IAEA nothing more than a political tool of
Western countries.
This is our impression of the IAEA at the present,
just as it was more than 20 years ago. Recently, the IAEA
has sought every opportunity to let loose a barrage of
inappropriate remarks that the Agency is fully ready
to resume the verification of my country’s nuclear
programme and calls for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s cooperation with it. We left the
IAEA long ago and have not forgotten its despicable
acts of siding with hostile forces for purposes of
putting pressure on us and raising suspicions about the
peaceful nature of my country’s nuclear facilities in the
early 1990s.
I would like to make it clear once again that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will never have
any business with the IAEA as long as it refuses to make
impartiality the lifeline of its activities and as long as it
remains hostage to forces hostile to my country.
Mr. AlMutawa (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express
the appreciation of the United Arab Emirates for
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation and thanks to the Director General of
the Agency, Mr. Grossi, who has led the IAEA’s work
against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic
(COVID-19).
The United Arab Emirates emphasizes the
central role played by the IAEA in strengthening the
6/31

11/11/2020

peaceful uses of nuclear technology and in helping
Member States to benefit from nuclear energy and
its applications. My country welcomes the Agency’s
colossal efforts to create platforms for the exchange
of scientific knowledge, expertise and technical skills
among Member States in the areas of safety, nuclear
security and non-proliferation. In this regard, we
welcome the IAEA’s response to the challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic, which has involved the provision
of support to several States.
The United Arab Emirates operationalized its
first Barakah nuclear power plant on 1 August, with
the support of its international partners, including the
IAEA. It is the first nuclear power plant in the Arab
world, and it allows my country to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes. Accordingly, we are fully
committed to transparency and non-proliferation and
wish to underscore our country’s commitment to the
highest standards of safety and quality in implementing
its national programme, in accordance with the
directives of the IAEA and international best practices.
The Barakah nuclear power plant is a source of clean
energy and supports sustainable development goals.
The partnership between the United Arab Emirates
and the IAEA allowed our country to develop its
programme in accordance with the highest standards of
nuclear safety and security, safeguards and transparency.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance
of the IAEA verification measures and of full
compliance with the comprehensive safeguards system
and the additional protocol, which is an important tool
for building confidence in the peaceful purposes of
nuclear programmes at the international level.
Technical cooperation with the IAEA is an essential
means to help Member States benefit from the peaceful
application of nuclear technology. My country continues
its close cooperation with the IAEA through technical
cooperation to develop our infrastructure and promote
capacity-building of nuclear energy in all sectors. With
the support of the IAEA, the United Arab Emirates has
created programmes for advanced nuclear medicine,
including the increased safety of the use of radiation
in the medical arena. We have also taken initiatives to
encourage and educate young people in our country
with respect to sciences and nuclear applications. We
also continue to promote the participation of women in
the nuclear sector.
20-30703

11/11/2020

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its continued and strong partnership with the IAEA
through a responsible approach to developing a national
nuclear-energy programme and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. My country appreciates the work of the
IAEA Secretariat and its achievements as indicated in
the 2019 annual report (see A/75/303).
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
for his briefing on the 2019 report of the Agency (see
A/75/303).
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy play a
significant role in the scientific, technological and
socioeconomic advancement of developing countries.
In this context, as enshrined in the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
Statute of the IAEA, nuclear knowledge-sharing and the
transfer of nuclear technology to interested developing
countries are imperative. Based on its Statute, the
IAEA is responsible for assisting its member States in
research on and development and practical application
of nuclear energy for peaceful uses. We reiterate that
one of the main responsibilities of the IAEA is to “foster
the exchange of scientific and technical information on
peaceful uses of atomic energy... [and] [t]o encourage
the exchange and training of scientists and experts in
the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy [among
member States]” (Statute of the IAEA, article III,
paras. 3 and 4).
Iran has made considerable investments in
establishing needed nuclear infrastructure and
achieved significant progress in the civil application of
nuclear science in the electrical, medical, agricultural
and industrial fields. Furthermore, Iran underscores
that safeguards related to verification activities as an
additional IAEA statutory mandate should be carried
out in support of the Agency’s primary responsibility
of promoting the application of nuclear science and
technology throughout the world. In this context, we
emphasize that the design and implementation of
required safeguards must comply with the inalienable
rights of NPT States parties without hampering their
economic or technological development.
Along the same lines, efforts to enhance the
implementation of safeguards need to ensure that these
inalienable rights and the national sovereignty of NPT
States parties are respected. In this context, concerns

A/75/PV.23

related to nuclear proliferation should not in any way
restrict these rights. Accordingly, one cannot but reject
the systematic attempts applied under the pretext of
promoting non-proliferation and contrary to the letter
and spirit of the Treaty to restrict the application of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
is considered to be an important achievement of
multilateral diplomacy that enjoys the strong support of
the international community. The unilateral withdrawal
of the United States in May 2018, the reimposition
of illegal sanctions against Iran and the significant
non-performance by the United States of its obligations
under the JCPOA and Security Council resolution 2231
(2015) have effectively impeded the Islamic Republic of
Iran from enjoying its rights enshrined in that Security
Council resolution. It goes without saying that the
responsibility for such mockery of international law lies
with the United States and any other country that aligns
itself with the approach adopted by the United States.
The Agency and the Islamic Republic of Iran are
working closely with each other in different fields. It is
noteworthy that, at the global level, Iran alone receives
22 per cent of the total number of inspections of the IAEA.
Some 432 inspections and 33 complementary accesses
were also conducted in Iran in 2019. Furthermore,
the Agency has been able to carry out its verification
activities in Iran despite the difficult situation caused
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
With this transparency and extensive cooperation, Iran
and the Agency have agreed to work in good faith to
resolve safeguards-related questions. However, within
the framework of the safeguards obligations of States
under the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
the Additional Protocol, the Agency’s impartiality,
independence and professionalism should not be
compromised under any circumstances.
In this context, it is of the utmost importance to
consider the available information on the nuclear
activities of Saudi Arabia. If Saudi Arabia is seeking
a peaceful nuclear programme, it should act in a very
transparent manner and allow the Agency’s inspectors
to verify its activities. Another problem in our region
is caused by the Israeli regime, which, as a non-party
to the NPT, has continuously and adamantly refused
to adhere to the IAEA safeguards. The Agency needs
to take an unbiased and professional approach towards
this regime.

20-307037/31

A/75/PV.23

Mrs. Maitra (India): Today’s debate is an
important occasion to reflect upon the critical role
played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in supporting its member States in their pursuit
of nuclear power in a safe and secure manner, in
highlighting the nuclear applications in various sectors
like food, agriculture, health, water management and
the environment, and in providing technical assistance
to member States.
India congratulates Mr. Rafael Grossi on his
appointment as the Director General of the Agency.
We thank him for the report on Agency’s activities in
2019 (see A/75/303). This report remains an important
publication for understanding the crucial work being
performed by the Agency. We also congratulate Guinea
and Samoa for joining the IAEA membership.
India appreciates the spirit of the Agency in
ensuring business continuity even during tough
lockdown conditions witnessed during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We had the privilege
of hosting four IAEA teams during this period. India
also acknowledges the IAEA’s assistance to member
States for the use of reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction, which came at an important juncture
and helped many countries in addressing the pandemic
crisis. India’s Department of Atomic Energy has also
been actively participating in national and international
efforts to counter, track, study and strategize on the
COVID-19 pandemic impact.
Nuclear power remains an important option for
meeting the challenges of increased energy demand,
address concerns about climate change, redress volatile
fossil fuel prices and ensure security of the energy supply.
I would like to emphasize the need for continuation of
the IAEA’s support for member States embarking on or
expanding their nuclear energy programmes and, most
importantly, support for member States in enhancing
their capacities.
India attaches great importance to the Agency’s
work in different fields of nuclear science. We contribute
regularly to these activities through participation in
technical meetings and coordinated research projects.
We also value our partnership with the IAEA in
capacity-building, through the Agency’s technical
cooperation programme, by seconding experts and
by offering training slots in reputed institutions in
India for experts from member States. Let me take
8/31

11/11/2020

this opportunity to reiterate that India will continue to
provide its support to the Agency’s programmes.
India’s collaboration with the IAEA has continued to
be significant during the last year. We had the privilege
of organizing several international events, technical
meetings, workshops and training programmes together
with the IAEA in this period. We also hosted an
important meeting to address the challenges faced by
member States in using radiation-detection instruments
on determining minimum detectable quantities and
alarm thresholds. I am pleased to share that India
has joined the Agency’s Response and Assistance
Network, which offers assistance to member States to
mitigate the consequences of nuclear or radiological
emergencies. India’s emergency preparedness and
response capabilities will now be available to all partner
countries during an emergency. This is a reflection
of our support for strengthening the international
framework for nuclear and radiological emergency
preparedness and response.
On the domestic front, we have again demonstrated
our commitment to the IAEA by placing three more
facilities under IAEA safeguards since December
2019, taking our total tally of facilities under such
safeguards to 29. Despite the pandemic conditions, we
have also successfully achieved criticality of our first
native pressurized heavy-water reactor, at Kakrapar, on
22 July 2020. This reactor is a forerunner for another
15 reactors.
India has made enormous progress in the utilization
of radiation technologies for the common good of its
people. In the spirit of our own philosophy of Vasudhaiva
Kutumbakam — The World is One Family — we are
eager to share our knowledge and expertise in this area
with every member of the global family. The process has
already set in through increased interactions, expanding
cooperation agreements, and actual collaborations in all
areas where nuclear technologies can make a positive
impact on the quality of human life. We are determined
to take this collaboration to higher levels.
India acknowledges the dynamic role played by the
IAEA in guiding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
in ensuring safety and security and looks forward to the
Agency’s continued and vital support for providing an
atmosphere conducive to the growth of nuclear science
and technology. India has reaffirmed its support for
the work done by the IAEA by co-sponsoring the draft
resolution on this year’s report of the IAEA (A/75/L.9).
20-30703

11/11/2020

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the convening of today’s
debate on the 2019 report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/75/303).
In the international context in which we
find ourselves, it is essential to defend effective
multilateralism, support for the work of the United
Nations, the progressive codification of the rules
of international law and respect for established
standards and agreements. There is no doubt that at
this time, more than ever before, cooperation between
our Organization and the specialized agencies is
indispensable for achieving coherent and robust
responses to current challenges. For these reasons, we
commend the work of the IAEA and its invaluable role
in the machinery that makes up the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime.
It is very difficult to imagine how this regime would
function without the IAEA and its nuclear verification
activities, which are a palpable sign of compliance with
the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as regards the pillars of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and non-proliferation.
It is also a crucial element in the validity of other
contributions to international peace and security, such
as the nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Mexico is fully committed to compliance with
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America and the Caribbean — the Treaty of
Tlatelolco — and to the full implementation of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
will enter into force in January 2021, and will continue
to fight for the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. This framework of
treaties complements and strengthens the nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament regime established
by the NPT and remains its cornerstone.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to the
implementation of all commitments and obligations
under the NPT. While we regret the postponement of
the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
owing to the pandemic, we see this grace period as an
invaluable opportunity to continue dialogue on the full
realization of the NPT’s three pillars: disarmament,
non-proliferation and the use of nuclear energy for
exclusively peaceful purposes, under the surveillance
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

A/75/PV.23

We have taken due note of the report on the Agency’s
activities in 2019 and are pleased to acknowledge the
very fruitful efforts of the IAEA Secretariat, as well
as those of the sixty-third General Conference, which I
had the honour to chair, and which adopted resolutions
on nuclear and radiological safety, nuclear security,
the implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement
between the Agency and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the application of the Agency’s
safeguards in the Middle East, among other aspects
of great relevance to the work of the United Nations
General Assembly and Security Council.
We welcome the appointment of Rafael Mariano
Grossi as the new Director General of the Agency,
the first Latin American to hold that position. I
reiterate Mexico’s great satisfaction at having such an
experienced and capable diplomat as Director General
Grossi at the head of the organization, as the adoption
of draft resolution A/75/L.9 by the General Assembly
today coincides with his arrival at the Director
General’s Office.
Similarly, it is very fitting that the General
Assembly should reaffirm the support warranted by
the role of the IAEA in promoting development. The
practical application of nuclear science and technology
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development encompasses
a broad thematic agenda, from safeguarding human
health to combating insect pests and climate change.
In the case of my country, Mexico, technical
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency has benefited its people in many ways,
especially with regard to programmes for treating
cancer, eradicating dengue and methods for improving
agriculture, as well as programmes focused on the safety
of nuclear facilities and materials within the country.
The importance of the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme, through which projects to
address such problems are implemented, as well as of the
Agency itself, has been made abundantly clear in 2020,
thanks to the leadership of Director General Grossi
and his ability to promptly respond to the coronavirus
disease pandemic in providing solutions and support
for the countries in greatest need, in coordination with
the World Health Organization.
Preserving the “Atoms for peace and development”
initiative has paid off. We must continue to support and
strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency

20-307039/31

A/75/PV.23

in all its activities, which are linked to the goals of
the United Nations system. The work of the IAEA
demonstrates the importance of multilateral agencies
as the appropriate tool for providing solutions to
global problems.
We reiterate that a safer and more peaceful world
must be based on international law, cooperation and
solidarity. We hope that all Members of the United
Nations are committed to this goal.
Mr. Lim (Singapore): Singapore is pleased to
continue its co-sponsorship of this year’s draft resolution
A/75/L.9, entitled “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA)”. We commend IAEA Director
General Rafael Grossi for his efforts to continue the
Agency’s important work in safeguards verification,
capacity-building and providing assistance for
Member States, despite the challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease.
The IAEA plays a central role in maintaining
nuclear safety and security and ensuring that nuclear
material is not diverted to non-peaceful uses. Its
technical competence, professionalism and impartiality
have earned the Agency a high degree of trust from
Member States. Singapore will continue to fully
support the Director General and the IAEA’s work in
these areas.
Allow me to make three brief points.
First, as new technologies emerge, such as for
transportable nuclear power plants, small and mediumsized or modular reactors and advanced nuclear power
reactors, the IAEA must be well positioned to help
Member States take advantage of those technologies
for development, while implementing high standards of
nuclear safety and security. It is also essential for States
parties to fulfil their obligations under international
legal instruments, such as the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and the amended Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material to ensure the safe,
secure and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Secondly, as the sole competent authority
responsible for verifying States’ fulfilment of their
safeguards obligations, the IAEA’s work is a critical
pillar for international confidence that nuclear material
is used for peaceful applications. We commend the
IAEA’s efforts in finding alternative ways to continue
conducting safeguards verification effectively, even
during the pandemic.
10/31

11/11/2020

Thirdly, technical cooperation remains an integral
part of the IAEA’s work. Despite the pandemic, the
IAEA has continued to assist Member States, including
in building valuable capacities to detect viral pathogens.
The Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action initiative,
which focuses on the early detection of zoonotic disease
pathogens, will add to those efforts.
Singapore will continue to play an active and
constructive role to support the Agency. We look
forward to continuing our strong cooperation with
the Agency, including by renewing Singapore’s thirdcountry training programme with the IAEA. We thank
the IAEA for its continued support to strengthen the
capabilities of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to handle radiation and nuclear
technologies and their associated materials and
activities in a safe and secure manner. We look forward
to furthering our collaboration through the ASEANIAEA practical arrangements, which were concluded
last year.
Above all, Singapore will continue to work with all
Member States to build a culture of trust, collaboration
and open dialogue towards a safer, more secure and
better future for all.
Ms. Tiwet (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
would like to express its appreciation to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, for his annual
statement on the sixty-fourth report (see A/75/303) of
the IAEA.
Malaysia notes with appreciation the Agency’s
activities in various areas highlighted in the report,
despite the challenging circumstances caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Malaysia reaffirms its
continued support for the IAEA’s mandated role to
promote the safe, secure and peaceful uses of nuclear
technology. Malaysia strongly believes in the balanced
and effective implementation of the three pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons —
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In this regard, Malaysia recognizes the
indispensable role of the IAEA in promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology. We
also recognize the Agency as the sole competent
authority mandated to verify the compliance of States
with safeguards obligations.
20-30703

11/11/2020

Malaysia welcomes draft resolution A/75/L.9 on
the report of the IAEA, as it reaffirms the importance
of supporting the Agency in its role in the development
and application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
Malaysia is pleased to serve as a current member of
the Board of Governors of the IAEA. Cooperation
between Malaysia and the IAEA in various areas has
been fruitful and encouraging.
We reiterate our commitment to building further
cooperation with the IAEA, other States and interested
partners towards realizing our mutual goals and
interests. Malaysia hopes that the IAEA will continue
to play its important role in facilitating access to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy and technology for
States, while ensuring that the highest levels of nuclear
safety, security and safeguards are observed.
On that note, Malaysia is pleased to co-sponsor
draft resolution A/75/L.9 on the report of the IAEA. We
reiterate once again our strong support for the Agency
and its mandated activities.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to thank Director General Rafael Mariano
Grossi for his comprehensive presentation of the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(see A/75/303), as well as the delegation of Canada for
presenting draft resolution A/75/L.9, co-sponsored by
Argentina, through which the General Assembly will
adopt the report.
Argentina recently celebrated the seventieth
anniversary of its first nuclear activities. Over the past
seven decades, the country has developed a nuclear
programme mastering the various steps of the nuclear
fuel cycle, while establishing itself as a reliable exporter
that, in the framework of its State policy on nuclear
energy and its applications, invests in the research,
development and innovation of nuclear technology for
peaceful uses.
We welcome the professionalism with which the
Agency’s secretariat, inspectors and the entire staff
under the leadership of Director General Rafael Mariano
Grossi, have carried out their duties in the face of the
current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
That commitment has enabled the Agency to continue
to fulfil its main statutory responsibilities, despite the
difficulties caused by the circumstances. At the same
time, we can be thankful to the IAEA for providing
assistance in the area of equipment and protection kits
for the rapid detection of COVID-19. Such assistance

A/75/PV.23

has contributed significantly to strengthening national
capacities to respond to the current pandemic affecting
us all.
The Agency plays a fundamental role in promoting
the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, which is one
of the paths that Argentina has chosen to advance its
national scientific and technological development.
Nuclear energy is crucial to achieving a future of
sustainability and energy security and the work of
the IAEA in that regard should be recognized and
appreciated by the international community. With a
range of technological and nuclear energy projects
under way, my country aspires to be a relevant actor in
that process.
Our nuclear sector attaches vital importance to
the implementation of the international safeguards
system. The effectiveness of the IAEA’s verification
system for nuclear activities is essential to preventing
nuclear proliferation and is a central pillar on
which the international community has worked for
decades to prevent the misuse of nuclear materials
and technologies. We reiterate the importance of
ensuring that safeguards implementation activities are
efficient, effective and technically sound, thereby also
ensuring their non-discriminatory nature. Similarly,
the Argentine Republic insists on the need for the
safeguards regime and its guarantees to be developed
in a climate of cooperation and dialogue.
We emphasize the importance of the quadripartite
agreement that Argentina has with the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Brazilian-Argentine Agency
for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials
(ABACC), which will celebrate the thirtieth anniversary
of its establishment in 2021. Argentina once again
highlights the constructive role and significance of
ABACC and the bilateral inspection system, both in
the implementation of safeguards and in building trust
with Brazil in that area in the current context of the
pandemic, Argentina congratulates ABACC for the
additional effort made to comply with the inspections
regime and the level of cooperation achieved between
ABACC and the IAEA.
Argentina’s commitment to the highest standards
of nuclear safety continues to be one of the pillars of its
nuclear policy, and the Nuclear Regulatory Authority
is the independent technical and regulatory body
designated by law to monitor such activities, including
the proper inspection of the construction of nuclear

20-3070311/31

A/75/PV.23

reactors. Argentina seeks to continue the expansion of
its fleet of nuclear power plants, while complying with
the highest safety standards and the principles of the
Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety and is working
towards hosting an Integrated Regulatory Review
Service mission in 2021.
The Argentine nuclear sector continues to work
towards the seventh review meeting of the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,
and the eighth review meeting of the contracting
parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, both of
which have been rescheduled for 2021. The Argentine
Republic reiterates once again its support for the
central role that the Agency plays in strengthening the
nuclear security framework at the global level and the
guidelines provided in the ministerial declaration at
the International Conference on Nuclear Security, held
in February.
We acknowledge the importance of the entry into
force of the Amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the review
process under way, which will lead up to the 2021
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We emphasize
that nuclear security falls under the sovereign power
of each State. On that basis, we support the need to
harmonize binding and non-binding measures in
order to move forward in a harmonious, gradual and
permanent manner.
Argentina believes that international cooperation is
essential to expand the benefits of nuclear energy and
its peaceful applications and that it is key to achieving
development goals for the benefit of the people. In that
regard, Argentina actively participates in and aspires
to become a focal point for training activities in the
region. Our country frequently hosts training, education
and human resources development activities related to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the auspices of
the IAEA.
We will continue to work and contribute resources
to the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme,
to which we provide our experience and training
and capacity-building facilities. They have already
benefited technicians and professionals from our region
and other parts of the world. Accordingly, we welcome
the renewal of the Regional Cooperation Agreement for
the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in
12/31

11/11/2020

Latin America and the Caribbean, which has proven to
be a valuable instrument for improving the quality of
life of the countries of the region.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the submission of the 2019 annual
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/75/303) and draft resolution A/75/L.9.
Out the outset, we acknowledge the work of
the Agency in support of its States members in
confronting the challenges related to the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We highlight the leadership and
organizational resilience demonstrated by the Agency’s
technical secretariat in the midst of the pandemic. Cuba
also recognizes and supports its important work and
contribution to peace and sustainable development.
The implementation of the IAEA safeguards
verification system is essential in the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, including by verifying the peaceful nature
of nuclear energy programmes. The IAEA ensures the
promotion of the development and use of nuclear energy
and its applications for peaceful purposes to the benefit
of humankind, particularly in priority areas such as
health care, food security, environmental protection
and water resource management, which is especially
important for developing countries.
Cuba attaches particular importance to the
development of nuclear applications, the technical
cooperation of the IAEA and technology transfer to
developing countries. In that regard, it is essential that
the Agency’s efforts be prioritized and redoubled so as
to increase the resources of the Technical Cooperation
Programme, with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as its main focus.
Cuba is proud to hold the presidency of the
Regional Cooperation Agreement for the Promotion
of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America
and the Caribbean (ARCAL) for the term ending in
2021. As such, we are demonstrating our commitment
to continue working to strengthen existing cooperation
ties, create new alliances and work towards the
development of nuclear applications for peaceful use
in our region. Under our presidency, 15 countries have
deposited their instrument of acceptance to the second
ARCAL extension agreement for the period from 2020
to 2025, which ratifies the sustained commitment of
Latin America and the Caribbean to the Convention.
20-30703

11/11/2020

We will continue to support the inalienable right of
all States to develop the research, production and use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without any
form of discrimination or conditions. We demand the
immediate abolition of all limitations and restriction on
exports to developing countries of materials, equipment
and technologies for peaceful nuclear activities.
The IAEA is the framework for the adoption of
international nuclear-security standards, which must
be the result of multilateral, transparent and inclusive
negotiations, with the participation of all States. We
reiterate that the effective management of nuclear
security does not allow for exclusion or selectivity. The
entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material must
lead to the enhanced protection of nuclear facilities
and materials and facilitate cooperation among States
to prevent and combat crimes involving the use of
radioactive and nuclear materials.
Mr. Kpayedo (Togo), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
We reiterate that nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing and that the
only guarantee against the use of nuclear weapons is
their total elimination in an irreversible, transparent and
verified manner. We once again stress the importance of
the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East,
and we support the Conference on the Establishment of
a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction in the Middle East.
We reject the decision by the United States
Government to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and to reimpose unilateral sanctions
on Iran. That decision is unjustified, contrary to
international law and in violation of the rules of
coexistence among States and — by distancing us from
the objective of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East — could therefore have serious
consequences for stability and security.
Mr. Braquetti (Monaco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi for his presentation of the sixty-fourth report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(see A/75/303) and commend him on his work and
leadership in a year marked by challenges and severe
constraints. The Principality of Monaco reiterates its
full confidence in the Director General’s continuation

A/75/PV.23

of his work, which promises to be no less challenging
in the months and years ahead.
The presentation by the Director General highlighted
the benefits that the entire international community
reaps from the shared development of the peaceful uses
of nuclear technology. He recalled that the development
and application of that technology represent the success
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). The development of civil nuclear
cooperation is indeed one of the fundamental objectives
of the NPT, in accordance with its article IV.
Thanks to those efforts, the international
community recognizes the major role played by nuclear
technologies in the service of human development
and pursuing the Sustainable Development Goals. In
many areas, that technology will play a decisive role
in improving the well-being of the greatest number of
people and Monaco attaches particular importance to
health care and environmental protection, which are
areas of concern to us all and of great consequence.
With regard to the medical field, the added value
of nuclear technologies is undeniable and should
play a primary role in the field of medicine of the
future. Such techniques already play a major role in
the treatment and diagnosis of many diseases. In the
future, they will allow us to perform examinations and
respond with innovative and personalized follow-up
treatments, use new approaches involving diagnoses
paired with targeted radionuclide therapies and adapt
certain treatments according to the radiosensitivity of
the individual patient.
Convinced of the added value of such technologies,
the Principality launched a new medical service last
September that takes advantage of what we call “full
digital care”, thanks to a new nuclear cardiology
unit and two of the latest-model PET scanners with
unparalleled imaging capability. Monaco has also
historically supported the IAEA Programme of Action
for Cancer Therapy, which it will continue to fund.
The IAEA is demonstrating the importance of its
work and its expertise is essential for supporting the
development of that kind of personalized and individual
medical treatment.
It is also imperative that we recall here our
commitments with regard to the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. Accordingly, nuclear applications
are playing a major role in monitoring climate change
and human societies’ adaptation to the latter, thanks

20-3070313/31

A/75/PV.23

in particular to new agricultural and hydrological
technologies. Expectations run high in those areas.
At the IAEA Environmental Laboratories, which
Monaco hosts on its soil, researchers are using nuclear
and isotopic technologies to study how climate change
affects the environment — in the oceans, in fresh water,
in the mountains and at sea level — gather data on its
impact and identify the sources of contamination and of
the emission of greenhouse gases. Those data can and
must enable leaders to make science-based decisions
with a view towards mitigating and adapting to the
effects of climate change. We are particularly proud
today of the appointment of Mrs. Florence DescroixComanducci, a Monegasque national, as the Director of
the Environmental Laboratories.
To site just one example of a priority area for the
Principality, on 8 June — World Oceans Day — the
IAEA published a new study showing a dizzying spike
in microplastic pollution in the tropical eastern Pacific
Ocean, which provided crucial data for understanding
future ocean scenarios. Such studies can help political
decision-makers to implement a suitable solution.
Almost a hundred years ago, Marie Curie, double
Nobel laureate in chemistry and physics and pioneer in
the study of the atom, said,
“Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be
understood. Now is the time to understand more so
that we may fear less”.
Science is our ally. It is a weapon against scepticism
and disinformation. It is the ladder that enables us to
understand the scale of events. It is a framework and
guide leading us to appropriate and sustainable actions.
It provides us with solutions. Let us therefore support
and use science.

11/11/2020

the pandemic. We appreciate the provision of reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction equipment by
the IAEA to increase the testing capacity in Indonesia.
We also welcome the launching of the Zoonotic Disease
Integrated Action initiative to strengthen global
preparedness and capabilities to detect and respond to
future pandemics.
Indonesia appreciates the Agency’s continuous
efforts to provide the necessary support for Member
States in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We encourage the Agency to pursue its programme of
work in a balanced manner, with a view to meeting the
needs of Member States and ensuring its contribution
to the development of nuclear science and technology to
support socioeconomic development. Indonesia is of the
view that nuclear security efforts must be pursued in a
comprehensive manner. Measures to strengthen nuclear
security must not hamper international cooperation in
the area of peaceful nuclear activities or undermine
the established priorities of the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme.
Indonesia is committed to continue developing
and strengthening its nuclear security infrastructure.
In cooperation with the Agency’s Integrated Nuclear
Security Support Plan, we continue to strengthen our
national capacity and enhance security in our nuclear and
radiation facilities. Our national detection capabilities
are being enhanced through the installation of radiation
portal monitors and the radiation monitoring system at
Indonesia’s entry points and borders.

Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to thank Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his statement and the Agency’s
2019 comprehensive annual report (see A/75/303).

Furthermore, as a State party to the International
Convention on Nuclear Safety, Indonesia is committed
to maintaining a high level of safety by establishing
fundamental safety principles in the operation of our
research reactors. Indonesia also remains committed
to further strengthening the implementation of IAEA
safeguard standards, including through the Asia-Pacific
Safeguards Network of which Indonesia is currently
the Chair.

Indonesia takes note of the developments and
activities of the Agency during the reporting period.
In this difficult time, we commend the IAEA for
continuing its work, while contributing to the global
efforts to fight against the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We welcome the Agency’s assistance to
Member States, including Indonesia, in strengthening
the capacity of their national laboratories to respond to

Indonesia welcomes the Agency’s work and
contribution to the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals, including through its Technical
Cooperation Programme. We are working closely with
the Agency, not only as a beneficiary but also as a
provider of technical cooperation to other members. The
signing of a practical arrangement in 2018 has provided
a framework for Indonesia and the IAEA to further

14/31

20-30703

11/11/2020

strengthen and enhance technical cooperation among
developing countries and South-South cooperation.
Indonesia has been working closely with the IAEA
to promote the use of nuclear science and technology for
development. In the agricultural sector, the application
of nuclear technology has played an important role in
strengthening our national food security, including by
increasing the production of rice and soybean.
In the health sector, Indonesia has been collaborating
with the Agency in the development of cancer therapy
and radiopharmaceuticals. Since 2010, the Agency has
sent integrated missions of the Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy to Indonesia to improve the diagnosis
and treatment of cancer through nuclear technology.
We have successfully produced radiopharmaceuticals
for bone pain, palliative care for cancer patients and the
diagnosis and therapy of neuroblastoma.
Indonesia also supports the application of nuclear
technology to address environmental problems. We
welcome the Agency’s initiative to collectively address
global plastic pollution through the Nuclear Technology
for Controlling Plastic Pollution programme.
Finally, we welcome draft resolution A/75/L.9 on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
which, inter alia, takes notes of the decisions and
resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the
IAEA at its sixty-fourth regular session. Indonesia is
pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution and supports
its adoption by consensus.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Indonesia’s strong
commitment to supporting the work of the IAEA. We
look forward to further strengthening cooperation with
the Agency to promote the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I wish to express
South Africa’s sincere appreciation to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Ambassador Rafael Grossi, for his detailed
presentation of the Agency’s 2019 report (see A/75/303)
and for providing valuable updates on the Agency’s
activities in 2020.
South Africa reaffirms its strong support for the
IAEA and we underscore the fundamental importance
of the Agency’s mission and mandate. We are
particularly pleased with the Agency’s work in the
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, sciences
and technology, through its Technical Cooperation

A/75/PV.23

Programme. We note that there has been a significant
increase in member States’ requests for support
from the Agency in that important area, through
which it addresses socioeconomic development and
contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
That has played a particularly positive role on
the African continent. IAEA programmes in African
countries have assisted member States in a wide range
of critical areas, including food safety and security,
by improving and sustaining healthy crops and animal
health; improving human health by supporting cancer
control; fighting insect-borne threats such as malaria;
and improving water management.
A key area of growth on the African continent is
also nuclear energy. Here, we have noted the support
given by the IAEA to several African countries that
have decided to embark on the path to introduce nuclear
energy. In that regard, the Agency has provided support
for the establishment of nuclear infrastructure and
capabilities for nuclear power plants, including training
and capacity-building in crucial areas of nuclear safety
and security.
In South Africa, we also continue to benefit from the
support provided by the Agency. One of the highlights
is the establishment of Africa’s first Vector Mosquito
Rearing Facility in our national health laboratories.
That facility will use the Agency’s successful sterile
insect technique, targeting mosquitoes with the aim of
eliminating malaria within our borders by 2023. Another
area of support for South Africa is in preparing Africa’s
only working nuclear power plant — the Koeberg power
station, located near Cape Town — for its long-term
operation. The Agency will also support South Africa
in preparing to build further nuclear power plants as
part of our energy plan for the next decade.
We congratulate the IAEA on its assistance to
member States in all parts of the world in dealing with
the coronavirus disease. The Agency provided member
States with equipment, materials and capacity-building
for the rapid detection and diagnosis of the virus. In
that regard, we note that support has been provided to
126 member States, which translates into support for
281 laboratories and institutions. That support was
mainly provided by using the Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory Network, established nearly a decade ago
to enhance States’ capacity to detect and diagnose
zoonotic diseases. The above examples illustrate in

20-3070315/31

A/75/PV.23

a concrete manner the meaning of the IAEA’s motto,
“Atoms for Peace and Development”. That mandate is
derived directly from the third pillar of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
guarantees access to and the full and peaceful use of
nuclear energy and technology for the advancement
of humankind.
South Africa remains the only country in the
world to voluntarily dismantle its highly developed
domestic nuclear weapons programme. In that regard,
the IAEA verified the dismantlement of the weapons
that South Africa had developed. Since then, the
IAEA has consistently verified the peaceful nature of
South Africa’s current nuclear programme. We have
consistently received broader conclusions in support of
our full compliance with our legal obligations.
We believe that the safeguards system should
continuously be strengthened and support the
universalization of the Additional Protocol and the
strengthening of the small quantities protocol, as
decided by the Board of Governors of the IAEA. We
are concerned that some member States are developing
increasingly advanced nuclear programmes, without
upgrading the safeguards regimes. In our view, a
strong safeguards regime will also contribute to
making progress towards nuclear disarmament because
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing.
We further call on all those members of the IAEA
that are outside the NPT to join without delay and
upgrade their safeguards agreements. That will build
confidence in the nature of their respective nuclear
programmes, thereby contributing to global peace
and security.
In conclusion, my delegation supports draft
resolution A/75/L.9, introduced by Canada. We are
pleased that it reaffirms the General Assembly’s
strong support for the indispensable role of the Agency
in encouraging and assisting the development and
practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses
in technology transfer to developing countries and in
nuclear safety, verification and security. South Africa
will also join as a co-sponsor of the resolution.
Mr. Namazu (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing our highest respect to Director General
Grossi for his strong leadership in guiding the agency
in exercising its full authority, while combating the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
16/31

11/11/2020

The peaceful uses of nuclear energy are an
important cornerstone for global socioeconomic
growth and contribute to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Japan therefore
continues to support the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), technically, financially and with
its personnel, through contributions to the Peaceful
Uses Initiative and cooperation projects. In particular,
Japan strongly supports the Director General’s new
initiatives, including the improvement of member
States’ capabilities to defeat COVID-19.
IAEA safeguards are the fundamental instrument
for ensuring nuclear non-proliferation. Japan strongly
supports the work of the IAEA to make the safeguards
more efficient and effective. Japan also welcomes the
IAEA secretariat’s efforts to continue its safeguards
activities. The role of the IAEA is critically important in
addressing the key problems faced by the international
non-proliferation regime. Moreover, Japan will continue
to advance nuclear security worldwide in cooperation
with the IAEA.
As no single State can ensure global nuclear security,
Japan stresses the important role of legal frameworks,
such as the Amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and
the International Convention on the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. Japan continues to make efforts
to promote the universalization of those Conventions,
including through contributions to the 2021 CPPNM
Review Conference.
I would like to take this opportunity to touch on
some of the most pressing issues facing the international
non-proliferation regime today. With regard to North
Korea’s nuclear issue, Japan is deeply concerned about
North Korea’s continued development of nuclear and
ballistic missile capabilities.
Japan reaffirms its strong commitment to working
with the international community to achieve the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement
of all of North Korea’s nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles of all
ranges, as well as related programmes and facilities, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Japan also emphasizes the critical importance for all
Member States to fully implement relevant Security
Council resolutions.
As a continued supporter of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), Japan is deeply concerned about
20-30703

11/11/2020

the measures being taken by Iran that may undermine
the JCPOA. Japan strongly urges Iran to comply with,
and immediately return to its commitments under, the
JCPOA. Japan calls upon Iran to fully cooperate with
the IAEA, in accordance with all its nuclear obligations.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which serves as the
cornerstone of the international regime for nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. The postponement of the tenth
NPT Review Conference by no means undermines the
urgency of the issues regarding nuclear weapons. Japan
continues to strive to achieve a meaningful outcome of
the tenth Review Conference.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, on behalf
of my Government, Japan’s firm commitment to
continue to provide its maximum support for the IAEA
to further promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Ambassador Rafael Grossi, for his briefing
and work as the first Latin American at the helm of the
IAEA, in 2020 — a year that has been upended by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
I would also like to thank Canada for introducing
draft resolution A/75/L.9 and congratulate it on its
election as Chair of the Agency’s Board of Governors.
Ecuador co-sponsored the draft resolution as
another sign of our country’s commitment to the IAEA
and its efforts to ensure the use of nuclear energy for
exclusively peaceful purposes and non-proliferation, in
line with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. We hope that the Review Conference will be
held in August 2021.
As a result, in our joint statement with Malaysia
and 15 other countries on 22 May to mark the fiftieth
anniversary of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, we recalled
the effective role of the IAEA in the implementation
of the Treaty. Today, we also recall the importance
of continuing efforts relating to disarmament and
the elimination of nuclear weapons as we are deeply
concerned about their catastrophic humanitarian
consequences. The mere existence of such weapons is a
threat to the survival of humankind.

A/75/PV.23

Ecuador values and supports the right of all States
to employ nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The IAEA report (see A/75/303) mentions Ecuador
as it addresses the organization’s efforts relating to
the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy and to
non-destructive testing methods, which are critical for
ensuring the structural integrity of buildings, especially
after natural disasters.
In this first year of the Decade of Action, we stress
the importance of the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
As a primary producer of tropical fruits, Ecuador has
successfully employed nuclear techniques, with the
assistance of the IAEA and in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
in order to add non-traditional fruits to its exports by
controlling specific insect pests with environmentally
friendly methods, such as the sterile insect technique.
More recently, I would like to highlight the IAEA’s
Technical Cooperation Programme and its valuable
support, inter alia, in providing equipment and kits to
detect COVID-19, as part of global and national efforts
to address and control the spread of the virus.
Lastly, I would like to end my statement by
reiterating my country’s full and unwavering support
for the work of the IAEA, which it helped to establish
and which is proving to be ever more crucial to peace
and security and sustainable development.
Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate today’s briefing on the report of the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
2019 (see A/75/303). We also congratulate Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi on his work as Director General of the
Agency. El Salvador welcomes the fact that, for the
first time, a representative of the Latin American and
Caribbean region is at the helm of the IAEA.
We would like to underscore our gratitude for the
work conducted in my country in close cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency. We
underscore the important role the Agency plays in
promoting the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear
energy and in enhancing the access of its member
States to nuclear technology.
Given that all Agency efforts seek to establish
mechanisms that enable the provision of assistance
and the sharing of information and good practices in

20-3070317/31

A/75/PV.23

the area of safety and nuclear non-proliferation, my
country strongly believes that in spite of the challenges
to the work of multilateral organizations posed by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, it is
important to continue the momentum towards the
achievement of our common goals.
We therefore welcome the decisions adopted by the
IAEA General Conference at its sixty-fourth session
held in September. We believe that the outcome of this
year’s Conference will strengthen the Agency’s work in
various nuclear applications, technical cooperation and
the effectiveness of the safeguards regime.
We would also like to underscore the leadership of
the Director General and his team in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
My country acknowledges the sovereign right of
countries to exploit and use nuclear technologies for
peaceful means, as established in article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We reiterate our commitment to working to achieve
general and complete disarmament as the only way to
ensure international peace, security and stability. We
must continue to promote the use of nuclear science
and technology exclusively for peaceful purposes so
as to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
contribute to sustainable development and global peace.
We welcome the Zoonotic Disease Integrated
Action initiative of the Director General to strengthen
our countries’ capacities to address in a timely way the
threats posed by outbreaks of zoonotic diseases. We
also welcome the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship
Programme, which will help train women in the area
of nuclear science and technology. That programme
is being promoted by the relevant authorities in El
Salvador and we hope that some of our fellow citizens
will benefit from it.
The Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme
is a key factor in the economic and social development
of El Salvador. That is why we signed in 2019 the
Second Country Programme Framework for the
period 2019-2023, which focuses on human health
and nutrition, radiation safety, food and agriculture,
water and environment, and energy. We also made it
known that El Salvador endorsed the second extension
agreement of the Regional Cooperation Agreement
for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology
in Latin America and the Caribbean, which helped
18/31

11/11/2020

strengthen regional capabilities in the area of nuclear
science and technology.
In particular, we would like to reiterate our
gratitude to the Director General and the Agency for
assisting us with reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction kits as part of the COVID-19 pandemic
response, thanks to the generosity of a group of
countries and their valuable contributions to the project.
That highlights the importance of countries working in
tandem with the IAEA so that nuclear energy can be
exploited in addressing such priorities as the coverage
and quality of health care, food production and supply,
the effective prevention and reduction of the negative
impacts of climate change and the mitigation of natural
disasters — all of which would help us achieve genuine
sustainable human development.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate our call to work to ensure
that nuclear energy is used exclusively for peaceful
purposes. In that regard, nuclear energy is a tool to help
us attain the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its Sustainable Development Goals and prevent the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would
arise from the use of nuclear weapons.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): At the outset, let me join
others in congratulating Mr. Grossi on his election and
for his briefing on the report (see A/75/303).
Lithuania fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to make the
following points. Lithuania remains committed to and
supports global efforts to strengthen nuclear safety,
security and non-proliferation worldwide. We have
always encouraged countries embarking on nuclear
power programmes to proceed in a safe, secure and
sustainable way, with the utmost responsibility to cover
all stages of the life cycle of nuclear installations — from
the proper selection and assessment of sites to the
decommissioning and final management of spent fuel
and all radioactive waste.
In that regard, Lithuania strongly condemns the
irresponsible decision of our direct neighbour Belarus
in implementing the nuclear power plant project in
the immediate proximity of Vilnius — the Lithuanian
capital and by far its largest city — without the proper
evaluation of population distribution and density and
without conducting the proper consultative process.
20-30703

11/11/2020

While embarking on its first nuclear power plant
project, Belarus has violated the Convention on
Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary
Context (Espoo Convention) and the Convention
on Access to Information, Public Participation
in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in
Environmental Matters (Aarhus Convention). It
has failed to comply with international obligations
with regard to environment impact assessment in a
transboundary context and public rights in governmental
decision-making processes.
Furthermore, International Atomic Energy Agency’s
(IAEA) review missions have identified numerous
recommendations for strengthening nuclear safety
and provided advice on their timely implementation.
The stress-test exercise, led by the European Nuclear
Safety Regulators Group, has also provided a number
of recommendations, which are direct lessons drawn
from past nuclear accidents. Unfortunately, Belarus has
failed to implement those recommendations.
Incidents that occurred during the construction
phase were unreported or denied and confirmed
by authorities only after public and international
pressure. The situation was further aggravated when,
on 3 November, Belarus connected the first of the
two units of the nuclear power plant to the grid and
produced electricity despite unresolved nuclear safety
issues. Those actions pose an unacceptable threat to
national security, the environment and the public health
of Belarus and neighbouring countries.
In the presence of the whole United Nations family,
we again urge Belarus to suspend the launch of the
nuclear power plant and implement without delay all
the recommendations of international experts, while
ensuring compliance with the highest international
environmental and nuclear safety standards.
Lithuania considers the International Atomic
Energy Agency to be the key nuclear safety guardian,
setting standards and providing valuable expertise to its
members. However, we observe with regret the faulty
practices of Belarus — misusing the IAEA brand and
its review services for manipulative communication
with the public and adopting a rhetorical and selective
approach towards nuclear safety.
We believe that such behaviour undermines
public support for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Therefore, we are convinced that the role of the
Agency in ensuring nuclear safety worldwide should

A/75/PV.23

be strengthened, along with Agency standards and
the use of Agency services, in order to ensure a more
binding character.
Mr. Baek (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea remains a firm supporter of the mandate of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
accelerate and enlarge the contributions of atomic
energy to peace, health and prosperity. We welcome
the IAEA annual report for 2019 (A/75/303), which
illustrates how the Agency contributes to the work
of the United Nations in providing solutions to
global challenges.
We take note of the Agency’s proactive efforts
to contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals through nuclear technology. We
welcome the notable achievements in the field of nuclear
power and the renovation of the Nuclear Applications
Laboratories in Seibersdorf. As a donor country, we
look forward to productive plans for the next phase.
With regard to radiation and nuclear safety, the
Republic of Korea attaches great importance to the
Agency’s role in ensuring a robust and agile safety
framework, whose importance was highlighted
by the difficult circumstances caused by the
coronavirus disease.
Turning now to safety conventions, it is vital
to adopt the highest standards of safety in order to
protect human health and the environment. We urge
all Member States that have not done so to join the
Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.
As a party to those conventions, we are adopting
new technologies to enhance the safety of nuclear
power plants, for example by developing advanced
reactors with a passive safety system and accidenttolerant fuels to prevent severe accidents. We are also
working to incorporate artificial intelligence and big
data technologies into the nuclear industry that go
beyond conventional concepts of nuclear safety.
On nuclear security, we underline the central role
of the Agency in strengthening the global nuclear
security framework. In that regard, we welcome the
success of the IAEA International Conference on
Nuclear Security 2020 and appreciate its contribution
to encouraging nuclear security efforts. We also
appreciate the Agency’s efforts to promote universal

20-3070319/31

A/75/PV.23

adherence to the Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and look
forward to further ratifications as we approach the 2021
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We will
continue to contribute to the Nuclear Security Fund to
support the diverse activities of the IAEA.
With regard to nuclear verification, this year marks
the fifth anniversary of the entry into force of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
For five decades, the IAEA safeguards system has
underpinned the non-proliferation regime by providing
credible assurances on the peaceful nature of nuclear
activities. We will continue to provide strong support to
the IAEA’s verification work worldwide, including by
contributing to the Safeguards Member State Support
Programme. In light of the importance of the Treaty,
the Republic of Korea will contribute to making the
NPT Review Conference next year a success.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to commend the IAEA for its thorough, professional
and impartial monitoring and verification of Iran’s
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments.
We also extend our support to the IAEA in its
ongoing efforts to maintain and enhance its readiness
to play an essential role in verifying the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme, in
accordance with its mandate, if a political agreement is
reached among the relevant parties.
With the above remarks, the Republic of Korea
takes note of the annual report for 2019, reiterates its
steadfast support for the IAEA and its mandate and
is pleased to join the other co-sponsors of the draft
resolution on the report of the IAEA (A/75/L.9).
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We join others in thanking
the Director-General Grossi of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his presentation of
the annual report (see A/75/303). We also co-sponsored
the relevant draft resolution presented by Canada
(A/75/L.9).
Ukraine applauds the IAEA’s swift reaction to the
challenge of the coronavirus disease, as seen by the
launch of the ambitious technical cooperation project
during the early stages of the pandemic. We recognize
the Agency’s prominent role in addressing the
challenge by providing extensive and effective support
to more than 120 countries and territories. We also
20/31

11/11/2020

wish to mention the extrabudgetary and other voluntary
contributions to that end.
Since its establishment in 1961, the IAEA
safeguards system has undergone significant changes
to meet the requirements specified in the Agency’s
statute. To date, the balance between conceptual
development and practical safeguards implementation
has been achieved with the help of a State-level concept.
From our own experience, Ukraine is confident that
the system effectively underpins the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
contributes to international peace and security.
Against that backdrop, we see major implications
for the IAEA safeguards mechanism deriving from
the inability of a certain Member State to meet its
obligations under the NPT.
We must recall here that, for the seventh year in a
row, the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol remain occupied by a nuclear-weapon
State — the Russian Federation. In addition, Russia
is continuing its military aggression in certain areas
of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. As a
result, the occupying Power has made it impossible for
IAEA inspectors to access the locations where nuclear
and radioactive materials are stored, both in Crimea
and Eastern Ukraine.
That is why, in terms of safeguards challenges,
the case of the Russian aggression against Ukraine
inevitably leads to the necessity of reassessing the
qualitative component of the State-level concept in order
to consider the political repercussions. The complexity
of the issue is compounded by the fact that Ukraine has
been invaded by a nuclear-weapon State. Moreover,
the ongoing transformation of Crimea into a huge
military base may indicate the possibility of deploying
nuclear capabilities on the occupied peninsula, thereby
undermining the non-nuclear-weapon status of Ukraine.
To date, based on all technically credible safeguards
information, the Agency has not found any indication
of a proliferation concern in Ukraine, including in the
occupied territories. Still, there are no metrics to help
provide an answer to the question of how effective
the IAEA safeguards are with regard to the nuclear
material located in the occupied territories in Ukraine
or in any other country. What is obvious is that the
deterrence level will remain low until the safeguards
system addresses the vulnerabilities stemming from
the aggressor’s behaviour.
20-30703

11/11/2020

Next year will mark the thirty-fifth anniversary
of the Chernobyl tragedy. As we continue working to
restore the territories affected by the accident and to
decommission the Chernobyl nuclear power plant,
it is imperative for that issue to remain high on the
Agency’s agenda. In that connection, Ukraine reiterates
its interest in continuing constructive cooperation with
the IAEA, both at the national level and in the format
of regional technical cooperation projects. We also note
with appreciation that the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme is keeping pace, in particular by applying
nuclear techniques in the area of human health.
In that regard, Ukraine fully supports efforts to
respond to the growing global cancer crisis by further
developing the Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy. Ukraine has developed a national technical
cooperation project dedicated to tackling paediatric
cancer and is looking forward to fruitful cooperation
with the Agency to that end.
Ukraine is seriously concerned by a number
of recent radioactive incidents with transboundary
implications. In addition to the incident of a release of
ruthenium-106 in 2017 and an undefined radioactive
explosion near the city of Archangelsk in the Russian
Federation in 2019, another case involving the detection
of ruthenium and caesium occurred this year. Those
incidents obviously point to the problem of States’
non-compliance with international nuclear safety
obligations. The international community should not
allow the violator to take any further malicious steps.
There is a clear need and a right time to draw the
relevant conclusions from such events.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Ukraine’s continued
support for the work of the IAEA and our conviction
regarding the important role played by the Agency in
the area of international peace and security.
Mr. Wu Jianjun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi on his
election as the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We thank him for his
report on the work of the Agency (see A/75/303).
Over the past year, the Agency has conducted many
successful initiatives to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and the application of nuclear technology,
safeguard the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime and strengthen global nuclear safety and
security in accordance with its statutory mandate.

A/75/PV.23

During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the Agency, under the leadership of the
Director-General, has been actively assisting Member
States in combating the disease by leveraging the
unique advantages of nuclear energy. China appreciates
all such efforts.
The development of nuclear energy and
the application of nuclear technology are vital
to diversifying energy supplies, protecting the
environment and tackling climate change. They are
also instrumental in ensuring stable energy supplies
and promoting economic recovery in the context of
COVID-19. However, grave challenges remain in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear security
and we cannot afford to overlook the threat of nuclear
terrorism. Much remains to be done on the Agency’s
important and challenging agenda.
The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
will be held next year. Strengthening the Agency’s
work in all its mandated areas will also help bring about
a positive outcome at the Review Conference. In that
regard, China would like to propose the following.
First, in order to promote the inclusive sharing of
nuclear energy benefits, we encourage the Agency to
continue increasing input to support Member States in
their development and application of nuclear energy
and nuclear technology and to provide greater technical
and financial support for developing countries to help
them achieve the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
China also supports the Agency, as mandated, in
applying, as mandated, in contributing positively to
capacity-building for all States, especially developing
countries, in combating COVID-19 by leveraging is
technological advantages. Meanwhile, the international
community should come together to reject the
politicization of international cooperation for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy by certain countries
with the intention of triggering a race among major
States and serving their own geopolitical interests.
Secondly, we must ensure the safe, secure and
peaceful use and development of nuclear energy. The
Agency should continue improving the safeguards
system on the basis of impartiality and objectivity.
The universality of the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and Additional Protocol should be
continuously promoted and the effectiveness and

20-3070321/31

A/75/PV.23

11/11/2020

efficiency of the safeguards system should be further
enhanced. The Agency should also continue to develop
nuclear safety standards and nuclear security guidelines
and should facilitate experience-sharing by relevant
countries in order to strengthen the nuclear safety and
security capacity of all Member States.

This year, the IAEA’s work facilitated the
augmentation of the technical capacities of Member
States to deal with COVID-19. The IAEA’s assistance
package, which contains equipment and materials for a
nuclear-derived technique, has supported the efforts of
the Philippines to address the impacts of the pandemic.

Thirdly, in order to facilitate the political and
diplomatic settlement of hotspot nuclear issues, the
Agency should continue to play a constructive role in
that regard, as mandated, in an impartial and objective
manner. China appreciates the Agency’s efforts in
verifying and monitoring Iran’s implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), as well as
its engagement with Iran to address safeguards issues
through dialogue and cooperation.

As highlighted during the pandemic, one beneficial
application of nuclear energy in medicine and health
is the detection of zoonotic diseases that have
potentially catastrophic impacts on human health and
society. The Philippines supports the IAEA’s Zoonotic
Disease Integrated Action project, which aims to
strengthen capabilities in surveillance, early detection
and intervention against emerging or re-emerging
zoonotic diseases.

The Chinese Government firmly supports the
efforts of the Director-General and the Secretariat in
combating COVID-19 and has pledged, at the earliest
opportunity, a donation of testing equipment and
medical supplies worth $2 million.
By consistently taking a sensible, coordinated and
balanced approach to nuclear security and adhering to
the principle of safety first, China has been actively
promoting the safe and efficient development of
nuclear energy. China is ready to further intensify allround cooperation with the Agency so that the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy can better serve humankind.
We also stand ready to work with the international
community to uphold the vision of a community with a
shared future for humankind, foster greater unity and
cooperation and work tirelessly to deliver on our lofty
joint commitment, namely our “Atoms for Peace and
Development” mandate.
Ms. Ringor (Philippines): The draft resolution
on the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) (A/75/L.9) is fully consistent with the
partnership between the Philippines and the IAEA.
The Philippines commends the Director-General
of the IAEA, Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, who has
worked tirelessly since assuming his post in December
2019, despite the challenges of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We underscore the
indispensable role of the Agency in encouraging and
assisting the development and practical application
of atomic energy for peaceful uses, the transfer of
technology to developing countries and the verification
and maintenance of nuclear safety.
22/31

The Philippines is pleased to play a role in the
IAEA’s COVID-19 response. As the Rapporteur of
the Technical Assistance and Cooperation Committee
in November last year, the Philippines facilitated
the approval of the Agency’s Technical Cooperation
Programme for 2020-2021, which includes a project
dedicated to emergency response. Through its
Technical Cooperation Programme, the IAEA makes
a significant contribution, from a broader perspective,
to the achievement of the key sustainable development
priorities of each country, including relevant
nationally identified targets under the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Philippines expresses its appreciation for the
IAEA’s continued support for its move to establish
a nuclear power programme. The issuance of an
executive order on 24 July this year created our nuclear
energy programme’s inter-agency committee, which
was tasked with studying the adoption of a national
position on a nuclear energy programme in accordance
with pertinent IAEA guidelines and standards.
During the pandemic, the relevance of the IAEA
has become all the more pronounced, given the parallel
and ever-increasing importance of dealing with nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament issues from a
technical and scientific perspective. We recognize the
challenges faced by the Agency, including the steady
increase in the amount of nuclear material in circulation,
the number of nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards
and the continuing pressure on the Agency’s budget.
The Philippines will therefore continue to offer its
full support, wherever it can, for addressing the various
20-30703

11/11/2020

issues confronted by the Agency and pursuing collective
efforts for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I wish to join other
speakers this morning in welcoming the appointment
of Mr. Rafael Mariano Rossi as Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). I
would like to thank him for presenting the report of the
Agency for 2019 (see A/75/303).
We take note of the agency’s continued efforts to
pursue the objectives of accelerating and enlarging the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, medicine and
prosperity throughout the world. We acknowledge the
flexibility of the Agency, as enshrined in its statute,
to address the evolving needs of Member States and
help them achieve their national development goals.
We remember the contribution of the former DirectorGeneral, the late Mr. Yukiya Amano, to the Agency and
its work. Bangladesh considers nuclear energy as a
safe, environmentally friendly and economically viable
source of power generation to meet the increasing
demand for electricity. We believe nuclear energy
unlocks our development potential through enhanced
productivity and sustained growth. However, our
initiative for nuclear power generation is relatively
recent. Our aim is to generate at least 4,000 megawatts
of electricity from nuclear resources by 2030, which
will represent 10 per cent of our total targeted electricity
generation by that time.
We consider nuclear security as a vital subject and
recognize that the right to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy comes with the responsibility to ensure nuclear
safety and security. The IAEA plays a wide-ranging
role in that regard. On the one hand, it has a central role
in ensuring nuclear safety and security globally. On
the other, with its “Atoms for Peace and Development”
mandate, it helps Member States to build capacity
through its Technical Cooperation Programme.
Bangladesh appreciates the IAEA’s assistance in
strengthening local infrastructure and training our
officials. With the support of the IAEA, we are following
the highest Agency standards in constructing the
Rooppur nuclear power plant — the first in the country.
The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Regulatory
Authority has taken a number of steps to strengthen
regulatory infrastructure with regard to safety, security
and safeguards. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina envisions
transforming Bangladesh into a middle-income country
by 2021 and a developed one by 2041. In our journey

A/75/PV.23

forward, we greatly value our partnership with the
IAEA. We concluded the IAEA Safeguards Agreement
in 1982 and its Additional Protocol in 2001.
In 2018, we signed our country programme
framework for 2018-2023 with the Agency, with a focus
on food; agriculture; water, soil and the environment;
human health; nuclear power; nuclear and radiation
safety and security; development of nuclear knowledge;
and industrial applications. Our technical cooperation
projects on improving food security, stress-tolerant
crop varieties and cancer management have proved
immensely beneficial to the lives and livelihood of
our people.
The IAEA has long remained our main partner for
the promotion of safe and secure applications of nuclear
science and technology for peaceful purposes by way
of technical cooperation programmes, including under
the Regional Cooperative Agreement (RCA). We have
received sustained cooperation for developing capacity
in the application of nuclear science and techniques in
sectors such as nuclear infrastructure and research,
livestock, agriculture, health, industry and water
management, inter alia.
In addition, Bangladesh has benefited from the
IAEA’s RCA framework, which continues to promote
regional capabilities and expertise in different thematic
areas, including research reactors and radioactive
waste management, nuclear safety and radiation
protection. We look forward to availing ourselves of
future opportunities in the field of nuclear science and
technology in order to respond to evolving needs and
demands on the ground.
Bangladesh also looks forward to further enhancing
its engagement with the IAEA in the coming days with
a view to collectively enhancing global nuclear security
and safety and promoting the application of nuclear
science and technologies for peaceful purposes. We
consider those objectives to be of utmost importance in
realizing a number of relevant Sustainable Development
Goals, particularly for developing, graduating and least
developed countries.
We wish to thank the IAEA and its secretariat for
its excellent cooperation with Bangladesh and we look
forward to continuing our partnership with the IAEA in
that same cooperative spirit.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I would like to extend the
warm regards of my delegation to the President of the

20-3070323/31

A/75/PV.23

General Assembly and to commend him on his able
leadership of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session during this difficult period of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The delegation of Nigeria has taken note of the
annual report (see A/75/303) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for 2019, as transmitted by the
Secretary-General in his note (A/75/303), for which we
thank him.
My delegation welcomes the introductory remarks
made by Director-General Rafael Grossi on the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We thank
him for his excellent leadership of the Agency during
these difficult times, in particular the introduction of
various flagship programmes since he took office, such
as the remarkable Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship,
which offers scholarships in nuclear science to women
and young girls; the Zoonotic Disease Integrated
Action initiative; and the efficient implementation of
the interregional Technical Cooperation Programme,
through which COVID-19 detection equipment has
been provided to more than 120 Member States,
among others.
The report before us demonstrates the work of
the Agency in all aspects of its mandate. Nigeria
particularly appreciates the value of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy for the socioeconomic development
of countries. Nigeria also notes that, in line with its
mandate and pursuant to article II of its statute, the IAEA
has continued to support Member States, especially in
the developing regions of the world, towards the use
of nuclear energy in a peaceful manner for purposes
related to human health and well-being, such as cancer
control; soil and water management; the detection of
zoonotic diseases through nuclear or nuclear-derived
techniques; and power generation.
My delegation welcomes the promotion of the
annual report detailing the work of the IAEA in
delivering support to Member States through the
Technical Cooperation Programme. We welcome the
efforts of the Director-General aimed at strengthening
the Technical Cooperation Programme itself.
The Agency’s work in the area of nuclear safety
and nuclear security and, equally importantly, in
the area of safeguards and verification, contributes
significantly to international peace. Nigeria supports
those aspects of the Agency’s work and reiterates its
continued support for its Director-General and staff
24/31

11/11/2020

in that regard. Nigeria therefore welcomes the report
and supports the recommended actions therein, and
requests that the Secretary-General continue his efforts
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the IAEA within the framework of the agreement
governing their relationship.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation welcomes the General Assembly’s
consideration of the annual report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/75/303) during
the International Week of Science and Peace. The event,
which takes place during the week of 11 November
every year, has been held around the world for over
three decades to raise awareness of the relationship
between science and technology and the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The IAEA is an excellent example of that
relationship, as the State of Kuwait firmly believes
in the pioneering and pivotal role of the Agency in
promoting and harnessing the peaceful uses of atomic
energy for achieving peace and prosperity, as well
as promoting health. The Agency also contributes
to strengthening the system of nuclear security and
safety and the application of safeguards in all Member
States, pursuant to the motto “Atoms for peace and
development”, and highlighting the interlinkages
between science and technology and the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The State of Kuwait is currently a member of the
IAEA Board of Governors, for the fifth time since joining
the Agency in 1964. As in the past, we will continue to
take advantage of our membership and seek to enhance
the Agency’s technical and professional work in order
to fulfil the aspirations of Member States to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and responding to
international priorities and important issues.
The world is currently grappling with an enemy
that does not recognize history, geography, race or
climate. It is a renewed and transnational enemy that
has no regard for political, economic or social systems.
That enemy constitutes a universal and existential
threat to all humankind. We are gathered here today
in extremely sensitive and dangerous health conditions,
while taking exceptional and unprecedented measures
following the outbreak of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the repercussions of which cast a shadow
over our daily lives.
20-30703

11/11/2020

My delegation, therefore, welcomes the General
Assembly’s decision to hold a special session at the
level of Heads of States and Governments early next
month to confront the pandemic.
The State of Kuwait will continue to support all
initiatives to combat this pandemic and to alleviate its
effects on people’s lives, as we did recently with the
Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action initiative, which is
aimed at strengthening world preparedness to address
pandemics in the future by using nuclear technology.
The State of Kuwait will appropriate some of its
financial contributions to support that initiative.
We have taken due note of the 2019 annual report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which
highlights cooperation between the State of Kuwait
and the Agency in several areas, including the IAEA
Low Enriched Uranium Bank, to which we have
contributed $10 million. We would also like to mention
our contribution to modernize the Yukiya Amano
Laboratories. On the bilateral level, we note the third
Country Programme Framework for 2020-2025, as
well as the practical arrangements signed between the
IAEA and the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research
to support cooperation on environmental monitoring
and protection. The Environment and Life Sciences
Research Center of the Kuwait Institute for Scientific
Research has been designated as a centre of cooperation
with the Agency on the use of nuclear technology and
isotopes to study and advance the marine and coastal
sciences, which bears witness to the scope of the
ongoing cooperation between the State of Kuwait and
the Agency.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) guarantees the right of all States
to produce, develop and use atomic energy for
peaceful purposes. The NPT also seeks to limit the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and totally eliminate
nuclear arsenals. It remains the cornerstone of the
non-proliferation regime and international efforts to
that end. Our world today faces various challenges and
tensions in that regard, but dialogue and the peaceful
resolution of disputes remain the best way to resolve
such challenges.
We therefore call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply with international treaties
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council to
bring about stability and achieve the desired objectives
with regard to the Korean peninsula. We also call on

A/75/PV.23

the Islamic Republic of Iran to fully cooperate with the
IAEA in order to comply with its nuclear commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
with the relevant Security Council resolution 2231
(2015). We also call upon it to ratify and implement the
additional protocol.
The State of Kuwait, like other Arab countries,
underscores its adherence to the goal of creating a
zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, which would have a
direct impact on the stability of the entire region. The
nuclear-weapon-freeze zones that have been established
around the world have always assured Member States
of the non-use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Those zones also provide assurances to all their States
and to the international community of the intention to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The State of Kuwait welcomed the convening of the
first Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East
Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction, which took place last year and was
presided over by the sisterly Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan. We hope to see the second such conference held
next year.
We reiterate the importance of ensuring that Israel
accedes to the NPT, as it is the only State in the region
that is not party to the Treaty. It should place all its
nuclear installations under the IAEA’s comprehensive
safeguards regime.
Ms. Sokolova (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The International Atomic Energy Agency is a
unique instrument for international cooperation on the
peaceful use of nuclear energy and a robust oversight
mechanism for the fulfilment by States of their
obligations in the area of nuclear non-proliferation.
The Agency’s work in terms of helping to establish a
sustainable infrastructure and ensure States’ access
to the benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy is
important. That work merits the support of the United
Nations. International trust in the IAEA safeguards
regime is a fundamental criteria for supporting and
strengthening mechanisms for the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We support efforts under the
voluntary additional protocol to the comprehensive
safeguards agreement. We also believe that further
developing the safeguards system is in the interests of
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime with
the understanding that it is based on the basic principles

20-3070325/31

A/75/PV.23

of verification, impartiality, technical foundation and
transparency. An impartial and impartial objective
approach to nuclear verification is a key element in
supporting the legitimacy of the IAEA safeguards
system and the nuclear non-proliferation regime as
a whole.
The Russian Federation fully supports the IAEA’s
work. We advocate for broad access by States that
meet their nuclear non-proliferation obligations to the
benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the
strengthening of international cooperation in that area.
As a donor State, Russia makes voluntary contributions
to the International Project on Innovative Nuclear
Reactors and Fuel Cycles, the Technical Cooperation
Fund and the Nuclear Security Fund. We also provide
assistance to the IAEA’s work on nuclear and radiation
security, the safe transport of nuclear and radioactive
materials, the safe treatment of radioactive waste
and nuclear emergency preparation and response.
The Russian Federation remains ready to provide the
Agency and partner countries with all forms of support
to develop the necessary nuclear energy infrastructure.
The IAEA should play a central role in international
cooperation on physical nuclear security as the most
representative and technically competent organization
in that area. At the same time, we believe that
responsibility for ensuring physical nuclear security
on its territory lies with the State itself, which should
define the best ways of achieving that. We also believe
the broad participation of States in the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
Nuclear Facilities and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
to be important. We stress the importance of IAEA
member States treating the Agency with respect. It is
also necessary to refrain from artificially inserting
issues that are outside the scope of its Statute into the
agenda of the Agency’s decision-making bodies and its
activities in general.
The Russian Federation commends the work of
the Agency during the reporting period and reaffirms
its fundamental support for draft resolution A/75/L.9,
on the report of the Agency. We are confident that the
Agency’s efforts will continue and further increase in
the interests of developing peaceful nuclear energy
and nuclear technologies throughout the world,
while also improving and strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
26/31

11/11/2020

With regard to remarks made by the representative
of Ukraine, it is clear to all that it has no relation to the
topic under consideration today and is simply an act of
provocation. It is yet another example of anti-Russian
propaganda, and I therefore do not think it necessary
to respond. I will only say that the Russian Federation
strictly complies with the 1994 Memorandum on
Security Assurances in Connection with Ukraine’s
Accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and its obligations to respect
the sovereignty of Ukraine, while fully meeting
its obligations not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States, including
Ukraine. We also comply with all our obligations under
the NPT, the IAEA Safeguards Agreement and its
Additional Protocol.
Deliberate attempts to deny that undermines
international trust in the IAEA safeguards and
the non-proliferation regime owing to political
machinations. Our position on the matter raised by
Ukraine is reflected in the relevant IAEA document,
INFCIRC/876, of June 2015.
Mr. Horne (Australia): Australia thanks the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
submitting its report (see A/75/3030) and Canada for
introducing draft resolution A/75/L.9, which we are
pleased to co-sponsor. As a founding member of the
IAEA and a long-standing member of the Agency’s
Board of Governors, Australia strongly supports the
Agency’s roles, namely, advancing our collective
interests in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology
and safeguarding against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. That work remains vital as the international
community faces fresh challenges associated with the
coronavirus disease. We look forward to the rescheduled
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as an important
opportunity to strengthen the implementation of the
Treaty, including through the essential role played by
the IAEA.
As co-Chair of the Group of Friends for Women in
Nuclear in Vienna, Australia commends the Agency’s
efforts to increase representation and diversity in
the IAEA and to strengthen the role of women in the
nuclear sector.
We welcome the participation of the IAEA at
the International Youth Nuclear Congress, hosted by
Australian in March this year. The conference focused
20-30703

11/11/2020

on the important theme “Diversity in nuclear”. We
welcome the Agency’s remote monitoring systems and
remote data-transmission infrastructure, as highlighted
in the report — innovations that appear even more
important in the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19).
Australia also commends the Agency’s continued
safeguards implementation and its subsequent
maintenance throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
Strict adherence to IAEA safeguards obligations is a
critical element of the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. To that end, the IAEA must be able to
conduct its important safeguards work, including
the analysis of all safeguards-relevant material. We
emphasize Australia’s strong and continued support for
the professional work of the IAEA Director General and
staff as they seek to implement the Islamic Republic
of Iran’s Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
Additional Protocol. Australia sees the additional
protocol as the contemporary standard for verification,
which we should all aim to universalize.
Australia notes with concern that no IAEA
verification access has been provided to sites in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Australia
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to return to full compliance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, permit the early
return to IAEA safeguards inspections and sign and
ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The
international community must continue to implement
United Nations sanctions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea until it takes clear steps to comply
with all relevant Security Council resolutions by
abandoning not only its nuclear weapons and existing
programmes, but also its weapons of mass destruction
and ballistic missile programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.
Australia strongly supports the IAEA’s work on
the peaceful uses of nuclear technology and its key
role in coordinating and assisting Member States to
enhance nuclear safety and security. As noted in the
report, we are pleased to have 41 research contracts
and agreements with the Agency and a collaborating
centre. With regard to the pandemic, we appreciate the
Agency’s technical cooperation programme facilitating
access to nuclear techniques for the rapid and effective
diagnosis of COVID-19. For its part, Australia is at the
vanguard of COVID-19 research, making a world-class
nuclear science infrastructure available to scientists

A/75/PV.23

seeking to understand the virus and develop vaccines
and treatments.
Australia commends the Agency’s continued support
for minimizing high enriched uranium in civilian
use. Australia has been producing molybdenum-99
exclusively for low enriched uranium for 15 years,
proving that it is technically and economically feasible
to do so. We urge all Member States in the process of
converting their high enriched uranium-based methods
to continue to eliminate an unnecessary nuclear
proliferation and security risk.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic believes that it is
important for the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) to fulfil its mandate in line with its statute.
Nuclear non-proliferation is one of the fundamental
pillars and national priorities of my country, Syria,
in word and deed. My country was among the first to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), in 1968, ahead of many European
Union member States that today claim to be committed
to the non-proliferation regime, while some of those
European States — in addition to Turkey, which is a
member of NATO — have nuclear weapons on their
territories, in flagrant violation of articles I and II of
the NPT.
My country, Syria, signed a Safeguards Agreement
with the Agency in 1992. In 2003, Syria submitted a draft
resolution to the Security Council on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction. The credibility of our
country’s commitment to and engagement on nuclear
non-proliferation cannot therefore be questioned,
particularly in light of the fact that the draft resolution
was in line with the purposes and principles of the
IAEA. But the United States objected to the draft
resolution and threatened to use the veto.
The Security Council and the IAEA have not
condemned Israel’s flagrant aggression against my
country in 2007. They also have not condemned
Israel’s lack of cooperation with the Agency or its
refusal to allow its inspectors to reveal and investigate
the possible source of radioactive effects of the use
of missiles and materials by Israel in destroying and
contaminating the Deir ez-Zor installation. Israel’s
continued refusal to cooperate with the IAEA and its
development of nuclear military capabilities outside any
international safeguards regime, as well as its disregard

20-3070327/31

A/75/PV.23

of all calls to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East, which undermines the credibility of
the non-proliferation regime and the universal nature of
the NPT, threaten the stability and safety of the peoples
and States of the Middle East region. All these are very
serious issues that are proved, documented and known
to the IAEA.
The obligations of Member States under the statute
of the Agency would have required the United States
to report to the Agency information in its possession
before the installation was destroyed by Israeli forces,
not eight months later. The same applies to Israel, which
not only stopped short of providing information to the
Agency — correct or otherwise — but also conducted an
aggravated military aggression against the sovereignty
of Syrian territories by overflying the neighbouring
country of Turkey. That was not addressed by the
IAEA in accordance with its mandate. The Agency
failed also to take necessary measures, under its terms
of reference and responsibilities, with respect to Israel’s
non-compliance with its international commitments.
Most of the Agency’s conclusions concerning the
Deir ez-Zor installation were based on satellite imagery
provided by the United States Central Intelligence
Agency. That really calls into question the credibility
of the information provided to the Agency, particularly
given that it was provided by a State with a hostile
agenda against my country, Syria, as Member States
may recall, and considering the related precedents set
by the catastrophic and misleading Iraqi file, which led
to the invasion and destruction of Iraq’s infrastructure
and the spread of terrorism in Iraq and throughout
the region.
Syria has cooperated positively and constructively
with the IAEA on the status of the Deir ez-Zor
installation, which was attacked by Israeli warplanes
from Turkish airspace. Following that attack, my country
allowed Agency inspectors to visit the installation in
June 2008, granting them free access to its perimeter
so that they could collect environmental samples. Syria
also answered all requests for information and showed
maximum flexibility and seriousness in addressing
all pending issues. In October 2011, Syria reached an
agreement with the Agency on an action plan designed
to resolve all outstanding issues. Regrettably, some
States — the United States in particular — exerted
pressure not to allow the plan to be implemented and
resorted to political blackmail, as subsequently revealed
by the WikiLeaks documents. Hence, the United States,
28/31

11/11/2020

and not Syria, is responsible for the failure to implement
the action plan.
The Agency’s annual reports on safeguards
implementation have shown Syria’s full commitment
to meeting its obligations under the comprehensive
safeguards agreement and the NPT. Moreover, Syria has
met all inspection requests in a timely manner. Israel’s
admission of its responsibility for the attack on Syria
after a decade of denial requires that the Agency must
immediately dispatch an inspection team to Israel. Any
discussion on the issue is useless until the aggressor
entity cooperates with the Agency.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 93.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.9, entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/75/L.9: Argentina, Armenia, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Indonesia, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Nigeria, Palau, the Philippines, Singapore, Tunisia,
Ukraine and Uruguay.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/75/L.9?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/6).

A/75/L.9

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): Five
delegations have asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. May I remind them that statements made in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for
the first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention, and should be made by delegations from
their seats. Before giving the floor for explanations of
position on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that statements made in exercise of the
right of reply are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
20-30703

11/11/2020

Mr. Bandar (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
My country has asked to take the floor to exercise its
right of reply to respond to the accusations made by
the representative of Iran. In its statements, Iran simply
repeats its well-known practices, while the international
community is threatened by Iran’s lack of respect for its
international obligations and the increase in its level of
enriched uranium, which is 10 ten times higher than the
acceptable level. We call on Iran to act like a normal
State and to deal with other States and United Nations
agencies in a transparent way.
Ms. Kharashun (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus would like to exercise its right of reply to respond
to the statement made by the Lithuanian delegation. We
note the specialized international platform for nuclear
security information. The accusation made with regard
to the lack of safety of the new Belarusian nuclear
power plant is biased and has no relevance to the agenda
item under discussion today. From the very beginning
of the implementation of its national nuclear energy
programme, Belarus has been open and responsible
in its cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), the European Union (EU) and
other international partners. We continue to take all
necessary measures to ensure the highest level of safety
and security of our nuclear power plants. We apply the
entire toolkit proposed by the IAEA to assess all such
sites and ensure their security. Belarus has voluntarily
carried out a stress test of its nuclear power plant in
accordance with EU specifications and has a partner
review under the aegis of the European Commission and
the EU regulatory bodies on nuclear security. To date,
the Belarus nuclear power plant is the only existing or
projected nuclear power plant in the European region
that has gone through a verification process under the
most recent and strictest European standards. A team of
European regulators, including Lithuanian specialists,
did not highlight any shortcomings in the safety of the
Belarusian nuclear power plant.
We note that the first reactor unit is at the energy
launch stage, which sets out a regime for the reactor
unit to work at different power levels. During the tests,
it was highlighted that we needed to change some of the
measuring equipment and work to replace that equipment
is under way in line with all the technical regulations.
All technical systems are functioning normally.
Belarus intends to continue an open and professional
level of cooperation with all interested countries and
partners on nuclear security in general and to ensure

A/75/PV.23

the safe and sustainable operation of the Belarusian
nuclear power plant in particular.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Since the Russian
representative mentioned the issue of the Budapest
Memorandum, let me state the following.
It is well known that in 1994 the State signatories
of the Memorandum, with the Russian Federation in
first place, agreed to “reaffirm their commitment to
Ukraine... to respect the independence and sovereignty
and the existing borders of Ukraine”, as well as to
“reaffirm their obligation to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine”. It is also well known that
the General Assembly has recognized Russia as an
occupying Power in Ukraine on a number of occasions
and in a number of General Assembly resolutions.
The Assembly has also included in its agenda the item
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine”, meaning temporarily occupied
by Russia.
As a result of the Russian occupation of Crimea
and the invasion of the east of Ukraine, 14,000 people
have been killed, almost 30,000 people wounded and
1.5 million people displaced. Therefore, the answer
to the question “Is Russia committed to the Budapest
Memorandum, the Charter of the United Nations or
any other internationally legally binding document?”
is quite obvious: “Only in its own upside-down world”.
With regard to the more specific issue of nuclear
facilities and control over the nuclear facilities located
in the Crimean peninsula, I would like to remind the
Assembly of the following. Owing to the external
aggression, the competent State authorities of Ukraine
lost control over the nuclear facilities and materials
located in the Crimean peninsula and in the temporarily
occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Nonetheless, imprudent attempts by Russia to take
control of the nuclear facilities and materials located
in the Crimean peninsula contravene international law
and the Statute of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). All nuclear facilities, installations and
materials located in the territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol are the property
of Ukraine. Their legal status and the procedures for
their operation, use and maintenance are specified by
Ukrainian laws.

20-3070329/31

A/75/PV.23

The illegal actions of the aggressor State do not have
consequences for the legal status of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which
are an integral part of Ukraine, including in accordance
with resolution 68/262, on the territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Any attempts by the Russian Federation,
under the agreement of 1985 between the IAEA and
the USSR, to extend its jurisdiction over the nuclear
facilities and material in the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol are therefore null
and void.
The IAEA annual report for 2019, as well as every
annual report since the start of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine, has made it very clear that no actions
by the IAEA will imply a resolutionecognition of
Russian authority over Crimea.
With reference to resolution 68/262, entitled
“Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, which I have already
mentioned, Ukraine recognizes the guidance of the
United Nations Legal Counsel provided to the legal
advisers of the United Nations system, which stated that,
inter alia, the treaties to which Ukraine is a party remain
applicable to the entire territory of Ukraine, including
Crimea. Therefore, Ukraine welcomes the Agency’s
firm position in continuing to implement safeguards in
Ukraine, in accordance with Ukraine’s Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol.
Consequently, all facilities and nuclear material in
Crimea continue to be covered by the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol between
Ukraine and the Agency, as stated by the Director of
the Office of Legal Affairs of the IAEA secretariat on
10 June 2015.
Mr. Balouji (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to exercise my right of reply with regard to the
groundless allegations raised by the delegation of Saudi
Arabia against Iran.
Iran’s nuclear activities are totally transparent
and we are fully cooperating with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The most recent report
and statement of the Director General, including the
one that was just delivered at this meeting on Iran’s
cooperation with the Agency, is sufficient proof to
reject those allegations.
I would like to remind the Saudi delegation that it
is only the IAEA that has the competence to evaluate
the activities of its member States, not countries such
30/31

11/11/2020

as Saudi Arabia, whose ill intentions with respect
to Iran have never allowed it to accept the facts.
Moreover, what we have stated about Saudi Arabia’s
nuclear programme is in line with the requests made by
other member States, as well as the IAEA secretariat,
for the implementation of comprehensive safeguards
agreements by those countries that wish to have a
nuclear programme for peaceful purposes.
Saudi Arabia is an example in that regard. It is
not implementing the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement completely and, in that regard, unless
it rescinds its current small quantity programme, it
is not providing the IAEA with enough authority to
permit verification.
The failure to implement the IAEA safeguards at
a time when Saudi nuclear capabilities appear ready
to launch an ambitious programme could allow the
Saudis to hide certain nuclear activities without them
being subject to IAEA inspections. Concerns about the
leaked nuclear activities of Saudi Arabia and its covert
nuclear sites necessitate broad support for collective
international efforts to hold the Saudis responsible for
their behaviour.
Therefore, the international community should
call upon Riyadh to immediately bring into force the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement in full. Halting
nuclear assistance to Saudi Arabia is the only way to
alleviate such concerns about that country. Otherwise,
the lack of transparency in Saudi Arabia’s activities
will surely undercut the whole safeguards regime.
Mr. Bakanauskas (Lithuania): I am taking the
floor to exercise the right of reply to the statement just
made by the representative of Belarus.
Each country has the right to develop nuclear
power as long as international obligations with respect
to nuclear safety are properly addressed and national
decisions take account of the broader context of possible
transboundary implications.
Our concerns are related to the implementation of
recommendations provided by international experts
during the missions of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to Belarus.
Unfortunately, certain recommendations related
to nuclear infrastructure with respect to appropriate
service and emergency preparedness have not yet
been properly addressed by Belarus. However, the
commissioning of the first unit of the nuclear power
20-30703

11/11/2020

plant has already started. The issues raised by Lithuania
are related to nuclear safety and a responsible approach
to the implementation of the project, ranging from site
selection to decommissioning. The implementation of
IAEA safety standards must be transparent, responsible
and non-selective.
We urge the international community to
continuously support and promote the implementation
of the highest nuclear and environmental standards
for that and all other similar nuclear facilities around
the world.

A/75/PV.23

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 93?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

20-3070331/31
