General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

82

ress made in the implementation of its resolutions 2626
(XXV), 3202 (S-VI), 3281 (XXIX) and 3362
(S-VII) under a single item entitled "Assessment of the
progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 2626 (XXV), 3202 (S-VI), 3281
(XXIX) and 3362 (S-VII) entitled, respectively, 'International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade', 'Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order' 'Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States' 'and 'Development and international
economic co-operation''';
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Committee on Review and Appraisal to prepare
a preliminary assessment, for considerati_on by th~ Ge?eral Assembly at its thirty-second session, beanng m
mind the provisions of the preceding paragraphs and
the reports at the sectoral and regional le~el ~ubmitted
by the United Nations organs and orgamzations concerned, and such other developments as may take place
in the interim;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the heads of
the United Nations bodies and organizations concerned,
in preparing for the review and assessment, and M~mber States, in preparing their national reports on the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
to take fully into account the provisions of the present
resolution, in particular section II, paragraph 1.
J06th plenary meeting
2 J December 1976

31/179.

United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 and 3461 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Noting the recommendations made at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19
August 1976,108 and at the Conference on Economic
Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at
Mexico City from 13 to 22 September 1976,109
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 2023 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Recalling further the relevant decisions adopted by
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eighteenth, 110 nineteenth, 111
108 See A/31/197.
109 See A/C.2/31/7.
110 Official Records

of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5543/Rev.1),
para. 224.
111 fbid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5646),
para. 164.

twentieth, 112 twenty-first 113 and twenty-second114 sessions,
Taking note with appreciation of the statement made
by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme emphasizing the _importanc~ of technical co-operation among developmg countries as an
integral part and a new dimension . of mutual cooperation for development and ?f his ~ssurance of
making a great success of the Umted Nations Conf_erence on Technical Co-operation among Developmg
Countries, 115
Further taking note of the reports on the first and
second sessions of the sessional Committee on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries, contained in the report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme on its twentysecond session, of the reports of the participating and
executing agencies of the United Nations development
system and of the conclusions of the regional meeti?gs
on technical co-operation among developing countries,
held in Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and Africa,
1. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries at Buenos Aires from 27 March to 7
April 1978;
2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, in view of the importance of the Conference, to act as the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices,
in the capacity of observers, in accordance with Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX)
of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate as an observer;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional commissions, as
well as interested organs of the United Nations, to be
represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers;
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions for their travel
expenses and per diem;
l1 2 /bid., Supplement No. 2A
113 Jbid., Sixty-first Session,

(E/5703/Rev.l ), para. 332.
Supplement No. 2 (E/5779),

para. 302.
114 fbid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), para. 512.
115 Ibid., para. 462.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Decides that the sessional Committee on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme shall function as the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, that, for
that purpose, it shall be open to the participation of
all Member States as full members and hold three
sessions, and that the Preparatory Committee shall
elect its own bureau to be composed, in accordance
with regional geographical distribution, of a chairman,
three vice-chairmen and a rapporteur;
6. Also decides to establish a small secretariat to
assist the Secretary-General of the Conference in discharging his functions, composed of the Special Unit
for Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries for substantive purposes and the concerned services
of the secretariat of the Economic and Social Council
for organizational preparations, taking fully into account the need to maintain close interrelationship between these two aspects of the preparatory work for
the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
first session of the Preparatory Committee in January 1977;
8. Further decides that requisite funds for the preparation of the Conference in 1977 over and above
those already approved by the United Nations Development Programme for the preparations for, and organization of, the Conference, including those which
may be necessary to strengthen existing services, shall
be provided under the regular budget of the United
Nations and that the Preparatory Committee shall prepare detailed recommendations to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the total budget of
the Conference to be financed by the regular budget
of the United Nations;
9. Decides to include Arabic among the languages
of the Conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the Conference
to mobilize the assistance of the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat and of the Division of Information of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as of the concerned services of the
organizations of the United Nations system, to undertake a programme of public information activities
designed to ensure world-wide awareness of and interest
in the Conference and its objectives;
11. Agrees that the provisional agenda contained
in the report of the Administrator on the organization
of the Conference should be finalized by the Preparatory Committee in the light of the comments and suggestions made at the twenty-second session of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme and at the regional meetings on technical
co-operation among developing countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to enlist the fullest co-operation of the participating and executing agencies, including the regional
commissions, in the substantive preparations for the
Conference and, to this end, to establish an interagency
task force within the framework of the Inter-Agency
Consultative Board;
13. Requests the participating and executing agencies, including the regional commissions, in close co-

83

operation and consultation with the Secretary-General
of the Conference, to continue to give priority to activities to promote technical co-operation among developing countries and to contribute fully to the development by the Conference of an effective and pr_actical
plan of action to intensify further such co-operation on
a continuing basis;
I 4. Requests further the interagency task force
to report to the Preparatory Committee at each session, through the Secretary-General of the Conference,
on the progress made and the activities undertaken for
the implementation of paragraphs 12 and 13 above;
15. Calls upon the Governments of Member States,
in particular those of developing countries, to continue
to participate actively in the preparations for the Conference and, to this end, to designate a co-ordinator
or liaison officer at the national level and make other
arrangements, as appropriate, in order, inter alia, to
prepare national reports on their experience and capacity as well as needs on a global and sectoral basis,
in regard to technical co-operation among developing
countries, for submission to the Conference, taking into
account the standards which the Secretary-General of
the Conference should prepare with a view to facilitating uniformity in the format of the documents;
16. Also calls upon the developed countries to
continue to participate actively in the preparations for
the Conference and, in particular, in the identification
of their measures and policies aimed at promoting and
intensifying technical co-operation among developing
countries.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/180.

Implementation of the medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian
region

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, particularly Assembly resolutions 3253 (XXIX) of 4
December 1974 and 3512 (XXX) of 15 December
1975 and Council resolution 1918 (LVIII) of 5
May 1975,
Considering that the nature and scope of the needs
of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region make
it necessary for the international community to continue and to strengthen its solidarity action to support
the recovery efforts and economic development of those
countries,
Noting with satisfaction the decisive role played by
the United Nations Sahelian Office in helping to
combat the effects of the drought and to implement
the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme adopted by the States members of
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sahe!,
Notini with satisfaction the results of the meeting
convened by the Secretary-General and held at Geneva
on 1 July 1975, whose purpose was to mobilize the
necessary resources to finance priority projects identified bv the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel and its member States,
