S/2015/833

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK,
and developments related thereto, from 16 July 2015 to 15 October 2015.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respe ct
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
The reporting period was marked by progress in the European Union facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, including in the implementation
of the “First agreement of principles governing the normalization of relations” of
19 April 2013, Kosovo’s passage of legislation required for the establishment of the
Specialist Court (which will try cases brought forward by the European Union
Special Investigative Task Force), as well as internal tensions in Pristina owing to
protests by the opposition against the establishment of the Association/Community
of Serb majority municipalities.
4.
On 25 August, the Pristina and Belgrade delegations, led respectively by the
Prime Minister of Kosovo, Isa Mustafa, and the Prime Minister of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vučić, met in Brussels under the facilitation of Federica Mogherini, the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission. The sides concluded a package of
agreements, including on general principles/main elements of the association/
15-18592 (E)

031115

*1518592*

S/2015/833

community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo. Among other provisions, the
package foresees the submission, within a period of four months, of the draft statute
of the association/community for further consideration of the Prime Ministers; an
agreement to advance the implementation of the Energy Agreement of 2013; an
action plan for telecommunications; and arrangements for use of the main bridge in
Mitrovica in a mutually agreed manner. On 13 October, Ms. Mogherini additionally
hosted an informal meeting with both Prime Ministers, during which they discussed
the implementation of the agreements of 25 August and reaffirmed their
commitment to the implementation of all the agreements reached to date.
5.
The agreements of 25 August, however, have prompted protests by Kosovo
opposition parties, consisting of “Self-Determination”, “Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo” and “Initiative for Kosovo”. On 22 September, during a briefing by Prime
Minister Mustafa to the Assembly on the package of agreements, opposition
representatives physically disrupted the session by throwing objects at the Prime
Minister and blocking the podium, demanding that the government withdraw from
the high-level dialogue agreement establishing the association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo, as well as an agreement on territorial delineation signed
with Montenegro. A similar incident occurred during the Prime Minister’s visit to
Podujevë/Podujevo on 6 October. On 8 October, a leading “Self-Determination”
member of the Assembly interrupted a plenary session of the Assembly by
triggering a tear gas canister in the Assembly hall, resulting in some of the members
seeking medical assistance. These acts were deplored and condemned by
representatives of the international and diplomatic community, including UNMIK.
Leaders in Belgrade also expressed concerns about the aggressive rhetoric used by
some Kosovo opposition parties, including threats of further violent actions against
the establishment of the community/association.
6.
On 12 October, the same senior “Self-Determination” member of the
Assembly was briefly detained for an interview by the Kosovo police.
Approximately 200 of his supporters then gathered in front of the main Kosovo
police station in Pristina, demanding the release of the Assembly member, throwing
stones and other objects at the building and at police protection units. Several
arrests were made. According to the Office of the Chief Prosecutor, investigations
have been initiated against some members of the Assembly with regard to the tear
gas incident of 8 October. Despite enhanced security measures, on 15 October,
“Self-Determination” and “Alliance for the Future of Kosovo” members of the
Assembly again released tear gas in the Assembly hall, resulting in the opening of
the session being aborted. On 15 October, the Prosecutor’s Office announced the
initiation of investigations of some Assembly deputies in connection with the
incidents of 8 and 15 October.
7.
Previously, on 3 August, the Assembly of Kosovo had endorsed a long awaited
and important constitutional amendment, by a two -thirds majority vote of 82 out of
120 deputies, to enable the establishment of the Specialist Court. As had been the
case during the previous attempt to pass the constitutional amendment on 26 June,
opposition lawmakers from “Self-Determination”, “Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo” and “Initiative for Kosovo” declined to participate in this vote. Also on
3 August, the Assembly adopted the accompanying Law on Specialist Chambers and
Specialists Prosecutor’s Office as well as the Law on Legal Protection and Financial
Support for Potential Accused Persons in Trials before the Specialist Chambers. The
President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, promulgated these two laws on 20 August.

2/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

The three opposition parties requested the Constitutional Court to annul the
amendment to the Constitution, citing procedural grounds. The request, however,
was ruled inadmissible by the Court on 21 September, and the amendment and laws
are now in force.
8.
A memorandum of understanding on the mutual recognition of motor third
party liability insurance, signed in Brussels by Pristina and Belgrade on 23 June,
entered into force at all crossing points on 12 August. The agreement h elps to
normalize vehicular insurance rates charged on both sides of the boundary.
9.
On 26 August in Vienna, Kosovo signed an agreement on territorial
delineation with Montenegro. The agreement confirms the mutual commitment to
good neighbourly relations, security, stability, and regional cooperation, conforming
to the former administrative boundary of 1974 of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and in harmony with current Kosovo legislation. As noted above,
however, opposition parties have continued to oppose the agreement.
10. On 2 September, Kosovo Prime Minister Mustafa appointed members of the
“Civic Initiative Serbian List” (GISL), the Kosovo Serb political party, to six deputy
ministerial posts as well as to the post of Director of the Office for Communities
within the Office of the Prime Minister. The appointments further fulfilled parts of
the GISL coalition agreement with the “Democratic League of Kosovo” (LDK) and
the “Democratic Party of Kosovo” (PDK) reached on 9 December 2014. Separa tely,
on 21 September, three senior Kosovo Serb members of the government: the Deputy
Prime Minister, the Minister for Communities and Returns, and the Minister for
Local Government Administration, as well as 9 out of 10 Kosovo Serb mayors
called upon Aleksandar Jablanović, the leader of GISL, to step down. On
29 September, the Kosovo Serb Deputy Prime Minister, Branimir Stojanović,
further announced that he would serve as interim coordinator of GISL pending the
identification of a permanent replacement.
11. On 16 September, the government of Kosovo adopted a five -year strategy for
the prevention of violent extremism and radicalization. The strategy and its action
plan represent the government’s commitment to take steps across many sectors of
government and society to prevent and combat all forms of extremism.
12. On 27 August, Kosovo attended the Western Balkans summit, held in Vienna.
The meeting focused on regional cooperation in the construction, energy and
transport sectors, including a possible upgrade of the road link between Pristina and
Niš in central Serbia, and connection to the already existing road structure between
Pristina and the Albanian coastal city of Durrës. From 10 to 12 September, President
Jahjaga visited Tirana. She met with the Albanian leadership to discuss cooperation
across a range of sectors.
13. At the end of July, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
approved a 22-month standby arrangement for Kosovo in the amount of
€184 million. The arrangement is intended to support lower public deficits and
debts, while encouraging private investment as well as additional support from
multilateral and bilateral creditors.
14. In early August, Kosovo submitted to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) an application for membership.
The application was strongly contested by Belgrade, which argued, among other
things, that it was incompatible with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

15-18592

3/17

S/2015/833

III. Northern Kosovo
15. Following from the agreement reached on 25 August in Brussels, work aimed
at revitalizing the area of the main bridge in Mitrovica was delayed by 48 hours
from the originally planned date of 15 October for the bridge to be closed with the
exception of one pedestrian lane. The works are to be based on the
recommendations of a technical assessment and an architectural design study that
were agreed by the parties on 29 June. The plan foresees a reopening, including for
vehicular traffic, by the end of June 2016. Also under the terms of the agreement of
25 August, a memorandum of understanding that determines the administrative
boundaries of cadastral areas in Suvi Do/Suhadoll and Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani was to
be agreed upon by the relevant ministries and the municipalities of North and South
Mitrovica by 10 October. However, discussions overran that deadline, and the date
for signing the memorandum was still to be determined.
16. The northern Municipal Assemblies completed and submitted, by the
30 September deadline, their municipal budget proposals to the Kosovo
government. The proposals, however, exceeded the budgetary “ceilings” set by the
Ministry of Finance, which subsequently rejected the current proposals of the four
northern municipalities. Further exchanges were expected to be conducted in order
to find agreement on these budgets.
17. On 20 July, miners at the Trepça/Trepča mining facility in Stan Trëg/Stari Trg
held a one-day strike to call upon the Assembly of Kosovo to accelerate the passage
of legislation that would help to resolve the status of the Trepça/Trepča mining
complex.
18. The continued detention of Oliver Ivanović, a Kosovo Serb political leader
prompted public protests in North Mitrovica. Protesters demanded the release of the
detainees from detention on remand during the court proceedings, which have been
under way since December 2014. On 18 September, the trial panel in the Basic
Court of Mitrovica issued a decision to terminate the detention on remand against
Ivanović and a co-defendant, instead ordering house detention for both defendants,
which had been among the demands of the protestors.

IV. Security
19. The situation in Kosovo remained generally stable, while the reporting period
was marked by recurring incidents of protests and disruptions of t he Assembly of
Kosovo, as described in paragraphs 5 and 6 above.
20. On 3 August, during a gathering in Pristina of more than 100 members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army War Veterans Association, who demanded that an official
list of fighters from the 1998-1999 conflict be finalized, the demonstrators heckled
and threw objects at the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Hashim Thaçi. On 28 August and 6 October, similar incidents, which also involved
the throwing of objects, targeted Prime Minister Mustafa. Two suspects were
arrested by the Kosovo police in connection with the latter incident. In the context
of opposition-led protests against the agreement on an association/community of
Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo, opposition membe rs also organized smallscale meetings across Kosovo and carried out a campaign of graffiti -spraying and
vandalism.

4/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

21. Incidents targeting non-majority communities as well as cultural and religious
heritage sites also continued to occur during the reporting period. A total of
26 incidents affecting cultural and religious heritage sites have been recorded, 17 of
which occurred at Serbian Orthodox sites, 3 at Roman Catholic sites and 1 at an
Islamic religious site; an additional case was recorded at the Jewish Community
Centre in Kosovo and the remaining four targeted other cultural heritage sites. The
incidents included a number of cases of theft of property from Serbian Orthodox
Churches, mainly in eastern Kosovo, and subsequently led to arrests of three
suspects by the Kosovo police. On 1 August, four Kosovo Serb members of the
Assembly of Kosovo, one of them the Deputy President of the Assembly, received
telephone threats related to their voting positions in the Assembly. These threats are
being investigated by the Kosovo police.
22. On 28 August, during a visit of some 170 Kosovo Serb internally displaced
persons in Gjakovë/Ðakovica to celebrate the “Assumption of the Virgin Mary”
Orthodox holiday, a group of Kosovo Albanian protestors attempted to break
through a police cordon, throwing firecrackers and paint at the police officers. One
person was arrested.
23. On 7 October, the Economic Crimes Unit of the Kosovo police arrested
15 employees of a Belgrade-funded public enterprise, “Šara Mountain National
Park” in Shtërpcë/Štrpce municipality, on charges of abuse of authority. The Kosovo
Serb members of the Kosovo government and Serb party leaders protested the
arrests. The Government of Serbia convened an emergency session in response to
what it saw as an illegitimate and unilateral action by the police in Kosovo. All
employees were released; four of them were charged with minor offences.
24. On 12 October, an explosive device damaged the house of the mayor of
Leposaviq/Leposavić in northern Kosovo; no injuries were sustained. The Kosovo
police is investigating the incident.

V. Rule of law
25. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise certain responsibilities in
the area of the rule of law as well as maintain technical cooperation with relevant
institutions in both Pristina and Belgrade. UNMIK continued to facilitate requests
for mutual legal assistance from States that do not recognize Kosovo and provide
document-certification services at the request of those States and Kosovo’s
residents. More than 500 such documents were processed during the reporting
period.
26. UNMIK also continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). During
the reporting period, UNMIK issued 19 INTERPOL “red notices”.
27. Work proceeded on the implementation of the Pristina -Belgrade agreement on
the integration of the judiciary. The Appointment Committee, composed of
representatives of the Kosovo Judicial Council, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
and EULEX, finalized the selection process on the technical level for the majority
of the advertised positions (a total of 63 positio ns, comprising 48 judges and
15 prosecutors). The Government of Serbia has yet to adopt the legislation aimed at

15-18592

5/17

S/2015/833

regulating the pensions of the staff still employed in its institutions, a requirement
for the completion of the integration process.
28. Work also continued on the integration of former Serbian civil protection
personnel in northern Kosovo. To date, more than 100 former civil protection staff
have been integrated within Kosovo institutions in the four northern municipalities,
including 80 officers who signed contracts with the Emergency Management
Agency of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and 25 who now serve as correction
officers in the North Mitrovica Detention Centre of the Kosovo Correctional Service
of the Ministry of Justice.
29. On 4 September, UNMIK facilitated a field visit by the representatives of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Pristina and their
discussions with Kosovo authorities on possible cooperation within the framework
of the UNODC Regional Programme for South-Eastern Europe for the period from
2016 to 2019, in particular in the field of anti-money-laundering and counterterrorism financing, anti-corruption, terrorism prevention and countering organized
crime.
30. On 10 September and 15 October, UNMIK held coordination meetings in
northern Kosovo with civil society on rule of law issues. These meetings serve as a
mechanism of cooperation and coordination among rule of law actors, including
international organizations, Kosovo institutions and local civil society
organizations. A number of actions related to the rule of law were agreed, including
several projects aimed at strengthening the rule of law, to facilitate the provision of
services by the Regional Social Welfare Office on Juvenile Justice and Gender Based Violence.

VI. Returns and communities
31. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
registered 213 voluntary returnees to Kosovo between July and September 2015
(123 Kosovo Serbs, 37 Kosovo Egyptians, 23 Kosovo Ashkali, 22 Kosovo Roma,
6 Kosovo Bosniaks, 1 Kosovo Albanian and 1 Kosovo Montenegrin). Since the
beginning of the year, UNHCR has registered a total of 427 voluntary returnees to
Kosovo, which is consistent with the continuing trend of a low rate of these returns.
As at September 2015, the number of voluntary returnees to Kosovo since 2000
stood at 26,323 and the total number of internally displaced persons in Kosovo was
estimated to be 16,950, including 474 individuals who continue to be housed in
29 collective centres.
32. UNHCR continued to provide support to individuals in obtaining personal
documentation and resolving matters related to their civil status. From July to
September, UNHCR assisted 170 individuals in obtaining civil documentation.
33. On 22 September, representatives from Pristina, Belgrade, Podgorica and
Skopje attended the High-level Forum on Durable Solutions for Displaced Persons
from Kosovo, organized by OSCE, with support from UNHCR, and issued a joint
communiqué affirming their commitment to regional cooperation on durable
solutions for displaced persons from Kosovo.
34. Local efforts in support of voluntary returns also continued. On 3 September, a
working group on the return of displaced persons to Mushitishtë/Mušutište village

6/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

in Suharekë/Suva Reka Municipality — which was established in the context of the
recently formed Interministerial Commission for Return — held its first meeting.
The meeting was chaired by a representative of the Ministry for Communities and
Return and attended by representatives of the local Kosovo authorities, the Kosovo
Serb community, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration.
35. As part of a project co-financed by the European Union and the Kosovo
Ministry for Communities and Return, and implemented by the International
Organization for Migration, 36 newly built houses were handed over to returnees
during August and September and 43 additional houses are in the process of
construction. UNMIK also continued to monitor developments and issues affecting
the majority and non-majority communities, through field visits and regular
exchanges with local stakeholders.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
36. Following the withdrawal of a highly controversial draft law on cultural
heritage from discussion at the Assembly of Kosovo in May 2015, Kosovo Prime
Minister Mustafa, in dialogue with representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church,
initiated the establishment of a working group to fully revise the draft law. The
initial draft law, which had aimed at identifying the means to strengthen the
preservation and protection of cultural heritage sites, while facilitating their public
access, led to expressions of serious concern by the Serbian Orthodox Church,
particularly as these sites were defined in the draft law as property of the
government of Kosovo.
37. On 4 August, local authorities proceeded to demolish the “Mullafazliu
Guesthouse” in the special protective zone of the Historic Centre of Prizren, on the
basis of an assessment by the municipal inspectorate that the old bu ilding presented
a serious risk to public safety. The guesthouse, constructed in the nineteenth
century, qualified as a Kosovo cultural heritage site and enjoyed legal protection by
the Law on the Historic Centre of Prizren. The building was demolished wit hout
adherence to the legally required notice period of 15 days. In protest of this action,
the Chairperson of the Council for the Cultural Heritage of the Historic Centre of
Prizren resigned from his position.
38. A cultural preservation project in Novobërdë/Novo Brdo Municipality, at a site
of a medieval fortress, has made progress in stabilizing the walls of the fortress to
prevent further deterioration. The first phase of the project, implemented by
UNESCO, is scheduled to be completed in November 2015.

VIII. Human rights
39. On 15 September, the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary
Disappearances presented to the Human Rights Council its report
(A/HRC/30/38/Add.1) resulting from its official visit to the region in 2014 to
examine matters related to enforced disappearances and missing persons. UNMIK
facilitated the participation of the Kosovo Commission on Missing Persons in the
interactive dialogue on enforced and involuntary disappearance at the session of the
Human Rights Council.

15-18592

7/17

S/2015/833

40. As at 15 October, a total of 1,670 persons remained listed as missing from the
Kosovo conflict. On 24 July, UNMIK attended a regular working meeting organized
by the Commission on Missing Persons. During the reporting period, no substantive
contacts were held in the Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons,
owing to the non-appointment of the Chair of the Pristina Delegation for the
Working Group. UNMIK has pressed for urgent action on the appointment .
41. On 10 September, the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, supported by the
European Union Office, organized a round-table meeting on the topic “The role of
women in countering violent extremism in Kosovo”, in Vushtrri/Vučitrn. The event
drew attention to the role of women in contributing to the early identification of
religious extremism as well as in contributing to its prevention.
42. The UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel, which reviews complaints of
alleged human rights violations committed by UNMIK from 23 April 2005 to
31 March 2010, delivered six opinions on 13 complaints during the reporting
period. The Panel found in all these cases that UNMIK had fallen short of satisfying
the procedural requirements of article 2 (right to life) and, in 11 ca ses, of article 3
(prohibition of torture, inhumane or degrading treatment) of the European
Convention on Human Rights. By the end of September, the Panel had closed 487
cases; 40 cases remain outstanding. The Panel plans to complete its substantive
work on the complaints by the end of 2015.

IX. Observations
43. I welcome the continued progress in the European Union-facilitated dialogue
and further agreements reached between Belgrade and Pristina on 25 August, in
particular, the general principles/main elements for establishing the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities. As one of the cornerstones
of the “First agreement of principles governing the normalization of relations”, the
establishment of the association/community is an essential step towards achieving
the full implementation of this historic agreement and further improvement in the
daily lives of Kosovo’s population. I congratulate Prime Minister Vučić and Prime
Minister Mustafa on their exceptional leadership in carrying this process forward. I
encourage all leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to sustain this momentum, including
by finalizing the statute of the association/community in the time frame agreed, as
well as ensuring swift implementation of all agreements included in the 25 August
package.
44. I strongly welcome the much awaited endorsement of the constitutional
amendment and other laws to establish the Specialist Court by the Assembly of
Kosovo. The progress made in this regard has been crucial to demonstrate Kosovo’s
commitment to the fundamental principles of justice and accountab ility. I call upon
all stakeholders to expeditiously complete the remaining arrangements for the full
and prompt establishment of the Court.
45. I condemn the use of violence and intimidation by the opposition parties to
impede the normal proceedings of the Assembly of Kosovo, as well as the
unacceptable physical attacks by opposition activists directed at the Prime Minister
and members of his government. I call upon all political actors to refrain from
rhetoric and actions that are incompatible with the principles and norms of a
civilized and democratic society. Such acts damage public confidence in these

8/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

institutions, as well as Kosovo’s image in the wider world. I urge all political actors,
notably those in the opposition, to fulfil their duties with res ponsibility and
maturity, fully respecting the democratic process and the institutions to which they
are elected.
46. I urge the swift appointment of the Chair of the Pristina Delegation for the
Working Group on Missing Persons, so as to facilitate progress without delay on
this matter. I call upon all stakeholders to step up their efforts, and avoid prolonging
the suffering of the affected families.
47. I welcome the expressed commitment and work by the Kosovo authorities to
help to address the transnational challenges of countering violent extremism and
radicalization. The adoption by the government of Kosovo of a broad -based strategy
to address those challenges is notable in this regard. The United Nations stands
ready to support and facilitate this continuing effort within the framework of the
UNMIK mandate.
48. I commend the progressive steps towards strengthening regional cooperation,
as exemplified by the Western Balkans summit in 2015, which focused, among other
issues, on cooperation with European financial institutions. Proposed development
projects designed to benefit the population of the region, collectively an d
cooperatively, represent crucial contributions towards the goals of peace and
stability.
49. In August, I appointed Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan as my new Special
Representative for Kosovo and Head of UNMIK. With extensive senior diplomatic
experience, Mr. Tanin enjoys my full confidence in this important role. I call upon
all actors to extend to him their full support and close cooperation. He succeeds
Farid Zarif, who has led UNMIK for the past four years with dedication and
professionalism. I express my gratitude to Mr. Zarif and to all Mission personnel for
their continuing commitment and service. I also thank members of the United
Nations system and international partners on the ground, including KFOR, EULEX,
OSCE and the European Union, for their cooperation and continuing contributions
to peace and progress in Kosovo.

15-18592

9/17

S/2015/833

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo
(covering the period from 16 July to 15 October 2015)
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake its monitoring, mentoring, and advising activities and to implement its
executive functions in line with its mandate in the rule of law area. A number of
verdicts were pronounced in cases concerning organized crime, corruption and other
serious crimes. The trial of the so-called “Bahrain robbery” case, relating to an
armed robbery of luxury watches worth over 1 million euros at a shopping mall in
the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2013, led to the conviction of five defendants. A high profile defendant, who had been sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment for murder,
was arrested when he was found unescorted by correctional staff outside a private
house in Pristina without any granted court order. The action followed repeated
concerns expressed by the Mission regarding the preferential treatment awarded to
high-profile defendants in Kosovo.
In northern Kosovo, the Mission exercised its executive functions in a number
of judicial cases. Notably, the main trial against five defendants, including a well known Kosovo Serb politician accused of war crimes, continued and attracted most
critical attention and scrutiny, which also amounted to political pressure on the
Mission and its judicial staff. There were only a few security incidents in the
reporting period, which was overall calm.
Further successful steps were taken in the implementation of European Un ionfacilitated dialogue agreements with support from EULEX. In the context of civil
protection integration, the last observation point of civil protection at the main
bridge in Mitrovica was handed over to the Kosovo police, and EULEX facilitated
the handover of equipment to the Kosovo Agency for Emergency Management. In
terms of the integration of former civil protection staff, 25 applicants began their
training ahead of taking up their positions at the Mitrovica Detention Centre.

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 7 August, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against a defendant in a war crimes case at Gjakova/Đakovica
Basic Court. The case relates to a massacre near the town of Gjakova/Đakovica,
which is thought to be the largest mass killing during the conflict in Kosovo.

10/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

Main developments in organized crime and corruption
At the Court of Appeals, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge
finalized the case against, inter alia, the Mayor of Prizren and sent it back to the
Basic Court for retrial. The EULEX judge, who presided over the panel, issued a
dissenting opinion expressing that there were not sufficient legal grounds to annul
the first instance judgement. A EULEX appellate prosecutor has appealed the
decision to the Supreme Court. EULEX appellate prosecutors have also appealed
and filed a request for protection of legality in two other cases in which the Court of
Appeals had dismissed the indictments as belated. These cases are awaiting
decisions of the Supreme Court.
The trial in the “Bahrain robbery” case, which began on 19 November 2014,
was concluded at Pristina Basic Court on 6 August. A panel of one local judge and
two EULEX judges convicted five defendants for offences related to the armed
robbery of luxury watches worth over 1 million euros at a shopping mall in the
Kingdom of Bahrain in 2013. One defendant was found guilty of organized crime
and was sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment as well as a fine of €12,500. Three
defendants were also found guilty of organized crime and were sentenced to
11 years of imprisonment and fines of €12,000 each. A fifth defendant was
sentenced to three years of imprisonment for unauthorized ownership, control or
possession of weapons. The case was prosecuted by a EULEX prosecutor at the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 27 August, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against six defendants at Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court in the
so-called “car wash” case. Four defendants are charged with organized crime and
aggravated extortion, while some of the defendants face additional charges. The
alleged criminal offending spans a period from 2008 to 2015 and is related to the
purchase of parcels of land in Ferizaj/Uroševac. The case was investigated jointly
by the EULEX police and the Kosovo police.
On 8 September, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at the
Court of Appeals affirmed the judgement of Gjilan/Gnjilane Basic C ourt, dated
20 November 2013, by which a former Kosovo mayor and a former procurement
manager at the municipality were acquitted of abusing official position or authority.
On 21 September, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina
Basic Court found four persons guilty of abusing official position or authority in the
“Ministry of Trade and Industry” case. A former Director at the Ministry was
sentenced to 26 months imprisonment, while three others received sentences of 10,
8 and 7 months of suspended imprisonment, respectively.
The privileged treatment awarded to certain high-profile prisoners continues to
be a serious concern. On 22 September, at the order of a EULEX prosecutor at the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office, a high-profile defendant was arrested for
violating the conditions of his detention. At the time of the arrest the defendant, who
had been sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment for murder, was found unescorted
by correctional staff in a vehicle outside a private house in Pristina , after having left
the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo, where he had been treated. On the same
day, a EULEX judge at the Mitrovica Basic Court ordered that the defendant would
be transferred from the Dubrava Detention Centre to the High Security Pris on in

15-18592

11/17

S/2015/833

Podujevë/Podujevo, where he is currently being held. Three officers of the Kosovo
Correctional Service were suspended for their involvement.
On 28 September, a EULEX prosecutor filed a consolidated indictment in the
“Ministry of Transport, Post and Telecommunications” case, following an order
from the Court of Appeals to join proceedings in two cases. Five defendants are
accused of, inter alia, organized crime and giving and accepting bribes. The
indictment was filed after a lengthy and complex inve stigation by the EULEX
police, in cooperation with the Kosovo police.
Other serious crimes cases
On 31 July, a panel of EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court sentenced a
defendant to 15 years of imprisonment for aggravated murder, committed in March
2013 in Vushtrri/Vučitrn.
At the Court of Appeals, panels with a majority of local judges also rendered
two rulings on serious crimes. On 4 August, a panel affirmed the judgement of
Mitrovica Basic Court from July 2014 and sentenced a defendant to 12 mont hs of
imprisonment and a fine of €300 for attempting to obstruct official persons in
performing their duties. A panel also affirmed the judgement of Pristina Basic Court
from 9 September 2014, according to which a defendant was sentenced to 25 years
of imprisonment for aggravated murder and unauthorized possession of weapons.
Allegations found in the report by the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal
Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick Marty
On 3 August, the Kosovo Assembly approved the constitutional amendments
needed to establish the Specialist Chambers that will adjudicate any indictment
arising from the investigations of the Special Investigative Task Force, with
82 votes in favour, 5 against and 1 abstention. The same day, the Assembly
approved the Law on Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. The
Lead Prosecutor, David Schwendiman welcomed the adoption of the legislative
package enabling the creation of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. On 21 September, the Constitutional Court declared
inadmissible objections submitted by the opposition parties against the
constitutional amendments.
The Special Investigative Task Force continued its criminal investigation into
the allegations contained in the report of the Council of Europe, focusing on the
individual criminal liability of those most responsible for the allegations made in
the report.
While cooperation with law enforcement and judicial authorities in the region
and elsewhere continues to be satisfactory, sustained cooperation from all parties
remains critical for investigative and operational activities to continue to make
progress. Work with injured parties, victim advocacy groups and individuals to
gather information relevant to the investigation is ongoing.
In parallel, the Planning Team responsible for the set-up of the Specialist
Chambers has continued with its preparatory work and planning to facilitate a
smooth process, once all the requirements are met for the establishment of the
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.

12/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

Department of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts, together with local experts, at the Department of
Forensic Medicine, conducted site assessments in the areas of Kamenicë/Kamenica,
Suharekë/Suva Reka, Prizren, Gjakova/Đakovica, Deçan/Dečani, Mitrovica,
Rahovec/Orahovac and Klinë/Klina as well as in Novi Pazar in Serbia. Four bodies
were exhumed from the sites. On 25 August, the Department carried out excavations
of three graves at the cemetery of Krushë e Vogel/Velika Kruša in order to make
proper identification of the remains. After autopsies were performed, DNA samples
were sent out for further profiling and identification. To respond to concerns
expressed during the excavation, the Department and its EULEX staff met with
representatives of the village and the Kosovo Women’s Network to inform them
about the work carried out in relation to the case.
Property rights
During the reporting period, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel
received 42 new appeals and adjudicated 33 appeals, while 457 appeals are pending
a decision of the panel. The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court f or privatization
matters rendered 304 decisions in first instance trial panel cases and finalized
56 cases at the appellate panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
EULEX continues to provide advice and guidance to Kosovo Customs in order
to establish a single-window system, to increase efficiency for traders, free up staff
to work in other customs areas and strengthen anti-corruption measures.
EULEX organized a workshop on data links between the Civil Registry
Agency and different law enforcement agencies to i mprove the understanding and
practical implementation of existing cooperation agreements, support the capacity
development of the institutions involved and highlight the importance of database
interoperability, with a focus on data protection policies. EUL EX continued its
support for the opening of Civil Registry Agency offices in northern Kosovo.
The Police Inspectorate of Kosovo opened its first Regional Office for
Complaints in the municipality of Gijlan/Gnijlane. This is part of its Strategic Plan
2016-2018, which was developed with the Mission’s advice, and will help in
strengthening the cooperation with the population and provide an opportunity for
better police oversight.
EULEX monitored the recruitment process for the Director of Dubrava
Correctional Centre. The Mission assessed that none of the candidates was suitable
for this position and Kosovo counterparts were advised to seek more adequate
candidates through a new vacancy announcement. Against the advice of the
Mission, the Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service appointed a new
Director of the Dubrava Correctional Centre on 14 August. The transfer of the four
convicts of the “Drenica group”, who are still held at the Dubrava Correctional
Centre, to the High Security Prison with its new medical facilities, is still pending
(one person was already transferred; see the previous section). Since the verdict in
May, the Kosovo Correctional Service has yet to categorize these prisoners. Prisoner
categorization is a crucial factor in the decision for placements of prisoners,
ensuring that each prisoner is housed in an adequate facility. The issue of abuse of

15-18592

13/17

S/2015/833

extended medical appointments at the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo in
Pristina continued. The Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service
resigned on 2 October. He has, since the beginning of his tenure, been at the core of
the phenomenon of privileged treatment of high-profile prisoners and the Mission
had continuously highlighted this to the Kosovo authorities.
The Mission also supported the Kosovo police in developing an action plan
with steps to full implementation of intelligence-led policing in Kosovo. The action
plan was incorporated into the Kosovo police Strategy on Intelligence -Led Policing.
To facilitate a smooth implementation, the Kosovo police launched a pilot project
on submitting adequate information reports (one of the most relevant points of the
action plan) in the Ferizaj/Uroševac region. This project has received good support
from the Kosovo police senior management and the Kosovo police plan to also
introduce it in the remaining regions in the coming months with the support of the
Mission.
The Mission monitored and analysed disciplinary decisions against judges.
Although some progress can be noted regarding disciplinary investigations by the
Office of the Disciplinary Counsel, they are still in need of major enhancements.
The Mission has set up a mentorship programme for Office of the Disciplinary
Counsel, which aims at improving the quality of the legal drafting and the quality of
the future disciplinary decisions.
2.3

Northern Kosovo
On 21 August, EULEX supported the Kosovo police in a search and arrest
operation in Leposavić/Leposaviq, following a shooting incident involving an
automatic weapon, with one victim badly injured. On 26 September, there was an
arson attempt against the personal vehicle of a Kosovo Serb officer of the Kosovo
police. On 27 September, an unidentified perpetrator fired shots towards a vehicle
driven by a Kosovo Serb in Mitrovica North. On 4 October, one person sustained an
injury from gun shots in Mitrovica North. On 12 October, a hand grenade thrown at
the family house of the mayor of Leposavić/Leposaviq in Sočanica/Soçanicë caused
material damages.
The Mission exercised its executive functions in a number of judicial cases.
On 1 July, a panel of EULEX judges started the main trial against eight defendants
indicted for the attacks against EULEX personnel in the municipality of Zubin
Potok in April and May 2012. The case of one of the defendants was severed from
the trial since he failed to appear for the main trial session. The main trial in the
case against five defendants, including a well-known Kosovo Serb politician,
accused of war crimes, continued throughout the reporting period and attracted most
critical attention and scrutiny, including political pressure from various sources in
Serbia and in northern Kosovo on the Mission and its judicial staff. In September,
the hearings of prosecution witnesses came to an end and the trial continued with
the hearing of the defence witnesses. After the detention on remand was again
extended for two of the defendants, one of them initiated a hunger strike on
7 August, which lasted until 22 August. He was temporarily hospitalized. On
18 September, the two defendants’ detention on remand was replaced with house
detention. On 18 September, a panel of EULEX judges opened the main trial against
two defendants in the second of three judicial proceedings related to the shooting of
a Kosovo police officer, Enver Zymberi, in July 2011.

14/17

15-18592

S/2015/833

The Mission continued to provide advice to the Kosovo police, including on
inter-ethnic crime and on principles of intelligence-led policing. As a concrete
outcome of EULEX discussions with the Kosovo police on crime trends, the
Kosovo police decided to have regional investigations and operations units work
together and to do joint patrolling as to prevent vehicle thefts. EULEX helped the
Kosovo police Directorate General and Kosovo police North in terms of co mmunity
policing, which also involved the setting up of local public safety committees,
together with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. The project
will require further support from the Mission to become fully embraced by the local
police and political leadership. The Mission also supported Kosovo police officers
by accompanying them to remote areas where little or no community policing had
been conducted in the past.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
On 20 July, 25 members of the civil protection were integrated into the
Kosovo Correctional Service, bringing the overall number to 105 former civil
protection staff employed by Kosovo institutions. They started their two -month
basic training course at the Kosovo Academy for Public Safety in Vushtrri/Vučitrn
on 27 July, which will prepare them for their duties at the Mitrovica Detention
Centre. The selection panel identified suitable candidates for most positions
foreseen in the agreement and it is expected that this process can be finalize d in the
coming weeks. On 12 August, the last observation point of civil protection at the
main bridge in Mitrovica was handed over to the Kosovo police. EULEX later
facilitated the removal of the container on 14 September. On 25 August, EULEX
facilitated the handover of equipment, such as rubber boots, shovels and fire
extinguishers to the Kosovo Agency for Emergency Management, which distributed
the equipment on the same day to the four northern municipalities.
On 12 August, after a first meeting of its Implementation Committee
facilitated by the Council of Bureaux, the memorandum of understanding on the
mutual recognition of vehicle insurance policies entered into force. It enables users
of motor vehicles registered in one party who are in possession of a valid insurance
for the territory of the other party to enter and travel freely in that jurisdiction
without the purchase of additional insurance.

3.

Other key issues
On 16 September, the Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board, co -chaired by
the Minister of Justice, the European Union Special Representative/Head of the
European Union Office in Kosovo and the EULEX Head of Mission, met for the
second time in 2015. In the meeting, the third Compact progress report for the
period from July 2014 to July 2015 was approved. The Board also discussed the
fulfilment of the requirements set out in the visa liberalization road map, the
dissatisfactory state of play of implementation of the Board’s road maps, the
intended strategic review of the justice sector by the Ministry of Justice and
measures taken to strengthen the independence of the justice system and to fight
political interference in the rule of law.

15-18592

15/17

S/2015/833

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2015)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2015)
Country

16/17

Number

Czech Republic

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

15-18592

S/2015/833

15-18592

17/17
