S/2016/822

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to continue to submit an annual report on the implementa tion of
resolution 1325 (2000). It provides updates on the status of implementation and on
trends reflecting indicator data (see S/2010/498, annex). In addition, in response to
paragraph 17 of Council resolution 2242 (2015), it provides follow-up on commitments
and recommendations made during the 2015 high-level review on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), including recommendations contained in the previous report
(S/2015/716).
2.
The present report is based on data and analysis provided by entities of the U nited
Nations system, including peace operations and country teams, and contributions from
Member States, regional organizations and civil society.

II. Overview of progress and follow-up to the 2015
high-level review
3.
In 2015, messages regarding conflict prevention and sustaining peace featured
prominently in global efforts to confront increasingly complex threats to peace and
security, from the three peace and security reviews 1 to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development adopted in September. 2 Similar calls were echoed at the World
Humanitarian Summit, along with themes such as inclusivity, gender equality and
women’s participation, strategic partnerships, people-centred approaches and the need
to break down the silos between the three pillars of work of the United Nations and
across entities of the United Nations system.
__________________
1

The high-level review on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446) and the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture (A/69/968-S/2015/490).
2
Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda is to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels.

16-16785 (E)

181016

*1616785*

S/2016/822

4.
The women and peace and security agenda is a critical, yet underutilized tool for
preventing conflict and shaping more effective responses to to day’s complex crises.
The global study conducted on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) 3 provided
evidence that women’s participation contributed decisively to peace processes, justice
and security, economic recovery and humanitarian assistance. The 2015 open debate of
the Council to review the implementation of the resolution had 113 participating
speakers, the largest number in any debate in the Council’s history. The outcome of the
debate, resolution 2242 (2015), was adopted unanimously, and nearly 70 Member
States made explicit commitments to implement the agenda. There is momentum for
change, but it is essential that support go beyond rhetoric.
5.
Growing support for the agenda is contributing to tangible outcomes. More
women are included in peace talks, more peace agreements contain provisions in
support of women’s human rights and more security sector personnel are trained to
prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence. In addition, more countries
are implementing national action plans or related strategies. There is a growing
understanding of the need to address multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination,
including those based on disabilities, indigenous status, sexual orientation or other
factors. In order to ensure realistically that no one is left behind, inclusivity must be
fully integrated into efforts to build and sustain peace.
6.
Developments during the reporting period, however, show that there is also room
for concern. While there have been gains, they have been achieved too frequently on an
ad hoc basis. Moreover, there continues to be widespread targeting of women and girls
in conflict zones and a pushback on progress with regard to women’s human rights in
some contexts. Initiatives to address these challenges in follow-up to the high-level
review are highlighted below.

A.

Implementing the women and peace and security agenda in
peace processes
7.
In my previous report, I called upon stakeholders to build and act on evidence,
lessons and good practices gathered over the past 15 years to ensure women’s
meaningful participation, in particular in formal peace processes.
8.
The steps taken by Colombia to facilitate the peace agreement signed between the
Government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC -EP) on
26 September 2016 illustrate how inclusion can broaden the constituency committed to
peace and can help to ensure that agreement is reached. Women were directly
represented and actively engaged both at the peace table in Havana, including through a
subcommission on gender formed by the negotiating parties, and in national and
regional consultations throughout Colombia. They constituted up to one third of peace
table participants, approximately half of the participants in the consultations and over
60 per cent of the victims and experts visiting the peace table.

__________________
3

2/31

Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice, Securing the Peace: A
Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 (United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women), 2015).
Available from http://wps.unwomen.org/~/media/files/un%20women/wps/highlights/
unw-global-study-1325-2015.pdf.

16-16785

S/2016/822

9.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2261 (2016), the United Nations is setting
up a special political mission in Colombia that will form part of the tripartite
mechanism that monitors and verifies the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. I
encourage stakeholders to ensure that the work of the mission is informed by relevant
recommendations put forward by women during the peace process. I also welcome the
commitment of the mission to maximizing the number of women in all functions and
positions, including efforts to ensure that at least 20 per cent of the United Nations
personnel deployed are women (see E/2016/729, para. 31).
10. Data on the participation of women in mediation processes 4 has shown mixed
progress globally during the reporting period. In 2015, the United Nations led or co-led
14 formal mediation processes. 5 All United Nations mediation support teams included
women, an accomplishment maintained since 2012. In 2015, at least one senior woman
was present in the delegations of 13 negotiating parties and in 9 out of 11 active
processes, compared with 4 out of 14 processes in 2011. While these figures indicate
some progress, stronger efforts are still needed to facilitate women’s increased and
meaningful inclusion in negotiation party delegations to peace talks. Consultation s with
women’s civil society organizations were conducted in all processes, 6 a target reached
and maintained since 2014. I encourage all actors supporting mediation processes to
persist in promoting women’s participation, in order to ensure that commitment s
continue to be met in this area.
11. My Special Envoy to Syria has set an example for United Nations -led mediation
processes and good offices, ensuring that women’s perspectives are considered at the
peace table. At each round of negotiations during the Geneva talks held in 2016, he
advocated for at least 30 per cent women’s representation, consulted regularly with
civil society and publically called for women’s participation as members of the official
delegations of negotiating parties. The Government o f the Syrian Arab Republic and the
opposition have included women representatives in their delegations, where 3 of
15 representatives (20 per cent) are women. In February 2016, the Special Envoy,
advised by a diverse group of Syrian women, established the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board with the support of the United Nations Entity for Gender and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women). The Board, comprising 12 Syrian women representatives of
civil society, meets regularly with the Office of the Special Envoy to provide gender
analysis and advice. Syrian women also share their perspectives with the Special Envoy
through consultative platforms that engage civil society representatives from 53 Syrian
networks and represent over 500 non-governmental organizations.
12. Efforts by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to promote women’s
participation in the Libyan political dialogue and constitutiona l drafting process have
also been notable. These included launching a separate women’s track to ensure regular
consultations with activists and, in partnership with Switzerland, organizing a
conference for 38 women’s groups, which resulted in the developme nt of the Libyan
__________________
4

On an annual basis, the Department of Political Affairs reports data on the representation of
women among mediators, negotiators and technical experts in formal peace processes and
consultations with women civil society organizations.
5
For three of these processes (Syrian Arab Republic, the Middle East and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia) no formal negotiations were held during the reporting period.
6
Not included in this number are the peace processes for which the sco pe was very limited, such
as discussions on border demarcation.

16-16785

3/31

S/2016/822

women’s agenda for peace. In Cyprus, the Office of the Special Adviser facilitated the
work of the Committee on Gender Equality, which was established by Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot leaders during the talks in order to find a compreh ensive
settlement to the Cyprus issue, increasingly involving women in both negotiation teams
at all levels.
13. Initiatives to promote women’s participation and inclusive consultations must
become standard practice in the mediation of peace agreements. T he high-level
seminars on gender and inclusive mediation processes, developed by the Department of
Political Affairs and conducted in partnership with Finland, Norway, the Peace
Research Institute Oslo and the Crisis Management Initiative, remain a key for um in
which senior mediation actors can learn, share and translate commitments into practice.
Between 2013 and 2015, eight seminars were organized for 164 envoys, United Nations
mediators, regional organizations, Member States and international mediation
organizations.
14. All actors supporting mediation efforts must uphold their commitments to
supporting women’s effective participation, ensuring that women are prepared and
selected as mediators, as reiterated by the Security Council in its presidential st atement
S/PRST/2016/9. In 2015, five women held appointments as chief mediators or special
envoys supporting mediation efforts or promoting good offices on my behalf. I
welcome the establishment of women mediator networks in different regions, which
expands the global pool of women mediators. For instance, the Nordic Women
Mediator’s Network was launched in 2015 to promote women peace mediators in the
Nordic countries and to promote links with similar networks in other regions. The
Department of Political Affairs and UN-Women updated their joint gender and
mediation strategy to promote inclusive, multi-track conflict prevention and mediation
processes.
15. Gender expertise is critical to ensure that peace agre ements reflect women’s
interests. In 2015, the United Nations provided gender expertise to eight of nine (89 per
cent) relevant mediation processes, an increase from 67 per cent in 2014. The United
Nations standby team of mediation experts and similar initiatives by regional
organizations provide support in this area. For instance, the Mediation Support Team of
the European External Action Service provided technical gender advice in various
processes, including Afghanistan, Mali and the Syrian Arab Republic . In 2015, UNWomen deployed gender experts to the Office of the Special Envoy for Syria, the
Resident Coordinator in Colombia and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security.
16. The number of signed peace agreements with gender-specific provisions
continues to rise. 7 This may be attributed to greater awareness by mediators, more
inclusive processes and greater access to and use of gender expertise. Of 10 peace

__________________
7

4/31

The Department of Political Affairs has tracked the inclusion of gender issues in peace
agreements since 2011, and figures have been reported to the Security Council in my annual
reports on women and peace and security. Information on peace agreements is available from
http://peacemaker.un.org.

16-16785

S/2016/822

agreements 8 signed in 2015, 7 (70 per cent) contained gender-specific provisions,
compared with 50 per cent in 2014, 54 per cent in 2013, 30 per cent in 2012 and 22 per
cent in both 2011 and 2010. In 2015, conflict-related sexual violence provisions were
included in the agreements reached with Colombia, Mali, Myanmar and South Sudan.
The United Nations, Member States and civil society must now facilitate and monitor
their implementation, ensuring that women are meaningfully involved.
17. In addition to their participation in formal high-level processes, women have long
been working on processes at the local and subnational levels, often outside the
spotlight of international attention. In 17 provinces of Burundi, for example, a new
network of women community peace mediators initiated dialogues with political actors,
security forces and civil society to avert conflicts. In Uganda, civil society groups
organized a women’s situation room and mediated between opposing political parties
after the elections. These types of civil society initiatives require scaled-up funding and
must be linked to peace mediation processes at the national level.

B.

Protecting and promoting the rights and leadership of women in
peacekeeping and humanitarian settings
18. The lack of respect for international humanitarian and human rights law continues
to cause enormous damage. At the beginning of 2016, the number of individuals
forcibly displaced as a result of conflict or generalized violence exceeded 65 million. 9
According to the Global Humanitarian Overview 2016 report prepared by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, an estimated 125 million people were in
need of humanitarian assistance. 10 Civilians are deliberately or indiscriminately killed
or injured daily by State and non-State actors, and widespread sexual violence is a
reality that destroys the very fabric of society in several settings.
19. The 2015 peace and security reviews, as well the 2016 World Humanitarian
Summit, conveyed the message that effective responses require a deeper understanding
of the gender dimensions of conflict and that reinforced efforts were needed to protect
and empower women and girls to shape responses at the local and international levels.
Increased efforts were also needed to end violations of the human rights of women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict settings, including the rights to bodily integrity, food,
health, livelihood, education, property and nationality.
Addressing sexual and gender-based violence in conflict-affected settings
20. The recommendations set out in my most recent report on conflict -related sexual
violence (S/2016/361) continue to be relevant. Through the report, I brought to the
Council’s attention 19 situations of concern and an updated listing of 48 parties to

__________________
8

For the purpose of data collection, the Department of Political Affairs includes, under the term
“peace agreements”, cessation-of-hostilities agreements, ceasefire agreements, framework
agreements and overall peace agreements signed between at least two parties to a conflict,
intended to end, prevent or significantly transform a violent conflict so that it may be addressed
more constructively.
9
Data available from www.unhcr.org/576408cd7.
10
Available from https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/GHO -2016.pdf.

16-16785

5/31

S/2016/822

conflict 11 credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict; the majority of the
parties are non-State actors. I also provided information on the growing practice of
sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism and on emerging concerns, such as the plight of
children born of wartime rape, lack of access to services and sexual violence
perpetrated against men and boys. All State parties repeatedly listed in the annexes of
the annual reports on children and armed conflict and on sexual violence in conflict
will be prohibited from participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
21. I welcome and encourage the full implementation of joint frameworks for
addressing sexual violence in conflict signed between my Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict matter and a growing number of Governments and regional
organizations, including most recently with the League of Arab States. The Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which brings together the
Office of the Special Representative, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), has continued to assist Governments
with regard to criminal investigations and prosecutions, military justice, legislative
reform, the protection of victims and witnesses, and reparations for survivors. To date,
at the request of national authorities, the Team of Experts has provided technical
support to combat impunity for conflict-related sexual violence in the Central African
Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea,
Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and countries neighbouring the Syrian Arab
Republic.
22. In my previous reports, I have underlined the need to address conflict -related
sexual violence as part of a continuum of violence that is closely intertwined with
broader attacks on gender equality and women’s human rights. Information on both the
scope and range of such violence is increasingly available, including through the
coordinated monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements established by the United
Nations on conflict-related sexual violence, the Gender-based Violence Information
Management System, demographic and health surveys, and surveys conducted by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Worl d Bank on violence
against women in conflict contexts. Survey data from 38 countries has indicated
elevated lifetime rates of physical violence in several conflict and post -conflict
countries. 12 Because of stigmatization, fear of reprisals and limited acces s to relevant
services, coupled with a general breakdown of the rule of law, many victims of
conflict-related sexual violence do not report incidents or seek assistance.
23. Ending all forms of gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, remains a priority. I encourage United Nations entities to continue to
collaborate under the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
network and urge Governments to deliver on commitments made under initiatives such
__________________
11

The report should be read in conjunction with the seven previous reports on conflict -related
sexual violence, which provide a cumulative basis for the inclusion of parties in the annexed list.
Boko Haram is listed separately under other parties of concern. The data and analysis included in
the reports inform the indicator on patterns of sexual violence in conflict and post -conflict
situations.
12
For individuals 15 to 49 years of age. Data available from http://unstats.un.org/unsd/gender/
chapter6/chapter6.html.

6/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

as the Call to Action to End Violence Against Women and Girls in Emergencies, and the
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. I reiterate the importance of women’s
participation in conflict and crisis response, including as members of the security
sector. Such participation has been shown to improve women’s access to services and to
strengthen community relations. 13 I welcome initiatives such as the training provided to
women military officers by UN-Women in collaboration with China, India and South
Africa, to enhance opportunities for women’s leadership in crisis settings.
Promoting gender-responsive protection environments in peacekeeping
24. I welcome ongoing efforts to increase the number of women among military and
police personnel deployed to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with the goal of
doubling the number over the next five years, pursuant to Council resolution 2242
(2015). As of December 2015, women made up only 4.7 per cent of total military
experts in field missions and 3.2 per cent of military troops. Women’s representation
among United Nations police has also remained low, at 16.9 per cent of individual
police officers and only 7 per cent of formed police units. 14 Slow progress in this area is
linked to low rates of women in national military and police forces. 15 Data show that
women’s representation rates vary widely across countries and tend to decrease at
managerial levels, even in top performing countries. Through engagement with
contributing countries and by prioritizing women candidates in screening processes, the
Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Service of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations maintained, on average, a 30 per cent deployment ratio of governmentprovided women corrections personnel between January and December 2015, the
highest among United Nations uniformed personnel.
25. The Office of Military Affairs of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations now
has a Military Gender Adviser and there are military gender advisers in man y missions.
The Military Gender Adviser will contribute to the inclusion of a gender perspective in
documents prepared by the Military Planning Service documents and in all future
concepts of operation. As of mid-2016, all nine military strategic concepts of Operation
and six force operation orders included provisions related to women and peace and
security. The Police Division in the Department also has a Gender Adviser and has
established gender advisers in five missions, aiming to increase the number of missions
to 10 by the third quarter of 2016. In 2016, 13 out of 14 (93 per cent) 16 concepts of
operations make reference to either gender or sexual and gender -based violence, up
from 81 per cent in 2015 and 54 per cent in 2012.
__________________
13

See, for example, Sahana Dharmapuri, “Not just a numbers game: increasing women’s
participation in UN peacekeeping”, Providing for Peacekeeping No. 4 (International Peace
Institute, July 2013).
14
Latest data is available from www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/resources/statistics/gender.shtml.
15
To monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), Member States are invited to report
data annually on the indicator: “Level of women’s participation in the justice and security
sector”. In 2015, 12 Member States reported figures on women’s representation in national armed
forces and 10 reported on national police institutions. The aggregate figures for these sets of
countries indicate that less than 12 per cent of military personnel and only 12.3 per cent of police
officers were women.
16
Apart from the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, all police components include
such references within their mandated duties and responsibilities.

16-16785

7/31

S/2016/822

26. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support
have made significant efforts to strengthen the accountability of senior leadership in
peacekeeping to fulfilling gender equality commitments, including by having the
Directors within the two Departments represented on the Task Force on Gender at
Headquarters and moving the Gender Unit to the Office of the Chief of Staff, which
allows for increased access to technical expertise to strengthen mainstreaming efforts.
However, in order for senior managers to receive technical support, the gender
expertise of all peacekeeping staff must be enhanced, and specialized training modules
must be developed.
27. I expect that the inclusion of gender perspectives in all strategic reviews of
peacekeeping operations will contribute to ensuring that peacekeeping operations are
responding to the needs of men and women on the ground. I call on senior mission
leadership to establish a regular consultation with local civil society, including
women’s organizations, to ensure that peace and security decisions reflect, and are
more responsive to, the needs and experiences of local communities. Recommendations
from these consultations should be reflected in outcome documents.
Addressing sexual exploitation and abuse
28. I remain profoundly concerned about the cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
that continue to surface in countries hosting United Nations peace operations. These
violations are a fundamental betrayal of trust, have devastated the lives of victims and
have seriously damaged global perceptions of the Organization. The international
community must do its utmost to care for and provide services to the victims, empower
and support vulnerable populations and hold the perpetrators to account. This is a
collective responsibility that requires the full engagement of Member States.
29. In 2015, 99 new allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse were received from
across the United Nations system (including departments and offices of the Secretariat,
agencies, funds and programmes), compared with 79 in 2014, 96 in 2013, 88 in 2012
and 102 in 2011. Detailed information on allegations received in 2015, including the
nationality of military and police personnel involved and actions taken, is provided in
annexes III to V to my report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse (A/70/729). 17 The majority of allegations in 2015
involved military personnel. Over 50 per cent of mission-related allegations were
received from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Of the allegations
reported from peace operations, 38 (55 per cent) involved the most egregious forms of
sexual violence and abuse, including sexual activities with minors and rape. Paternity
claims were associated with 15 allegations.
30. The increase in the number of allegations, their unspeakable brutality and the
weakness of the measures to assist victims reveal that much more needs to be done.
__________________
17

8/31

Data is regularly collected and published by the Conduct and Discipline Unit, under both the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. This informs the
indicator of resolution 1325 (2000) on the percentage of reported cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse allegedly perpetrated by uniformed, civilian peacekeepers and/or humanitarian workers
that are acted upon out of the total number of referred cases.

16-16785

S/2016/822

Pursuant to the findings of the independent review of the United Nations response to
the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse b y international peacekeeping forces in
the Central African Republic allegations (A/71/99), I appointed a Special Coordinator
to strengthen the ability of the United Nations to prevent abuse and respond to cases in
a timely manner. Earlier in 2016, I announced additional measures to strengthen
accountability and assist victims, including through the establishment of a dedicated
trust fund for victims, stronger and swifter investigations and disclosure of the
nationality of alleged perpetrators. It is essential that donors extend support to
mechanisms to assist victims, which remain severely underfunded.
Respecting the full range of obligations under international law in conflict-affected
settings
31. The three peace and security reviews conducted in 2015 highlighted the centrality
of a human rights-based approach for conflict prevention, peacebuilding and sustainable
peace and the importance of working in complementarity with international human
rights law to strengthen gender equality.
32. I welcome the focus of the Security Council on protecting health -care workers,
the sick and the wounded and medical facilities in war zones, in line with international
humanitarian law and as expressed in its resolution 2286 (2016). Attacks on workers
and facilities, as well as a lack of access to health -care services, including abortion- and
HIV/AIDS-related reproductive health care, have a devastating impact in conflict affected settings. In 2015, 418 per 100,000 live births in conflict and post -conflict
countries 18 resulted in maternal deaths; a ratio almost twice as large as the global ratio
of 210 per 100,000 live births. The situation is particularly dire in Mali, where 882
women died per 100,000 deliveries. Similarly worrisome are the ratios of Afghanistan,
Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, all of which
surpassed the 700 mark.
33. I recognize the efforts by Member States and United Nations entities to respond to
violence against women and girls in conflict by providing non -discriminatory, holistic
health services, including sexual and reproductive health care and psychosocial support
in line with international humanitarian law. The United Na tions Fund for Population
Activities (UNFPA) has recently established four women -friendly health spaces in
conflict-affected areas in Afghanistan, supported the Ministry of Health and partners in
Iraq to provide comprehensive care, in particular to Yazidi women and girls, and
launched mobile teams of psychosocial experts to assist survivors of gender -based
violence, including internally displaced persons in Ukraine. UNFPA and the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), in collaborat ion with
Chile and Spain Chile, have developed a curriculum aimed at building the capacity of
peacebuilders to facilitate access to sexual and reproductive health and gender -based
violence services. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland provides
kits for newborns in Iraq and reproductive health services in Jordan. Switzerland has
developed a programme with local partners in Burundi, eastern Democratic Republic of
__________________
18

16-16785

For the present report, this includes countries or territories in which a political, peacebuilding or
peacekeeping mission operated during 2015, or concerning which the Security Council was
seized and which had been considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the period from
1 January to 31 December 2015, or that had received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding
Fund in 2015.

9/31

S/2016/822

the Congo and Rwanda to provide holistic medical services, legal support and
socioeconomic integration to victims of violence. The international community must
continue to work in the spirit of partnership in order to ensure universal respect for the
right to health, including the full range of sexual and reproductive health right s, for all
women and girls.
34. Conflict limits access to education for women and girls. The gender gap in the
global adjusted net enrolment rate in primary and secondary education widens
significantly in conflict and post-conflict countries. Only 74 per cent of girls are
enrolled in primary education, compared with 92 per cent of boys. In secondary
education, the enrolment rate is 42 per cent for girls and 48 per cent for boys. Providing
an even more striking comparison, a sample study of 25 conflict -affected countries and
65 countries not affected by conflict 19 identified that girls in those conflict countries
were 90 per cent more likely to be out of secondary school than their non -conflict
counterparts. 20 Security concerns, including the use of schools by the military, continue
to have an impact on learning and jeopardize the safety of children. The implications of
girls not receiving an education are significant both in the short and long term. In many
crises contexts, girls are at a greater risk of being forced into domestic labour or early
marriage, trafficked or made to engage in prostitution and/or transactional sex for survival. 21
35. I am pleased that work to address statelessness has continued in earnest and I
welcome the adoption in 2016 of Human Rights Council resolution 32/7, entitled “The
right to a nationality: women’s equal nationality rights in law and practice”, in which
the Council called upon all States to ensure that all persons, regardless of t heir
nationality status, enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms and urged States
to take immediate steps to reform nationality laws that discriminated against women. I
encourage all actors to join the global campaign of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to end statelessness. 22
36. I am concerned about continued threats and attacks against, and the persecution
of, those who do not conform to gender norms, whether they be women political
leaders, journalists or human rights defenders, women justice and security sector
personnel, civil society leaders or those perceived to be lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex. The Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic has documented how rigidly defined gender roles, harshly
enforced, have removed women and girls from public life, and how the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to target sexual minorities for execution (see
A/HRC/31/86). In Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) recorded the use of parallel justice structure punishments of women accused
by anti-Government elements of so-called “moral crimes”. In the contexts of Colombia,
Iraq, Libya and the Sudan, the international community continues to learn about the
killing of women human rights defenders, often because they have challenged
__________________
19

Unweighted national averages have been used for analysis, including for seven countries in
which conflict is restricted to particular areas.
20
See www.globalpartnership.org/data-and-results/education-data.
21
Sarah Brown, “The importance of investing in girls’ education seems to have dawned, at long
last, on the international community”, in The Huffington Post (March 2016). Available from
www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/sarah-brown/all-women-everywhere-girls-education_b_
9512788.html.
22
Campaign updates are available from www.unhcr.org/ibelong/.

10/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

traditional notions of family and gender roles in their societies. In Libya, for example,
OHCHR found that high-profile women activists promoting equality, social justice and
accountability have been assassinated. I urge Member States to amend discriminatory
legislation and ensure that gender equality is promoted in laws, policies, practices and
institutions, including when systems are built or reformed in the aftermath of conflict.
37. I welcome initiatives to engage all constituencies in efforts to promote and protect
women’s human rights and prevent violence in conflict-affected settings. My Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide led a programme focusing on the role of
religious leaders in preventing incitement to violence that could lead to atrocity crimes.
The quota for women participation in the programme was set at 30 per cent. At some of
the regional meetings organized within the programme in 2015 and 2016, female
participation reached 50 per cent. All outcome documents from regional meetings
include strong gender language.
Protection in situations of displacement
38. The scale of the current forced displacement crisis and its increasingly protracted
nature is of deep concern. Displacement driven by armed conflict and violence
continues to increase, with 8.6 million new cases recorded in 2015. Iraq, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Yemen accounted for over half of the total of these cases. In many
contexts, people fleeing conflict and violence continue to be subject to a range of
violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual and
gender-based violence. The lack of protection from such violations is an important
driver of displacement and has profound humanitarian consequences. I urge all
stakeholders to work in partnership to ensure that the response to movements of
refugees and migrants is gender-responsive and to intensify efforts to address the root
causes of displacement, including conflict.
39. The United Nations and Member States must scale up efforts to prevent and
respond to violence against women in refugee or internally displaced per son camps and
in transit. UN-Women operates safe spaces for women and children in the Za’atari
refugee camp in Jordan, providing employment and day-care services, as well as raising
awareness of gender-based violence and women’s empowerment. The World Food
Programme (WFP) has promoted safe access to food distribution sites, especially for
women. In the Niger, for example, their distribution sites are located no further than
5 km from the refugee site, and pregnant and lactating women are served first. Few
interventions have targeted the underlying social norms driving violence against
women and girls during and after conflict. The United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) has piloted an initiative in displacement camps and communities in Somalia
and South Sudan to address these social norms. Preliminary results indicate that
increasing numbers of people in the intervention communities report that it is wrong to
blame women and girls who are raped.
Promoting gender equality in humanitarian action
40. At the World Humanitarian Summit, 9,000 participants from 173 Member States
committed to implementing new measures that address the needs of the world’s most
vulnerable people. At high-level round tables, special sessions and side events, there
were widespread calls for gender equality to become a central pillar of humanitarian
assistance. Concrete commitments were announced at the high -level leaders round table

16-16785

11/31

S/2016/822

on the theme “Women and girls: catalysing action to achieve gender equality” and at
the high-level round table on political leadership to prevent and end conflicts. The
outcomes of the Summit affirmed the need for more robust gender -equality
programming, increased leadership of women and girls in humanitarian action and
respect for women’s and girls’ rights under international humanitarian law. I commend
all those who made commitments and urge timely implementation to ensure
transformational change.

C.

Preventing and countering violent extremism
41. Terrorism and violent extremism continue to have devastating consequences that
affect women and men differently. The violation of women’s fundamental rights,
including to health, education, bodily integrity and public life, lies at the heart of many
of the agendas of these groups. United Nations-led investigations have uncovered the
use of sexual and gender-based crimes as tactics of terrorist and violent extremist
groups, in particular ISIL and Boko Haram (see S/2016/361), including rape, forced
marriage, abductions and sexual slavery, which may constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity and even genocide. Accordingly, prosecution efforts should include
the gender-specific international crimes perpetrated by these groups. Women are also
participants in terrorist and violent extremist groups; groups such as ISIL and Boko
Haram strategically recruit women in their efforts to build a state.
42. In resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council urged Member States and the
United Nations system to ensure the participation and leadership of women and
women’s organizations in developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent
extremism. It requested counter-terrorism bodies to integrate gender as a cross-cutting
issue and urged Member States and United Nations entities to conduct gender -sensitive
research on the drivers of radicalization and the impacts of counter -terrorism strategies
on women’s human rights and women’s organizations. It also called for an increase d
amount of funding to be committed to addressing gender dimensions within efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism. In paragraph 169 of my previous report, I
proposed that the 15 per cent minimum target applied to United Nations peacebuilding
projects also be applied to all projects to address new peace and security threats,
including violent extremism. I am pleased that the Counter -Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and UN-Women are working to assess current allocations and operationalize
this recommendation.
43. In response to resolution 2242 (2015), Member States, regional organizations and
United Nations entities have initiated a range of activities, including on gendersensitive research, security sector reform to increase women’s participation in
protection efforts, capacity-building, counter-messaging efforts and establishing
practitioners’ networks. The Global Alliance of Women Countering Extremism and
Promoting Peace, Rights and Pluralism, which comprises nearly 20 women’s
organizations, enables women-led organizations to engage in international policy and
programming debates to prevent and counter violent extremism. 23 Support for civil

__________________
23

12/31

See September 2015 statement of the International Civil Society Action Network annou ncing the
formation of the Global Alliance of Women Countering Extremism and Promoting Peace, Rights
and Pluralism. Available from www.icanpeacework.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/
Alliance-Statement-Draft-9-30-15.pdf.

16-16785

S/2016/822

society organizations working in affected communities must be an essential component
of prevention and response efforts.
44. In January 2016, I presented my Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism to
the General Assembly (see A/70/674 and A/70/675), with gender equality as one of the
seven priority areas. In addition, in its resolution 70/291 on the United Nations Global
Counter Terrorism Strategy, adopted in July 2016, the Assembly urged Member States
and United Nations entities to seek greater consultations with women and women’s
organizations when developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. I encourage Member States and United Nations entities to
integrate gender elements in their follow-up actions. Efforts to foster coordination and
coherence in this area include the establishment by the Counter -Terrorism
Implementation Task Force of a working group on adopting a gender -sensitive
approach to preventing and countering terrorism, chaired by UN -Women, to support
efforts by Member States and the United Nations system to mainstream gender
throughout their activities.

D.

Preventing conflict, building and sustaining peace
45. Since my previous report, there have been significant normative developments in
the field of peacebuilding. Notably, the General Assembly, in its resolution 70/262, and
the Security Council, in its resolution 2282 (2016), placed the concept of “sustaining
peace” at the core of the work of the United Nations. In these resolutions, the Assembly
and the Council emphasized women’s participation and moved away from confining
peacebuilding to the post-conflict phase alone. Instead, they suggested that sustaining
peace spanned the entire conflict cycle, with a focus on prevention and on addressing
the continuation, escalation and recurrence of conflict.
46. The Security Council recalling its resolutions on women and peace and security,
adopted resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security, marking another
important step towards more inclusive processes for buildi ng and sustaining peace. I
look forward to the upcoming progress study on youth, peace and security, including
research on the roles of young women in preventing conflict and sustaining peace. I
expect that the study will shed light on the twofold discrimi nation young women can
face due to age and gender and will include specific recommendations to address their
needs and empower them in conflict and post-conflict settings. The adoption by the
Peacebuilding Commission of a gender strategy also signals an un precedented
commitment from an intergovernmental body to systematically integrate a gender
perspective across its work.
Economic recovery and access to resources
47. Equal employment opportunities and asset ownership are key determinants of
economic prosperity and a society’s ability to recover from conflict. However, data
confirms large gender gaps in access to decent work in conflict and post -conflict
countries. In all such countries with available data, the employment -to-population rate
for men is higher than it is for women, with some countries displaying differences
larger than 25 percentage points. In several countries, discriminatory laws and customs
constrain women’s access to property, inheritance, land rights, natural resources and
economic recovery options. Although most of these countries prohibit gender -based

16-16785

13/31

S/2016/822

discrimination in national constitutions in practice, these principles are often
superseded by customary or religious law. In conflict and post-conflict countries, where
customary law and discriminatory practices are likely to be favoured over weakened
rule of law systems, the proportion of women landholders reaches only 11.1 per cent.
48. I welcome initiatives to end discrimination against women in access to
employment, land and resources, which accelerate their economic recovery. For
example, in the Niger, women members of a community group organized by the World
Health Organization (WHO) have obtained a 99-year land lease contract from local
landowners, becoming the first women’s group in the area to obtain legal and secure
access to land. In Sri Lanka, the Australian Community Rehabilitation Program, in
partnership with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), provides conflict
widows with economic opportunities, including financial assistance and business
planning training. 24 In South Sudan, WFP is assisting women in asset creation by
constructing shallow wells for crop irrigation, in order to reduce tension over scarce
water resources and build social cohesion among different social groups. As climate
change provokes an increase in tensions within and among communities, natural
disasters become more frequent and natural resources scarcer, wo men must be further
empowered to access and manage natural resources, including land and water. I
welcome in this regard the launch of the joint programme of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), UN-Women, UNDP and the Peacebuilding Support
Office on promoting gender-responsive approaches to natural resources management
for peacebuilding.
49. As part of the work of the United Nations to advance gender equality in
peacebuilding interventions in 2015, UNDP allocated 46 per cent of the monetary
benefits from temporary employment in the context of early economic recovery
programmes to women and girls, an increase from 38 per cent in 2014. 25 It is now
possible to monitor these allocations because UNDP has integrated indicator 18 (see
S/2010/498, annex) 26 into its strategic plan for the period 2014-2017. I encourage other
United Nations entities to include specific measures on women and peace and security
in their own monitoring frameworks.
Governance and women’s participation in elected and non-elected bodies
50. Promoting good governance and building inclusive societies requires women’s
representation in legislative and governance bodies and state institutions. The
contributions, full participation and leadership of women are essential as constitutions
are drafted or revised, legal and policy frameworks are revisited and State or local -level
institutions are built or restructured.
51. Despite firm global commitments to gender balance in decision -making, progress
remains uneven and falls far short of targets. As at 1 July 2016, only 15 countries had a
woman Head of State or Government, 2 of which (Liberia and Nepal) were conflict or
__________________
24

See, for example, IOM, “Kajanthini: a model for women” (July 2015).
Available data for 2015 cover Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Iraq, Jordan, Mali, Mauritania, Pakistan, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda and Yemen.
26
The designation of indicator 18, which is linked to paragraph 9 of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), reads “Percentage of (monetary equivalent, estimate) benefits from temporary
employment in the context of early economic recovery programmes received by women and
girls”.
25

14/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

post-conflict countries. The global proportion of parliamentary seats occu pied by
women has increased in the past decade, reaching 22.7 per cent in 2016. 27 However, the
proportion in conflict and post-conflict countries is just 16.6 per cent, a drop from 18
per cent one year ago. The use of legislative quotas has promoted represe ntation; in
conflict and post-conflict countries utilizing them, women occupied 22 per cent of
parliament seats, compared with 11.2 per cent in those that do not.
52. In 2015, several United Nations entities, including the Department of Political
Affairs, which serves as the system-wide focal point for electoral assistance activities,
UNDP and UN-Women, provided technical assistance for gender-sensitive electoral
processes, women’s participation and leadership. Notably, all electoral needs
assessment reports during this period included gender analysis and recommendations,
and 50 per cent of UNDP electoral assistance projects included strengthening of
women’s participation as voters, candidates and election administrators as a significant
or principal objective.
53. Specific country results achieved in 2015 include the reinstatement of the 25 per
cent quota for women in provincial councils and district councils in Afghanistan, and
the adoption of a new law in Mali stipulating a 30 per cent quota for women in elected
and nominated positions. Nepal’s new constitution ensures the fundamental right of
women to participate in all State organs and guarantees women’s political
representation in various government structures and at the leadership level. Its adoption
was followed by the formation of a new government, and the election of Nepal’s first
woman President, Bidhya Devi Bhandari, and the country’s first woman Speaker of
Parliament, Onsari Gharti Magar.
54. Women’s representation and leadership at the local level is critical. The
availability and comparability of data on women’s political participation at local levels
is limited, but available evidence indicates that women’s representation rates tend to be
much lower than at national levels. As part of its moni toring and reporting efforts with
regard to the Sustainable Development Goals, UN -Women is developing data collection
methodology for measuring the proportion of women’s representation in local
government in an internationally comparable manner. The data will enable further
research on the contributions of women local leaders worldwide, including in conflict affected settings. Promoting women’s participation in public administration should also
be prioritized in these settings. UNDP is developing a methodology to measure
women’s representation and leadership in public service. In four out of five country
case studies on gender equality in public administration in post -conflict settings,
women hold only 18 per cent or less of decision-making positions. 28
55. I am concerned by the persistence of barriers to women’s participation in political
processes, including targeted violence; deterring women from voting independently;
deterring women from running for office and compelling their resignation if elected;
and hindering women electoral administrators from carrying out their functions. In Iraq
in 2015, the United Nations warned that educated, professional women, particularly
women who had run as candidates in elections for public office were particularly at risk
__________________
27

Inter-Parliamentary Union, as of June 2016. Data available from www.ipu.org/wmn-e/arc/
world010616.htm.
28
UNDP, Gender Equality in Public Administration (June 2014). Available from
www.undp.org/gepa.

16-16785

15/31

S/2016/822

of being executed by militants. 29 Similarly, Iraq’s Independent High Elections
Commission has consistently reported on the actions perpetrated by ISIL against its
current and former staff, both female and male. A February 2016 report indicated that
three former women employees of the Commission had been arrested, dragged and
executed by hanging in Mosul. UN-Women is mapping programming responses to
mitigate violence against women in politics.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform
56. I reiterate the importance of gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform, and appreciate efforts made by some States in
this regard. In Colombia, a gender strategy informed the reintegration of demobilized
persons across 800 municipalities, contributing to improved responses to women’s
needs. Figures from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
implemented by the United Nations in six field missions 30 suggest that sustained
attention to this area is needed. Only 12 per cent of beneficiaries in programmes for the
reintegration of ex-combatants and youth at risk were women, compared with 26 per
cent in 2014. Female participation was higher in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(32 per cent of beneficiaries were women) and Haiti (27 per cent). I encourage all
actors to track not only the proportion of women beneficiaries but also the actual
proportion of funds received by women. Fulfilling commitments with regard to women
and peace and security in the ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in the Central African Republic and Mali should be prioritized. A gender responsive approach is also essential in non-formal disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes such as those for preventing violent extremism, community
violence reduction, stabilization and other pre-disarmament efforts. Similarly, although
gender-responsive security sector reform is now integrated across policy commitments,
gaps remain in initial assessments, and in the implementation and monitoring of
initiatives. All members of the security sector must be vetted for conflict -related crimes
against women, including sexual and gender-based violence.
57. I welcome the increased commitment to address the destabilizing impact of the
illicit transfer, accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons, including its
negative impact on women and girls. The impact of the Arms Trade Treaty began to be
felt in 2015. A number of civil society organizations and, in some countries,
parliamentarians, have invoked the Treaty in their advocacy efforts. By the end of 2015,
79 States had ratified or acceded to the Treaty. In order to assist States with
implementation, the Office of Disarmament Affairs has developed a practical online
toolkit. 31 The risk of gender-based violence must, in accordance with article 7(4), form
an essential criterion in assessments preceding the authorization of any export by States
parties of conventional weapons that fall within the Treaty’s scope. I reiterate the
recommendations contained in my report on this issue ( S/2015/289), including the need
to ensure women’s full participation in combating illicit transfers.

__________________
29

Samuel Smith, “UN: ISIS killing educated women, especially politicians”, Christian Post (21
January 2015). Available from
30
Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia, Haiti and
Sudan.
31
Data available from www.un.org/disarmament/convarms/att/.

16/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

58. The availability of data on the existence of national mechanisms for the control of
illicit small arms and light weapons remains uneven. 32 Between 2014 and 2016, 33
80 States voluntarily contributed reports to the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. Of these, 66 per cent reported having national coordination agencies on small
arms and light weapons, 95 per cent having a national focal point and 92 per cent
having legislation to regulate small arms and light weapons. Of the 11 conflict and
post-conflict countries that contributed reports 8 (72 per cent) reported having national
coordination agencies, compared with 66 per cent in 2013. All 11 countries had a
national focal point, while 10 (91 per cent) had related legislation in place, an increase
from 44 per cent in the previous reporting period.
59. The United Nations Regional Centres for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, Asia
and the Pacific and Latin America and the Caribbean support gender -focused activities
and women’s participation in decision-making. The latter developed a tool for assessing
gender-related risks of conventional arms transfers in the i mplementation of the Arms
Trade Treaty.
60. I reiterate the importance of the initiative by the Office of Disarmament Affairs to
develop a gender mainstreaming action plan (established in 2003, updated in 2014 and
2016). The overall goal of the plan is to facilitate progress on disarmament, and it is
built on the assumption that disarmament efforts can be strengthened through the
integration of a gender analysis. In this vein, I welcome the initiative of the Office to
develop in 2016 a training programme for all staff on women and peace and security.
Women’s access to justice
61. Significant advancements in criminal accountability for conflict -related sexual
and gender-based crimes have taken place recently. In March 2016, the International
Criminal Court convicted Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo for his failure to prevent and
punish the rape, murder and pillage committed by his troops in the Central African
Republic in 2002 and 2003. This was the first conviction at the International Criminal
Court for charges related to sexual and gender-based violence. In May 2016, the
Extraordinary African Chambers in Senegal, supported by the African Union, convicted
the former president of Chad, Hissène Habré, of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including rape and sexual slavery. This was the first time that the court of
one country had prosecuted the former ruler of another for human rights violations, and
the first time that a Head of State had been held accountable, under international law,
for having personally committed the crime of rape. At the national level, in February
2016, a Guatemalan court convicted two former military officers of crimes against
humanity in the case of 11 indigenous Q’eqchi’ women who had been subjected to
sexual violence and domestic slavery at the Sepur Zarco military base during the
country’s armed conflict. This was the first time that a national court anywhere in the
world had considered charges of sexual slavery during an armed conflict, a crime under
international law. These three seminal cases demonstrate that decades of efforts by
lawyers, advocates and survivors to seek justice for sexual and gender -based violence
__________________
32

Data for this indicator is compiled annually to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
33
Reporting to the Programme of Action is biennial, with most countries publishing reports on
even years.

16-16785

17/31

S/2016/822

are now bearing fruit. Overall, however, access by women to justice remains woefully
inadequate.
62. The United Nations, Member States and civil society must ensure that the global
momentum for accountability for conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
continues to grow. This will require continued financial and political support. The
roster of experts on sexual and gender-based violence operated by UN-Women and the
Justice Rapid Response mechanism has yielded results. During 2015, 25 experts were
deployed to provide support to investigations and accountability processes globally,
including to national authorities.
63. The United Nations continued to support accountability through international
investigations by commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions, which are
considered to be important tools for documenting crimes, creating a historical record
and paving the way for future justice and accountability measures (see S/2015/716,
para. 60). In 2015, the Human Rights Council received reports from commissions of
inquiry on Eritrea (A/HRC/29/42), the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/28/69 and
A/HRC/30/48) and the 2014 Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/29/52), and from fact-finding
missions to Iraq (A/HRC/28/18) and on Boko Haram (A/HRC/30/67). UN-Women
continued to provide gender expertise to all commissions of inquiry and many
OHCHR-led fact-finding missions, and OHCHR worked to strengthen the gender integration capacities of these bodies. These efforts contributed to findings of sexual
and gender-based violence in the final reports of commissions of inquir y and factfinding missions. For example, in 2016, the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic stated that ISIL had committed genocide through
acts intended to destroy the Yazidi community, including rape and sexual slav ery, and
by imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group. Documenting crimes
is essential for accountability. I continue to encourage Member States, donors and
regional organizations to draw upon existing rosters of trained professionals w ho are
readily deployable, such as the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and the UN-Women-Justice Rapid Response roster, to ensure
appropriate and timely documentation and investigation and eventual justice for these
heinous crimes (see S/2016/361, para. 91 (h)). An expert from the roster has been
deployed to support the Independent Special Investigation into the violence which
occurred in Juba, South Sudan, in July 2016.
64. In previous reports, I have called for justice measures that respond to the full
range of women’s human rights violations (see S/2013/525, para. 48). Truth
commissions provide the means to address historical injustice and conflict-related
human rights violations, including broader socioeconomic violations. The United
Nations currently supports two truth commissions, in Mali and Tunisia. As at
31 December 2015, 34.6 per cent of the commissioners in the two commissio ns were
women, and both commissions have explicit mandates on sexual and gender -based
violence.
65. As indicated in the 2015 Guidance Note of the Secretary-General on Reparations
for Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, reparations programmes provide redress for past
abuses and should strive to have a transformative effect on gender inequalities. Such
inequalities can lead to violations and compound the consequences of the crime.
Several countries are creating or implementing such programmes. For instance, in
2015, Peru created a registry of the victims of forced sterilization measures that had

18/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

been carried out in the country from 1998 to 2002. Those enrolled will benefit from
free legal assistance, psychological support and health care. In 2015, Kosovo 34
approved a new regulation for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, according
to which survivors would be identified and given official status as civilian victims of
war eligible for benefits, including a monthly pension. The United Nations is now
supporting the office of the Prime Minister of Kosovo to develop a comprehensive and
transformative reparations plan for these survivors.
66. For many women, the end of a conflict does not mean greater security since
violence against women often spikes during the peacebuilding period, and rule of law
institutions are too weak to respond. The United Nations and regional organizations
must continue to work in partnership with Member States to ensure that access to
justice is provided for violence experienced in the post-conflict period and that rule of
law institutions are responsive to women’s needs. Between August 2015 and May 2016,
the Global Focal Point on Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in
Post-Conflict and other Crisis Situations, a joint undertaking led by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP, together with OHCHR, UN -Women, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, supported the design and e stablishment of a Special
Criminal Court in the Central African Republic, integrating gender perspectives in all
its operations and prioritizing sexual and gender-based violence investigations. The
Global Focal Point has also developed joint rule of law programmes and teams with
funds and activities to strengthen women’s access to justice and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and the State of
Palestine. This includes support to women’s organizations and the gender units of rule
of law institutions; the establishment of gender-responsive specialized services and
referral pathways for victims of sexual and gender -based violence; legislative reviews
to eliminate discriminatory provisions; and oversight of informal justice systems. An
example of the support offered by one Member State to another in this regard is the
assistance that Australia provided to the Vulnerable Persons Unit of the Timor -Leste
National Police Force to investigate gender-based violence, including through
infrastructural and mentoring support.
Gender-responsive transitions
67. It is critical to identify peacebuilding needs and reconfigure the United Nations
presence on the ground during the transition and drawdown periods of peace operat ions
because the risks of relapse often increase during such periods. Effective transition
processes require joint conflict analysis, the identification of collective outcomes,
strategic planning and resource mobilization. In 2015, the peacekeeping missions in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), Liberia (UNMIL) and Haiti (MINUSTAH) were in the process
of drawdowns. The three 2015 peace and security reviews emphasized the need to
integrate gender considerations and analysis in these processes, while ensuring that
United Nations entities and national partners have adequate capacity to support gender,
and women and peace and security functions. In follow-up to the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, UN -Women and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations led a study of good practices to inform policy
__________________
34

16-16785

References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).

19/31

S/2016/822

guidance on women and peace and security issues during transition periods. The
guidance will be piloted in transition contexts with accompanying technical support.

E.

Initiatives to monitor implementation and advance results
68. Member States remain the most influential actors in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, as members of the United Nations and regional
organizations, parties to conflicts, donors, troop - and police- contributors to
peacekeeping, and political players in a specific conflict or region. They have the
primary responsibility to ensure that global commitments to the agenda are integrated
into domestic policies and laws. In this regard, I welcome Spain’s initiative to establish
a national focal point network for women and peace and security and welcome the
inaugural meeting held in September 2016.
69. Since my previous report, 11 countries or territories have adopted national action
plans on women and peace and security, bringing the total number to 63. 35 Of these, 9
are second generation plans, and 5 are third generation plans. Of these plans, 45 (70 per
cent) have monitoring frameworks with progress indicators, and 16 (25 per cent) have
designated implementation budgets — a slight increase from 23 per cent in 2014. For
example, Norway’s third action plan places greater focus on results and accountability
than earlier plans, with four ministries reporting annually using a set of indicators and
having earmarked funding for implementation, including for civil society organizations
working in the context of women and peace and security.
70. The localization programme facilitated by the Global Network of Women
Peacebuilders, whereby local authorities develop local action plans or integrate
commitments related to women and peace and security in their community development
plans, remains a key tool for translating policy into practice. The programme is
currently implemented in 11 countries: Burundi, Colombia, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Nepal, Liberia, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Serbia, South Sudan and
Uganda. In Uganda’s local districts where local action plans have been adopted the
incidence of sexual and gender-based violence has decreased.
71. Several countries are currently elaborating, reviewing and adopting new, second
or third generation action plans, building on the experience and good practices of
others. Sweden’s third action plan was informed by direct country consultation in
conflict and post-conflict countries. In July 2016, over 80 participants from 17
countries gathered in Bangkok for the Asia-Pacific regional symposium on national
action plans on women and peace and security to exchange knowledge on the effective
development, implementation, monitoring and review of action plans and in order to
review region-specific priorities and emerging issues, including the prevention of

__________________
35

20/31

As of May 2016, this includes: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Lithuania, Mali, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Kosovo and State of Palestine.

16-16785

S/2016/822

violence, climate change and displacement. Strong leadership, inclusiveness, robust
financing, localization strategies, and good monitoring and eva luation systems were all
identified as key components for the effectiveness of the action plans.
72. The 2015 high-level review reaffirmed the centrality of women’s human rights to
peace and security and the role of human rights bodies in securing accounta bility for
violations of women’s rights in conflict-affected settings. From 1 January to
31 December 2015, acting in response to reported allegations of human rights
violations, the special procedures mechanisms of the Human Rights Council sent a total
of 532 communications to 123 States and 13 non-State actors. Out of this total,
23 communications were sent to the countries and territories under review. 36 These
concerned incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence; abductions and the
forced marriage of girls; honour killings; discriminatory legislation; murder, threats
and/or reprisals against women human rights defenders; the arrest and detention of
women human rights defenders; trafficking in persons; virginity testing; and the denial
of sexual and reproductive health rights.
73. I welcome the growing use of the review process under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women as an opportunity to engage
with States regarding their implementation of the agenda, including in relation to
general recommendation No. 30 on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post conflict situations, which was adopted by the Co mmittee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women. In three of the four concluding observations for conflict
countries in 2015, the Committee referenced general recommendation No. 30, urging
Liberia to review its national action plan and urging Lebanon and Madagascar to adopt
national action plans. 37 The Committee should expand its consideration of the women
and peace and security agenda by recommending concrete actions towards
implementation. This should include recommendations to non-conflict countries
regarding extraterritorial obligations under the Convention, with regard to donor
assistance, involvement as third parties in peace negotiation processes and the
formation of trade agreements with conflict-affected countries (see CEDAW/C/GC/30,
para. 9).
74. The Human Rights Council offers another venue for addressing Member State
accountability. In 2015, nine conflict and post-conflict countries were assessed under
the universal periodic review and received questions, comments or recommendations
on issues relating to women and peace and security, including sexual violence,
women’s political participation and the adoption of national action plans. National
human rights committees play a critical role in translating international norms and
applying them in the local context. In Afghanistan, for example, the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission includes a women’s rights unit and has
investigated some 29,947 cases of violence against women in the perio d from 2002 to
2015. 38 As of June 2016, of the 34 countries and territories reviewed, 16 had national
__________________
36

Data for this indicator is compiled annually to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
37
CEDAW/C/LBR/CO/7-8 (Liberia), CEDAW/C/LBN/CO/4-5 (Lebanon) and
CEDAW/C/MDG/CO/6-7 (Madagascar). General Recommendation No. 30 was not referenced in
the concluding observations for Kyrgyzstan.
38
Data available from www.aihrc.org.af/home/introduction.

16-16785

21/31

S/2016/822

human rights institutions accredited with A or B status and 1 had an ombudsperson
institution. 39
75. At the regional level, attention to the women and peace and security agenda has
continued to grow. As of May 2016, nine regional organizations 40 had adopted
dedicated implementation frameworks, including regional action plans, on women and
peace and security, compared with five organizations in 2015. These reg ional
commitments incentivize implementation at the national level, as evidenced by a
growth in national action plans in the regions, improved knowledge -sharing and
monitoring of implementation. The formulation of a continental results framework by
the African Union Commission to monitor implementation is an example.
76. Available data on women’s representation in regional organizations shows that
participation in senior positions remains uneven. 41 As at December 2015, less than
25 per cent of all senior posts 42 — at Headquarters and in the field combined — in
reporting organizations 43 were occupied by women, with their representation typically
lower in field posts. In most reporting entities, women were largely absent from special
representative and envoy posts. I encourage organizations with low women’s
representation and those that are experiencing regression in this field to consider
temporary special measures and other forms of promotion initiatives to encourage
women’s access to managerial posts, both at the Headquarters and field levels.
Actions by the United Nations
77. The United Nations is responsible for modelling and delivering on global norms
and standards on women and peace and security. As such, the three peace and security
reviews put forward gender-specific recommendations for the United Nations to
improve coherence, coordination, leadership, gender balance and gender expertise. I am
working with senior managers to ensure effective follow-up and have put in place
initiatives to strengthen accountability, such as gender-specific commitments and
indicators in the 2016 compacts with my senior managers.
Representation
78. During my two terms, I have appointed several women leaders in the United
Nations, including five special representatives heading peace operations and the firstever woman Force Commander. I recognize, however, that the Organization’s gender parity goal remains unachieved, especially at the managerial level. As at 31 December
__________________
39

Data for this indicator is compiled annually to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Information on the accreditation procedure is available from
http://nhri.ohchr.org/EN/Pages/default.aspx.
40
Economic Community of West African States, European Union, North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), Pacific Islands Forum, African Union, International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), League of
Arab States (LAS), and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
41
Data for this indicator is compiled annually to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
42
Includes senior officials at Headquarters, special representatives, envoys, heads of country
offices, heads of missions and mediators.
43
African Union, Commonwealth, Council of Europe, European Union External Action Servic e,
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, LAS, NATO, Organization of American States,
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, OSCE.

22/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

2015, 25 per cent of peace operations were head ed by women, the same proportion as
in 2014 and only slightly higher than the 18 per cent of 2010. Women’s leadership
remains higher in peacekeeping missions, with 31 per cent of the 16 missions in 2015
headed by women, than in special political missions, where the figure was 10 per cent
of the 10 missions. In terms of deputy heads, the total proportion of women dropped to
18 per cent in 2015, compared with 24 per cent in 2014, regressing to the levels of 2012
and 2013, a proportion only slightly higher than the 15 per cent of 2010.
79. I am concerned about the latest data pointing to stagnation, and even regression,
in women’s representation in field missions. In 2015, only 23 per cent of positions in
the professional and higher categories (P-2 to D-2) in peace operations were occupied
by women, down from 25 per cent in 2014. In peacekeeping missions, the proportion
improved slightly, from 21 per cent in 2011 to 23 per cent in 2015, a significant lapse
after reaching a record high at 33 per cent in 2014. Si milarly, women occupied 18 per
cent of the positions at the P-5 to D-2 levels in special political missions in 2011 and
currently occupy nearly 24 per cent, also registering a drop from the 29 per cent figure
of 2014. Data comparison across all professional categories show that women’s
representation is greater at lower professional levels. With regard to resident
coordinators, 8 (26 per cent) of the total 31 resident coordinators placed in conflict and
post-conflict countries in 2015 were women. Breaking glass ceilings within the
Organization remains a pressing priority, as emphasized in my 2015 reports on the future of
peace operations (S/2015/682) and on wo m e n a nd peace and security (S/2015/716).
80. Ongoing efforts to improve the gender balance in field leadership positions
include targeted outreach by the Department of Field Support to identify and attract
potential women candidates, in particular from underreprese nted Member States, and
initiatives such as the senior women talent pipeline. In addition, gender considerations
are increasingly mainstreamed in the selection process for senior -level appointments,
including: avoiding all-male teams, shortlisting at least one woman per interview and
including at least one woman in all interview panels. I reiterate my call to Member
States to share profiles of qualified women candidates and appoint more women to
senior leadership posts in national institutions as part of a global response to promote
women’s leadership.
81. Beyond peace operations, women continue to be underrepresented in professional
posts across United Nations entities operating in conflict and post -conflict settings. The
proportion of professional posts occupied by women remained below 50 per cent in
every entity that reported data for 2015, 44 except UN-Women. Representation was
closest to parity in UNFPA, UNDP and OHCHR, where women occupied more than 40
per cent of all posts. However, at senior levels (P -5 to D-2), gaps widen. Exceptions
include the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and UNFPA,
where women occupied roughly half of the senior posts. In OHCHR and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), however, the proportions of
women in these positions did not reach 15 per cent. Between 2014 and 2015, the
proportion of women in senior posts in these settings declined in almost every entity.
Exceptions were UNICEF, the only entity registering a noticeable incre ase (from 36 to
__________________
44

16-16785

FAO, IFAD, IOM, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance, OHCHR, the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UNDP, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNFPA, UNICEF, UN-Women,
WFP and WHO.

23/31

S/2016/822

44 per cent), and UNDP, where the proportion remained constant at 28 per cent.
Beyond leadership positions, the proportion of posts occupied by women at all
professional levels combined remained more or less constant for almost all entities . In
UN-Women, 75 per cent of all posts were occupied by women in 2015. The proportion
was closer to parity in conflict and post-conflict duty stations, at 57 per cent. In
comparison with other entities, women’s representation rates were greater at senior
levels, with women holding 79 per cent of senior posts overall and 65 per cent of senior
posts in conflict and post-conflict settings.
Gender expertise
82. All three peace and security reviews recognized the importance of technical
expertise for the implementation of norms and standards on women and peace and
security, and put forward recommendations aimed at enhancing the United Nations
gender architecture both at Headquarters and in the field.
83. As of December 2015, all eight multidimensional peacekeeping missions had
gender units led by senior advisers, and the eight traditional peacekeeping missions all
had gender focal points. In line with Security Council resolution 2242 (2015), all
gender advisers in the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support are
now situated the offices of my special representatives for more direct reporting lines
and strengthened technical support.
84. Of the 10 special political missions active in 2015, 6 (60 per cent) had gender
advisers, 45 compared with 50 per cent in 2014. All are situated in the offices of my
special representatives. However, of the 25 gender advisors deployed, most were at the
junior level (P-3 and below). Only two missions (20 per cent) had gender advisors at
the P-5 level and above, compared with 50 per cent of missions in 2014. The proportion
of missions with gender focal points went down from 100 per cent in 2013 and 92 per
cent in 2014 to 90 per cent currently.
85. As of December 2015, 28 international and 7 national women protection advisers
had been deployed to peace operations in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia and South Sudan, with
responsibilities for monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence. Five positions were vacant at the time of writing, including the two
positions established for Sudan (Darfur). The peace operations in Afghanistan and
Liberia had appointed focal points for conflict-related sexual violence. I urge the rapid
deployment of similar expertise to other conflict-affected countries, such as Iraq, where
abuses continue to mount.
86. As of December 2015, UN-Women had a country presence in 23 conflict and
post-conflict countries or areas 46 and was implementing peace, security and
__________________
45

United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM), United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
46
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia,
Mali, Myanmar, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Ukraine,
Yemen and State of Palestine.

24/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

humanitarian activities in 68 countries. In 2015, United Nations country teams had 71
gender theme groups and 26 inter-agency groups, with an integrated focus on gender
and human rights; of these 6 gender theme groups and 12 additional inter -agency
groups with a gender focus were active in conflict and post-conflict settings. 47 These
groups can promote coherence and provide coordinated support to Member States. I
support the call in resolution 2242 (2015) to encourage closer working relationships
within the United Nations system. I welcome the joint initiatives that are already are
under way and emphasize the importance of system-wide collaboration among entities
responsible for implementing the women and peace and security agenda.
The work of the Security Council
87. I welcome the Security Council’s follow-up on the commitments expressed in
resolutions 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015) to the consistent integration of women and
peace and security in its work. 48 The meetings of the Council’s new Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, established pursuant to the 2015 high -level
review, provide an additional tool for this purpose. In the first half of 2016, the
Informal Expert Group met on developments regarding women and peace and security
in Afghanistan (S/2016/673), the Central African Republic (S/2016/672), Iraq
(S/2016/683) and Mali (S/2016/682).
88. A range of gender-specific concerns were brought to the Security Council’s
attention in 2015, including through briefings from the Executive Director of
UN-Women, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and civil
society representatives. All thematic reports to the Council included references to
women and peace and security. I acknowledge, however, that greater efforts are needed
to ensure that gender-specific analysis is integrated across all deliberations, reports and
briefings, including on country-specific situations. 49 I encourage the Security Council
to systematically request gender-specific information for all issues and situations on its
agenda.
89. In 2015, 123 reports were submitted to the Security Council. Of these, 47 were
periodic reports submitted by peacekeeping and special political mission s. 50 While all
22 periodic reports submitted by special political missions and all 25 submitted by
peacekeeping missions contained references related to women and peace and security, I
recognize that linkages between findings and actionable recommendations in reporting
and briefings still need to improve.
90. The Security Council’s role in establishing, reviewing and renewing the mandates
of peace operations creates opportunities to follow up on the implementation of
__________________
47

Data from the United Nations Development Group Information Management System. Data
available for 131 United Nations country teams.
48
Data is collected annually for the indicator on the number and type of actions taken by the
Security Council related to resolution 1325 (2000).
49
Policy brief prepared by the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, entitled
“Mapping women, peace and security in the UN Security Council: (2015) ”. Available from
http://womenpeacesecurity.org/media/pdf-NGOWG_MappingWPS_PolicyBrief_2015.pdf.
50
In their periodic reporting to the Security Council, the Department of Political Affairs, and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations provide data annually on the indicator and on the extent
to which United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions include information on
violations of women’s and girls’ human rights.

16-16785

25/31

S/2016/822

resolution 1325 (2000). In 2015, eight peacekeeping operations 51 and four special
political missions 52 had tasks related to women and peace and security in their
mandates. 53 I appreciate the emphasis placed by the Department of Political Affairs an d
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on gender analysis in 2016 through revised
directives, guidance and training. Budget negotiations taking place in the meetings of
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly are essential to ensuring that
peacekeeping and special political missions are capable of integrating gender as a
cross-cutting issue.
91. In 2015, the Security Council adopted 64 resolutions and issued 26 presidential
statements. Of the 64 resolutions, 42 (65.5 per cent) contained references related to
women and peace and security, a share similar to previous years. Most of the references
concerned conflict-related sexual violence, followed by other human rights violations
and the political participation of women. Concern was expressed about human rights
violations against women and girls linked to violent extremism and terrorism. 54
92. In resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council committed to ensuring that the
relevant expert groups for sanctions committees had the necessary gender expertise. As
at 31 December 2015, 8 of 16 sanctions regimes (56 per cent) 55 included violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law as designation criteria, with 5 regimes
(31 per cent) explicitly including acts involving sexual violence or violations targeting
women as designation criteria. 56 In 2015, at least two individuals were listed for these
offenses. Out of the 16 published expert group reports associated with sanctions
regimes submitted to the Council in 2015, 11 (69 per cent) contained information on
human rights violations targeting women, sexual and gender -based violence or the role
of women in armed groups.
93. In 2015, the Security Council undertook two field missions: 57 to Haiti in January
and to Burundi, the Central African Republic and Ethiopia in March. Although
considerations on women and peace and security were not included in the terms of
reference for the mission to Haiti, information was included in the findings briefing.
The mission to Africa in March included specific mention of women and peace and
security in the terms of reference, the report and in the briefing. Both missions met with
women’s groups. I encourage the Council to systematically integrate gender -specific
concerns in its visiting missions and to follow up on priorities raised through
deliberations on country-specific issues and the Informal Expert Group on women and
peace and security.
__________________
51

MINUSCA, UNOCI, African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
MONUSCO, MINUSTAH, UNMIL, Mali (MINUSMA) and United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).
52
UNAMA, UNIOGBIS, UNSOM, and United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).
53
The mandates are available from www.un.org/en/sc/repertoire/data.shtml.
54
For example, the Security Council expressed concern that acts of sexual and gender -based
violence were known to be part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain terrorist
groups (see S/PRST/2015/25).
55
Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire (since terminated), Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Libya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan and Yemen.
56
Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, South Sudan and Sudan.
57
See, for example, S/2015/40, S/PV.7372, S/2015/162, S/2015/503 and S/PV.7407.

26/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

94. Direct interaction with civil society and women peacebuilders is essential to
inform the work of the Security Council. The commitment in resolution 2242 (2015) to
invite civil society, including women’s organizations, to brief the Council under
country-specific agenda items and relevant thematic areas should be upheld. As of
August 2016, civil society representatives had yet to be invited to country -specific
briefings. In 2015, women civil society representatives from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria and Somalia addressed the Council during open
debates on women and peace and security, the protection of civilians, conflict -related
sexual violence, trafficking in persons and the protection of journalists. 58
Financing the women and peace and security agenda
95. The human, environmental and economic costs of conflict are immense, yet far
too few funds are invested to prevent conflict and avoid relapse. Through the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda, Member States recognized the linkages between peace and
sustainable development, reiterating that, without respect for human rights, there would
be neither. I expect national Governments and development actors to make these
commitments a reality. I welcome the stronger recognition within and beyond the
Security Council of the need for adequate, predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding, as expressed in its resolution 2282 (2016), including the need to invest
more in conflict prevention and for greater implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, in accordance with its resolution 2242 (2015). However,
tremendous financing gaps remain.
96. I remain concerned about the diversion of resources from development to the
waging of war. It is estimated that global military expenditures in 2015 reached $1.6
billion ($1,634,985 million) 59 in current prices. This is roughly 32 times higher than the
combined spending by donor countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development-Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) on conflict and
post-conflict countries through bilateral sector-allocable official development
assistance in 2014. 60 The share of global military spending incurred by conflict and
post-conflict countries is rising and reached 2.4 per cent in 2015, often outstripping the
amount of funds these countries are spending on much needed public services.
97. The share of sector-allocable official development aid from OECD-DAC donor
countries to fragile States that focuses on gender equality must be increased. In 2014,
more than 51 per cent of the total aid from OECD -DAC donor countries was allocated
to conflict and post-conflict countries. However, only 7 per cent of aid to those
countries was specifically marked as targeting peace and security, and of that amount,
less than 1 per cent targeted gender equality significantly.
98. I encourage Member States to sustain gender-focused investments for preventing
conflict, addressing fragility and building peace. In Myanmar, the Joint Peace Fund,
supported by Australia, Sweden and the United Kingdom, committed to spending at
least 15 per cent on women’s rights. Roughly 13 per cent of Sweden’s aid to fragile
__________________
58

See S/PV.7533, S/PV.7374, S/PV.7428, S/PV.7585 and S/PV.7450.
Data available from www.sipri.org/databases/milex.
60
The latest available figures are for 2014 because official figures of sector-allocable official
development assistance data are published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development with a delay.
59

16-16785

27/31

S/2016/822

States in 2015 targeted gender equality as a primary objective, as did 14 per cent of its
aid to conflict, peace and security. New promising developments include Australia’s
commitment to allocating a minimum of 80 per cent of aid — regardless of its
objectives — for addressing gender issues, and the United Kingdom’s target to provide
a minimum of 50 per cent of aid to fragile contexts, with the firm intention of ensuring
programme delivery for women and girls.
99. I emphasize the role and responsibility of development banks, such as the World
Bank, in furthering gender equality through direct financing and reiterate the
importance of ensuring a strong gender focus for allocations in conflict settings.
100. More United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict settings are
now screening financial allocations using gender marker systems (see E/2016/57). In an
upward trend from 5 per cent in 2011, the Peacebuilding Fund, in 2015, exceeded my
15 per cent target for the first time, allocating 15.7 per cent of funds to projects with
the principal objective of gender equality and women’s empowerment. 61 With the
launch of the Peacebuilding Fund’s third gender promotion initiative in 2016, I expect
that the trend will continue. The initiative, which promotes financial coordination
across United Nations entities, is now associated with the first Youth Promotion
Initiative to support the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), including young
women’s participation in peacebuilding.
101. Data suggest that marking budgets has not necessarily resulted in an increased
focus on gender in programming in conflict and post-conflict settings. I am concerned
about signs of weakening gender focus and an overall shift from targeting gender
equality as principal objective, to supporting it as a significant objective. For instance,
while UNICEF met the 15 per cent target, with 16 per cent of its interventions in
conflict and post-conflict countries primarily targeting gender equality in 2015, this
proportion has dropped from 19 per cent in 2014 and 23 per cent in 2013. In the case of
UNDP, although allocations that have gender equality as a significant and principal
objective have increased by 14 per cent since 2014, only 4 per cent were allocated to
activities with gender equality as a principal objective in 2015, the same share as in
2013 and a drop from the 6 per cent achieved in 2012. While gender marking is a
crucial tool for gender-sensitive planning and monitoring, more attention is needed to
increase programming of gender-specific interventions to empower women and girls
102. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which uses the InterAgency Standing Committee gender marker, made it mandatory to mark allocations
prior to the inclusion of projects in the humanitarian programme cycle appeals and in
the humanitarian financing mechanisms it manages. Although in 2015 95 per cent of
projects reviewed in a sample study across 18 funds contributed in some way to gender
equality, only 4 per cent focused mainly on gender and 57 per cent addressed gender by
targeting the specific needs of women, men, girls or boys.
103. Entities that have recently established and begun reporting using gender markers
show wide differences in the gender focus of their allocations. Of the 14 loans for
conflict and post-conflict countries approved by the Executive Board of IFAD in 2015,
53 per cent of the loan value had gender equality and women’s empowerment as a
__________________
61

28/31

The Peacebuilding Fund recently updated its gender marking method ology to capture all genderfocused activities, including the shares allocated to gender -sensitive efforts in projects that were
not necessarily designed with the main objective of promoting gender equality.

16-16785

S/2016/822

principal focus, while 20 per cent of the value supported activities where gender was a
significant objective. In the case of WFP, all projects in conflict and post -conflict
countries addressed gender equality as a significant objective, amounting to 14 per cent
of operational resources allocated to activities contributing to gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
104. I welcome the initiative of the Department of Peacekeeping Op erations, in
collaboration with UN-Women, to develop a pilot project to assess the budget of select
peacekeeping missions. I encourage entities, including those working on peacebuilding
activities related to rule of law under the Global Focal Point arrange ment, to emphasize
gender-responsive financing, such as the minimum 15 per cent target, to meet women’s
needs, build their capacities and improve equality.
105. In terms of total funds, overall allocations to gender -focused interventions have
increased over time across entities. 62 In 2015, gender-focused allocations of UNDP rose
to almost $82 million, compared with $72 million in 2014. Of these, $28 million
targeted the strengthening of institutions in order to deliver universal access to basic
services, including rule of law and support for victims of sexual and gender -based
violence, $16.5 million targeted emergency jobs, livelihoods and early recovery, and
$15 million promoted gender-responsive national budgets and development strategies.
UN-Women allocated $41.6 million to promote gender equality in peace, security and
humanitarian action in 2015, of which $26 million went to peace and security field
projects and over $6 million to humanitarian interventions on the ground. The figure
more than doubled the $17.7 million of the previous year.
106. I reiterate the importance of supporting special funds such as the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women, the Fund for
Gender Equality and the United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, 63 established after
the 2015 high-level review, is also an important new mechanism fo r addressing funding
gaps in this area. The Global Acceleration Instrument has begun supporting women centred peacebuilding initiatives in Burundi and will soon become active in Colombia,
Fiji, Jordan and Solomon Islands. Scaled-up funding is needed for this initiative, and I
encourage Member States to use it as a vehicle to sustain peace, prevent conflict and
further localize efforts in line with the commitments of the World Humanitarian
Summit.

III. Concluding observations and recommendations
107. At the high-level review held in 2015, Member States, United Nations entities,
regional organizations and civil society committed to accelerating progress on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I am therefore pleased to describe in the
present report noteworthy advances that have been made in the past year. However, I
remain concerned that the achievements have not filled the vast gaps that I highlight
__________________
62

Analysis made at current prices. Increments might appear higher than actual increases at constant
prices.
63
More information is available from http://mptf.undp.org/factsheet/fund/GAI00.

16-16785

29/31

S/2016/822

each year. The five priority areas, identified in my previous report and set out below,
continue to require urgent action.
108. Bringing women’s participation and leadership to the core of peace and
security efforts. I re-emphasize the need to increase efforts in this area. Outstanding
examples of this, from the Colombian peace talks to local mediation efforts in Burundi
and Uganda, demonstrate that women are making a remarkable difference as agents of
change. However, when available, data show that the overall shares of women’s
participation and leadership in peace and security efforts have stagnated or are even
regressing in many areas, including post-conflict governance, peacekeeping, and within
the very leadership of the United Nations. Therefore, I continue to call upon all
stakeholders to remove obstacles and incentivize the effective participation of women
in peace and security, as well as to carefully track and report on progress in this field. I
also recognize that more must be done by the United Nations to accelerate progress in
achieving gender balance in staffing at Headquarters and in the field.
109. Protecting the human rights of women and girls during and after conflict.
There remains an urgent need to protect such rights. Despite progress achieved since
the high-level review, including several high-level prosecutions of conflict-related
sexual violence, human rights violations against women and girls have continued
unabated, including with some armed actors and terrorist organizations attacking
women’s human rights as part of their political agenda. All actors must recommit to
complying with obligations under international humanitarian, refugee and human rights
law, to respect and promote the full range of women’s human rights, to punish all
violators, including non-State actors or those within its own troops, and to protect those
who defend the human rights of women and girls. Women must play key roles in the
design and implementation of protection and prevention strategies, as well as in the
international community’s determined efforts to root out sexual exploitation and abuse
from the Organization.
110. Ensuring gender-responsive planning and accountability for results. The
international community must do more in this area. I applaud efforts to include
women’s needs and perspectives in peace and security planning and monitoring,
including through the Security Council’s new Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, and the 11 new national action plans adopted in 2016. I also
celebrate the linkages drawn between peace, security and sustainable development in
the recently adopted 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. However, I note with
concern that the availability of gender statistics remains limited in conflict settings and
that reporting on progress towards the implementation of commitments related to the
women and peace and security agenda is scarce overall, particularly at the national
level. I therefore continue to encourage Member States, as well as international and
regional actors to ensure that gender equality and women’s empowerment is
mainstreamed across planning frameworks, implementation and monitoring efforts.
111. Strengthening gender architecture and technical expertise. The United Nations
must accelerate efforts in this area. The high-level review, as well as the reviews of
peacebuilding architecture and peace operations, recommended new measures in this
respect. While steps have been taken to act on these recommendations, includ ing
initiatives by the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Support Office and UN -Women, full implementation will
require additional commitment to effecting partnerships. I call upon all entities to

30/31

16-16785

S/2016/822

further enhance coordination, build internal capacity for gender mainstreaming and
analysis, and use comparative expertise on gender equality when responding to
conflicts and crises. I also call upon Member States to extend increased support for
these efforts.
112. Financing the women and peace and security agenda. Increased financial
resources are necessary in order to meet commitments to the women and peace and
security agenda. I welcome sustained financial support by Member States to
organizations working on women and peace and security, and multi-stakeholder
initiatives such as the new Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action. However, initiatives in this area continue to be
dramatically underresourced, constraining the ability of the international community to
meet the commitments made at the high-level review. United Nations entities also fall
short in this area, with several showing a downward trend in allocations to gender
equality. I call upon Member States, multilateral organizations and development banks
to ensure robust financing of the women and peace and security agenda.
113. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development places gender equality at the
centre of sustainable development and highlights the connections between sustainable
development and peaceful and inclusive societies. The World Humanitarian Summit
emphasized the need for global leadership to prevent and end conflict, a core
responsibility outlined in my Agenda for Humanity. Against this ba ckdrop, I am calling
upon Member States and the United Nations to redouble efforts to prevent conflict and
to insist that gender equality be at the heart of every endeavour to establish a more
peaceful world.
114. Prioritizing gender equality and women’s empowerment in peace and security
settings must remain a continued effort in the long term. I strongly encourage my
successor to ensure that systems are in place for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda across the United Nations and I call upon Member States to
ensure that commitments are backed with political, human and financial support.

16-16785

31/31
