V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

support the realization of the Five-Year Plan of Cape Verde,
in accordance with the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
7. Requests the organizations, organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to continue and to increase their
assistance to Cape Verde, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to mobilize resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the measures they have taken and
the resources they have made available to help that country;
8. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance, made by the Government of Cape Verde or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system to help it cope
with the critical situation in the country;
9. Draws once again the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established ~t
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, m
accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99. for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
10. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to continue to consider, through their governing
bodies, the special needs of Cape Verde and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15
July 1983;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development
assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1983, on the progress made in
the implementation of the present resolution, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
in Cape Verde and to make a substantive report on further
progress in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for
the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/153.

Assi!itance to Djibouti5 9

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/216 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on the same subject in which it drew
the attention of the international community to the critical
economic situation confronting Djibouti and to the country's
urgent need for assistance,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 156 of 16 December 1981
in which it called upon the international community to continue to support the efforts made by the Government of
Djibouti to cope with the needs of the refugee population,
Recalling further its resolution 36/221 of 17 December
I 981 in which it appealed to the international community
59 See also resolution 37/147 above.

125

to contribute generously towards the projects and programmes to help the drought-affected populations,
Aware of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/
41 of 27 July 1982 in which the Council recommended the
inclusion of Djibouti in the list of least developed countries, 60
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 61
to which was annexed the report of the review mission which
he sent to Djibouti in 1982,
Taking note of the critical economic situation of Djibouti
and the list of urgent and priority projects, formulated by
the Government, that require international assistance,
Noting further that the Government of Djibouti will convene a donor's conference early in 1983 in order to seek
international support for the country's economic and social
development,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize an international programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;61
3. Notes with appreciation the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations;
4. Again draws the attention of the international community to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti and to the severe structural constraints to its
development;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to cope with its
difficult economic situation and to implement its development strategies;
6. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain
and increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme
of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to help that country;
7. Appeals to those States and organizations invited to
the donors' conference to be held in Djibouti early in 1983
to respond generously to the programme of assistance that
will be presented by the Government of Djibouti at that
time;
8. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To continue to ensure that adequate financial and
budgetary arrangements are made to mobilize resources and
to co-ordinate international assistance to Djibouti;
(c) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of I 983, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
"'' See resolution 37 / 133 above.
hi A/37/136.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

(d) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing
the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
I 09th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/154.

Assistance to the Comoros

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/212 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on assistance to the Comoros in
which it appealed to the international community to provide
effective and continuous financial, material and technical
assistance to the Comoros in order to help that country
overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the Comoros as a developing island country and as one of the least
developed countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the Comoros
has assigned to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting also the economic difficulties arising from the
country's scarcity of natural resources, compounded by recent drought and cyclones,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-ofpayments problems facing the Comoros,
Aware of the intention of the Government of the Comoros
to convene a donor's conference in the first quarter of 1983,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 62
to which was annexed the report of the review mission which
he sent to the Comoros in May 1982,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by Member
States, organizations of the United Nations system and other
organizations to its appeals and those of the SecretaryGeneral for assistance to the Comoros;
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance thus
far provided continues to fall short of the country's urgent
requirements and that assistance is still urgently required to
carry out the projects identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General; 62
4. Appeals to those States and organizations invited to
the donors' conference to be held in the Comoros early in
1983 to respond generously to the programme of assistance
that will be presented by the Government of the Comoros
at that time;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to provide the Comoros with assistance to enable it to cope
with its difficult economic situation and pursue its development goals;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to increase their
current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to report

periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to help that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1983, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for the
Comoros;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of the Comoros and in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/155.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/210 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of Chad and emergency humanitarian
assistance to that country,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Chad63 and on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in this regard, 64
as well as of the Co-ordinator's statement, 65
Noting with satisfaction that the stability of the situation
in Chad has enabled the Secretary-General to organize an
international conference on assistance to Chad in late November 1982 at Geneva, in close co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity and the Government of Chad,
A ware that serious destruction of property and extensive
damage to the economic and social infrastructure of Chad
over more than fifteen years, together with the effects of
natural disasters, have placed the country in a situation of
dire need,
I . Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General on
the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Chad;
2. Expresses its gratitude to all States, international
organizations and other agencies that have provided assistance to Chad;
3. Renews its appeal to all States, the appropriate organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations,
regional and international organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, and the
international financial institutions to contribute to the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Chad through bilateral
or multilateral channels, as appropriate;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the International Conference on Assistance to Chad was held at Geneva on 29
and 30 November 1982 and invites the States and agencies
which participated to honour as soon as possible the commitments they entered into at that Conference;
A/37/125 and Add. I.
See A/37/235 and Corr. I, annex I.
65
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Second Committee, 27th meeting, paras. 1-9.
63

64

62 A/37/128.

Special economic assistance to Chad
