United Nations

S/PV.6513

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6513th meeting
Wednesday, 13 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2011/211)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-29790 (E)

*1129790*

S/PV.6513

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-seventh progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2011/211)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Choi Young-Jin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Mr. Choi, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Abidjan. I thank Mr. Choi for his
participation and would ask him to remain with the
Council throughout today’s meeting, as I know that
many Council members wish to speak with him.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/211, which contains the twentyseventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Choi Young-Jin.
Mr. Choi: One of the world’s most open, free,
fair and transparent elections, which took place in Côte
d’Ivoire on 28 November 2010, has been forfeit to the
greed of the outgoing President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo.
Thus, an utterly unnecessary post-electoral crisis
erupted and lasted more than four months. Now, with
the taking into custody of Mr. Gbagbo, on 11 April, by
pro-Ouattara forces, we have witnessed the end of a
chapter in the history of Côte d’Ivoire.

2

Unlike some crises that have required massive
international military intervention, the Ivorian crisis
has been dealt with largely by Ivorians themselves. The
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the Security Council have been
providing the necessary framework within which the
Ivorian people themselves have faced their own
destiny. From that perspective, one may say that Côte
d’Ivoire represents a success story of a people
managing their own affairs with international support.
Yet, the major credit for bringing the post-electoral
crisis to an end must go to the Ivorian people. They
succeeded in making the will of the people, as
expressed during the presidential elections, prevail
largely by their own efforts. The date of 11 April must
therefore be remembered as the end of a demagogic
and Orwellian perversion by a regime that tried to cling
to power by military means, bringing about serious
pain and damage to Côte d’Ivoire.
Before I proceed, let me pay tribute to the French
Licorne Force for its most helpful cooperation,
including its crucial protection of the headquarters of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) at various moments during the crisis, as well
as for its timely restoration of the functioning of the
water distribution system in Abidjan, which relieved
the besieged UNOCI headquarters from 10 days of
water deprivation.
Let me now focus on the challenges that lie ahead
in Côte d’Ivoire. I would count four major challenges
as needing urgent attention from President Ouattara’s
Administration, with the assistance of the international
community. They are related to the protection of the
civilian population and national reconstruction.
The first challenge is the restoration of peace and
law and order throughout the country, particularly in
Abidjan. The second is the prevention of any further
human rights abuses and violations, and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, especially in the western part
of the country, where several serious problems have
already been reported. The third challenge is national
reconciliation. On that score, President Ouattara has
taken a very clear stance in favour of reconciliation over
retribution. The fourth, and perhaps most formidable,
challenge awaiting the Ivorian people appears to be
national reconstruction, particularly with regard to the
promotion of education, the creation of youth
employment, addressing the land ownership problem,
poverty eradication and economic development.

11-29790

S/PV.6513

Among other concrete measures, there are four
that must be taken urgently. The first is the swearing-in
of President Ouattara and the completion of the
organization of his Government. During the crisis,
President Ouattara could nominate only 13 of some 30
ministers. Many important Government posts also need
to be filled urgently.
The second, or perhaps concomitant, urgent task
would be the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the security
sector reform programmes.
The third measure, which is intimately connected
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and the security sector reform programmes, is the
reunification question, including the extension of State
authority to the northern part of the country and the
centralization of the Treasury.
The fourth measure pertains to the organization
of legislative elections which, in a certain sense, would
mark the real end of the post-electoral crisis by
creating a democratic Parliament that would be active
across the country.
With regard to those tasks, UNOCI will do its
utmost to provide its support and assistance to the
Ivorian people and authorities. In the meantime,
UNOCI is currently focusing on helping the efforts to
re-establish a secure environment and prevent a
security vacuum; collecting weapons and disarming
surrendering former pro-Gbagbo forces; securing vital
lifelines and strategic installations, such as the airport,
the seaport, bridges, and the presidential palace and
residence; protecting civilians, including Mr. Gbagbo’s
entourage, against reprisals; continuing documentation
of committed human rights violations; and facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Yet, in the end, it must be the Ivorian people who
shall forge their destiny. I remain hopeful. The Ivorian
people organized a most impressive election; they
succeeded largely by themselves in resolving the postelectoral crisis, which allowed for the will of the
people to prevail; and now they will march forward
towards national reconciliation and reconstruction,
with the assistance of the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Choi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.

11-29790

Ms. Amos: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Côte d’Ivoire, including findings from my mission last
week to Man and Duékoué in Côte d’Ivoire, and
Monrovia and Grand Gedeh county in Liberia.
Despite the arrest of Laurent Gbagbo, the
humanitarian situation in Côte d’Ivoire remains deeply
troubling. The crisis that followed elections in
November and the escalation we have seen in the past
weeks
have
had
far-reaching
humanitarian
consequences for ordinary people throughout Côte
d’Ivoire and its neighbouring countries. These effects
will not subside without a significant and sustained
effort from the humanitarian community, and the
combined efforts of the broader United Nations system
in Côte d’Ivoire contributing to stabilization and
reconciliation.
In Duékoué, at least 255 people were killed in a
massacre between 28 and 29 March, during which
grave violations of international law took place. People
told me harrowing stories about the executions and
kidnappings that occurred. More than 27,000 people
have been forced to find refuge at the Catholic mission
in Duékoué, and there are another 1,000 displaced
people at another site in the city. Some of them had
walked 200 kilometres or more through the bush to
reach relative safety. The camp exists because of the
heroism of the pastor at the mission. It is being
protected by United Nations peacekeepers, whose
commitment to the mission of the United Nations is
commendable. Their focus on the protection of
civilians has saved many lives.
The Council will hear from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights that mass killings
have taken place in several other towns and villages in
the west of the country. These are in addition to the
widespread and indiscriminate attacks against civilians
that have occurred in Abidjan since violence flared up
last December, including extrajudicial killings and
forced disappearances. Sexual violence has been
perpetrated particularly against women and children.
Human rights investigations are ongoing, and the
commission of inquiry requested by the Human Rights
Council will deploy soon. It is vital that those
responsible be held accountable for the crimes they
have committed. There can be no culture of impunity.
In Abidjan, many of the city’s 5 million people
are in crisis. Although open conflict has ceased, there

3

S/PV.6513

continue to be reports of sporadic violence. Many
families in the city are without food and are trapped in
their homes, too afraid of the militias and the fighting
to leave. Some have been forced by the violence to
flee. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has already
registered more than 130,000 displaced people in
Abidjan. Entire neighbourhoods have been without
electricity and water for weeks, raising concerns that
cholera, which is already present in Côte d’Ivoire,
could spread further.
Food is difficult to find in the markets and shops,
and prices have risen sharply. The World Food
Programme (WFP) has warned that malnutrition levels
in Abidjan and around the country are rising. Many
hospitals and health facilities have been unable to
operate properly. Those that have stayed open do not
have enough doctors, medicines or other basic
equipment to meet the needs. Schools have been closed
for months, leaving more than 800,000 children
without access to education.
Outside Abidjan, communities in the centre and
north, including Bouaké, have had to deal with the
influx of the at least 800,000 people whom UNHCR
estimates have been internally displaced. Many have
been taken in by host families; others have gathered in
spontaneous settlements. Heavy fighting in other cities
has also had serious humanitarian consequences. In
Daloa and Duékoué in the west, the south-western port
city of San-Pédro, Abengourou and Bondoukou in the
east, Tiébissou and the capital Yamoussoukro, medical
centres have treated many people suffering from
gunshot and machete wounds. In all these places,
distributions of food, water, sanitation materials and
other relief items are still urgently needed.
And we must also not overlook the grave
psychological impact that these weeks of violence have
had. People are immensely traumatized. They have
witnessed terrible violence, and many have been
directly targeted.
The humanitarian response to the crisis has so far
been severely impeded by the security situation around
the country, which has prevented aid agencies from
scaling up their operations and accessing those most in
need. Some international United Nations staff stayed in
Abidjan throughout the crisis; most relocated to Man
and Bouaké in recent days. Even for those who stayed,
their movements were severely impeded by the lack of

4

security. Immediately after the arrest of Mr. Gbagbo,
UNICEF was able to make a delivery of medical
supplies in Abidjan. It distributed essential medicines,
blankets, tents and nutritional supplements to a health
centre and a hospital in the Abidjan neighbourhood of
Treichville.
As soon as the security situation permits, it is
essential that more aid workers get into all areas of
Abidjan and that humanitarian organizations strengthen
their presence where they are most needed. A United
Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination team
has just arrived in Côte d’Ivoire to strengthen
humanitarian assessment, operations and coordination
for the ongoing relief effort.
Outside Abidjan, WFP is planning more airlifts in
the coming days to provide food assistance to tens of
thousands of internally displaced people. WFP, which
manages the humanitarian air service on behalf of the
whole aid community, plans to launch humanitarian
flights to northern towns such as Bouaké and Man,
where relief agencies have relocated their operations.
The World Health Organization has shipped additional
supplies of kits to treat trauma injuries, malaria and
infectious diseases, to support the people who fled
Abidjan. The Food and Agriculture Organization is
helping people to restart their livelihoods with seeds
and tools. Numerous other United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are also
active on the ground.
The humanitarian community launched two
emergency action plans in January to raise funds for
the humanitarian response in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
Both appeals have been revised to reflect the greatly
increased needs on the ground. Overall, we estimate
that about $300 million is needed to cover priority
humanitarian needs. As of today, $57 million has been
committed, which is only 15 per cent of what is
needed. We need to act now to deliver more food,
provide shelter and offer better medical treatment to
those who are sick. We must not let down the people of
Côte d’Ivoire and the region. I hope that Member
States will redouble their efforts and respond to the
needs in Côte d’Ivoire and the region.
Côte d’Ivoire’s neighbours — Liberia, Guinea,
Ghana, Mali and Burkina Faso — have between them
taken in more than 140,000 people since the crisis
began. More than 130,000 refugees are in Liberia. I
visited a refugee transit centre in Toe Town, in Grand

11-29790

S/PV.6513

Gedeh county, which is situated along the Liberia-Côte
d’Ivoire border. Most of the refugees are women and
children. They fled their homes with almost nothing.
The Government of Liberia and the Liberian people
need to be recognized for the welcome and support
they have given refugees. The majority of refugees are
staying in host communities, which also deserve
assistance. People are sharing their homes and their
limited supplies. Most of the people I spoke with
needed more food and non-food items, shelter, water
and sanitation and agricultural inputs. The ongoing
crisis forced many Ivorians to cross into the more
impoverished southern counties of Grand Gedeh and
Maryland. Access challenges related to the upcoming
rainy season are some of the factors worsening the
current humanitarian situation in Liberia.
While we can still count on Liberia to welcome
Ivorian refugees, the Government is obviously
concerned about the security and other economic and
social impacts of the Ivorian refugee crisis on Liberia.
Liberian authorities, United Nations agencies and our
partner NGOs are doing their utmost to ensure that the
response is adequate. But we still have a long way to go.
It was clear to me from my discussions in Côte
d’Ivoire that there are still many political challenges
ahead. Those challenges and the current social
tensions, which also impact on civilians, are likely to
continue for some time. In this highly militarized
context, I am concerned about the security vacuum in
certain parts of the country. It is important that UNOCI
continues to robustly pursue the implementation of its
protection-of-civilians
mandate,
including
by
deploying into areas where civilians continue to be at
risk, and take appropriate action to deter threats.
It is crucial that we remind President Ouattara
that his Government and he as President must take
seriously their responsibilities to abide by international
law and to take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection of all civilians. All armed groups also
continue to bear responsibilities in that regard. Equally
important is the need to avoid retaliation, end impunity
and focus on reconciliation and social cohesion.
I have recently discussed with humanitarian
agencies and our partners the urgency of scaling-up our
activities in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia to immediately
respond to the needs of all affected people. We need to
continue to make every effort to ensure that assistance
is coordinated and provided in as coherent a way as

11-29790

possible. The people of Cote d’Ivoire deserve our
support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Navanethem Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I am very grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
human rights situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Let me begin by saying that I welcome the
growing recognition that human rights concerns are
central to the issues of peace and security. In Côte
d’Ivoire there is a history of human rights violations
without any accountability or redress, including
discrimination, particularly against people in the north.
Côte d’Ivoire was plagued by years of violence, which
was further fuelled by disregard for the people’s right
to choose their own leadership.
The recent arrest of former President Laurent
Gbagbo offers the prospect of an end to the conflict.
Nonetheless, the serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law that have occurred
must be addressed, or they may yet serve as cause for
further future destabilization in an already fragile
situation. Immediate and decisive action is now called
for, not only to respond to the dire humanitarian needs
that my colleague has referred to but also to build
public confidence in the rule of law and ensure that
justice is done.
Reconciliation will not be accomplished without
meaningful accountability, which has been lacking in
Côte d’Ivoire over the past decade. In 2004, an
international commission of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General identified alleged perpetrators and
recommended accountability mechanisms, which were
never implemented. To achieve
peace and
reconciliation, the cycle of impunity must be stopped,
perpetrators must be brought to justice and victims
must be rehabilitated in their rights and dignity.
As part of the United Nations coordinated
response, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights conducted a mission
to Côte d’Ivoire from 2 to 9 April, which was led by
my Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović. The
purpose of the mission was to assess the human rights
situation in the country and to remind all parties of
their obligation to respect international human rights
and humanitarian law and of the importance of

5

S/PV.6513

bringing perpetrators to justice as a prerequisite to
sustainable peace.
The mission visited Abidjan and the west of the
country. Its members met with President Ouattara, the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights and the Minister
of Health. They also held meetings with victims and
witnesses, as well as with the United Nations country
team and humanitarian actors. The mission found
evidence of large-scale human rights violations,
including
extra-judicial
killings,
enforced
disappearances, torture and sexual violence in Abidjan
and the rest of the country in the course of the conflict.
The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) Human Rights Division estimates that at
least 400 people were killed in Abidjan between the
first round of presidential elections and the entry of the
Forces républicaines into the city. The dangerous
security situation held the inhabitants of Abidjan
hostage, leaving them short of food, water and
medicines. Many others were directly targeted by
uncontrolled armed elements, including through the
use of heavy weapons. Extended looting and pillaging
of shops and private homes by militia groups, and in
some cases by the Forces républicaines, contributed to
the climate of insecurity and fear.
The human rights call centre established by the
Human Rights Division continues to receive distress
calls from victims. Since its inception, the centre has
registered more than 12,000 calls, 75 per cent of which
pertained to alleged human rights violations. In a very
restricted security environment, the human rights call
centre has proved to be an essential tool for the
collection of information for the Mission and has
provided a much needed link with the civilian
population trapped in Abidjan.
Towns in the west of the country, such as
Duékoué, have reportedly been the scene of large-scale
killings from the second half of March, leading to a
total displacement of at least 28,000 people from
Duékoué alone. Preliminary investigations carried out
by the Human Rights Division suggest that at least 500
people have been killed, including 255 people in
Duékoué, more than 100 in Guiglo, 79 in Bloléquin
and possibly 100 in Bangolo. In the Carrefour
neighbourhood of Duékoué, which was known to be a
former stronghold of pro-Gbagbo militia from the
Guéré community, 229 bodies were found, mostly of
young men dressed in civilian clothes.

6

While additional investigation is needed to
determine the exact circumstances of the killings and
the identity of perpetrators and victims, the area was
known to be hosting a heavy presence of pro-Gbagbo
militiamen
and
had
witnessed
ethnic
and
inter-communal tensions over the exploitation of land
resources. During March, the area was under the
control of pro-Gbagbo forces, and later pro-Ouattara
forces as the Forces républicaines advanced further
south towards Abidjan. Killings and acts of retaliation
were reported on both sides, sometimes with the
involvement of the local population.
As President Ouattara is now effectively taking
power in Côte d’Ivoire, it is of the utmost importance
that, in the transition, all necessary measures be taken
to prevent a security vacuum or acts of retaliation. Law
and order should be restored as soon as possible in
Abidjan, including through the collection of weapons,
which are all too readily available in the city.
President Ouattara’s pledge, on 7 April, to
establish a truth and reconciliation commission and to
punish those who committed crimes or acts of
vengeance is a positive and welcome step. Of course,
transitional justice processes must be comprehensive
and
interconnected
and
include
meaningful
accountability, such as prosecutions and vetting. These
commitments must be implemented. My Office stands
ready to assist President Ouattara and his Government
in the development of a transitional justice strategy for
the country. Perpetrators must be held accountable for
crimes committed regardless of their affiliation, and all
should be treated with dignity and respect for human
rights, including the right to a fair trial.
I am particularly concerned about the climate of
entrenched division and distrust among the
communities after years of discrimination and
violence, which has been further exacerbated through
the propagation of inflammatory messages and the
wave of retaliation killings reportedly committed by
both sides. Rebuilding social cohesion and fostering
reconciliation between communities will need to be
one of the main priorities of the Government and will
require the support of the international community.
In response to the human rights crisis in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Human Rights Council established an
independent commission of inquiry. The commission
has been mandated to investigate the facts and
circumstances surrounding the allegations of serious

11-29790

S/PV.6513

abuses and violations of human rights committed in the
aftermath of the 28 November 2010 elections.
Yesterday, the President of the Human Rights Council
announced the appointment of three high-level experts
as members of the commission of inquiry. They are
Mr. Vitit Muntabhorn of Thailand, who will serve as
Chair of the commission, Mr. Suliman Baldo of the
Sudan and Mrs. Reine Alapini-Gansou of Benin. The
independent commission of inquiry was asked to report
back to the Human Rights Council at its next session,
in June. We hope that the commission of inquiry will
receive full cooperation.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
for his leadership and to commend the work of the
UNOCI Human Rights Division under difficult security
conditions.
Let me conclude by suggesting that Côte d’Ivoire
is another striking example of the inextricable link
between peace, justice and human rights. Rights,
justice and accountability will bolster the prospects for
sustainable peace, an outcome to which the people of
Côte d’Ivoire are entitled. They deserve our full
support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Pillay for her informative briefing.
I now give the floor
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire.

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Beginning four months ago, the Ivorian post-electoral
crisis, provoked by the refusal of the former President,
Mr. Gbagbo, to accept the verdict of the ballot box,
reached a critical point when he was arrested by the
Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) on
Monday, 11 April. This event is a turning point in the
resolution of the Ivorian post-electoral crisis inasmuch
as the legitimately elected President of Côte d’Ivoire,
His Excellency Alassane Ouattara, has now assumed
the full range of powers, in line with resolution 1962
(2010).
All of the generals, in particular General Mangou,
Chief of Staff of the armed forces, General Kassaraté,
Commander of the gendarmerie, General Detoh Letoh,
Commander of the ground forces, and General
Brindou, Director-General of the national police, have
sworn allegiance to President Alassane Ouattara. In
addition, civilian populations in Côte d’Ivoire have

11-29790

been effectively protected from massacres carried out
with heavy weaponry after such weapons were
destroyed by the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and Operation Licorne pursuant to
resolution 1975 (2011).
At this stage, my delegation would like to
express, on behalf of President Ouattara, the
Government and the people of Côte d’Ivoire, our
deepest gratitude to the Security Council for the
responsible approach that the Council adopted in
responding to the distress calls by civilian populations
living in Côte d’Ivoire and for coming to their aid. My
delegation would also like to pay tribute to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and decisive
commitment, which allowed us to save countless lives
caught up in the killing spree initiated by the former
President of Côte d’Ivoire. We also thank the UnderSecretaries-General of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support and
their respective colleagues, without forgetting the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Côte d’Ivoire, his team and all of UNOCI’s staff on the
ground.
Several very significant challenges await
President Alassane Ouattara and the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, and they are all urgent. First of all, the
President has given the necessary instructions to the
various force commanders to immediately take
appropriate measures to restore public order and
security. Therefore, starting today, all of the security
corridors will once again be operational, and patrols
will be reactivated and will include elements from the
FRCI, UNOCI and impartial forces. Six police sectors,
including the anti-riot squad and the Companies
républicaines de securité 1 and 2, are already
operational while awaiting the gradual reopening of
police stations. The gendarmerie brigades will also
gradually be reopened. We note that the Sassandra
Brigade, in the south-west of the country, is already
reactivated.
A general appeal has been launched to the entire
population for individuals who are not in the regular
forces of the FRCI, and who still have arms, to deliver
them to police stations or any law enforcement venue.
All generals and commanders of the various units
have officially proclaimed the end of hostilities. They
have called for coordination and synergy among the
various components of the army, which will need to be

7

S/PV.6513

strengthened rather quickly to allow the forces of law
and order to more effectively protect people and
property, guarantee free movement and pacify lawless
zones.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, the
re-establishment of water and electricity delivery is
now allowing for the satisfactory operation of health
centres, which will continue to be strengthened. The
reopening of the ports of Abidjan and San-Pédro, as
well as the Félix Houphouët Boigny International
Airport in Abidjan, has allowed the large-scale delivery
of required humanitarian assistance, especially
medicine.
As part of the presidential emergency
programme, public health activities, particularly the
removal of bodies abandoned out of doors, have begun.
Household garbage removal and the cleaning of roads
are to take place without delay. The health alert is high
with respect to the risk of cholera and meningitis
epidemics, but these are being closely monitored.
Displaced persons are also beginning to return home.
With respect to the human rights situation, the
protection of civilian populations was at the heart of
the post-electoral crisis. It was to protect civilian
populations that resolution 1975 (2011) was
implemented to destroy Mr. Gbagbo’s heavy weapons.
It was also to protect civilian populations that the
Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire launched the
offensive that led to the arrest of Mr. Gbagbo.
Indeed, civilians living in Côte d’Ivoire were
killed throughout the country by mercenary militias and
forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo seeking to maintain his reign
by terror. The situation was of grave concern in western
Côte d’Ivoire, particularly in Duékoué, Guiglo,
Bloléquin and Bangolo, due to the presence of numerous
mercenaries from Liberia recruited by pro-Gbagbo
political leaders in the region, who perpetrated largescale killings against non-native populations. These
mercenaries were criminally associated with local
militias armed by local politicians of Mr. Gbagbo’s
party, who fomented recurrent land problems in those
areas in order to ignite hatred and inter-ethnic conflict.
The Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire
successfully fought the mercenaries and militias and
saved many lives. Their actions allowed for the return
into those areas of UNOCI and humanitarian
associations, which had abandoned them because of
excessive insecurity. Grave allegations of human rights

8

violations have been made in these regions of western
Côte d’Ivoire, with the alleged involvement of the
Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire. My delegation
expresses its deep concern about these allegations and
hopes that light will be shed upon these events through
investigations, inquiries and the appropriate judicial
procedures, including international procedures. No
crime should go unpunished.
The President of the Republic, Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, is the President of all Ivorians. He respects
the lives and well-being of all people living in Côte
d’Ivoire. Respect for human rights and the rule of law
are at the heart of his Government’s agenda. He has
therefore instructed the Public Prosecutor of Daloa to
launch judicial investigations to establish the facts and
bring the perpetrators to justice.
My delegation welcomes the recent visit to Côte
d’Ivoire of the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Šimonović, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos. We hope that
their reports will help to shed light on human rights
violations in Duékoué.
The statement of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, was very
important and fully in line with our expectations.
Similarly, my delegation welcomes the nomination of
three commissioners to the international commission of
inquiry established on 25 March by the United Nations
Human Rights Council
“to investigate the allegations of serious abuses
and violations of human rights committed in Côte
d’Ivoire following the 28 November polls in
order to identify those responsible for those acts
and bring them to justice” (S/2011/211, para. 59).
During his various broadcast statements and
telephone conversations with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and with his counterpart Heads of State,
President Ouattara has always and unambiguously
reaffirmed his will to an end all violence and to open
transparent investigations leading to fair trials and
assigning responsibility to all the perpetrators of
violence, whatever their camp. President Ouattara calls
for the immediate establishment of a truth, justice and
reconciliation commission in order to mend the fabric
of Ivorian human relations, which has been
considerably damaged by 10 years of painful conflict,
and to thereby restore social cohesion in the context of

11-29790

S/PV.6513

a process of collective soul-searching and internal
healing in truth, justice and forgiveness.
That is the price we must pay for the challenge
and success of national reconstruction. The President
of the Republic, as he promised during the electoral
campaign — a promise that has assumed its full
meaning at these critical times in our country — will
very soon put together a broad-based and inclusive
Government that will draw on the competencies of all
political forces of the country in such a way that all the
sons and daughters of Côte d’Ivoire will own the vast
reconstruction process in the post-crisis phase,
allowing our country to enter an era of peace, stability
and prosperity. To that end, we will continue to rely on
the invaluable assistance of the United Nations, not
only in the immediate task of restoring law and order,
security and humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, but above all with respect to longerterm challenges, which will require the conversion of
UNOCI from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

From this standpoint, my delegation welcomes
the good news that public assistance is to be restored to
Côte d’Ivoire. We express our thanks to France, which
has allocated €400 million on an emergency basis; to
the European Union, which has allocated €180 million;
and to the World Bank, whose President, Mr. Zoellick,
has said that his institution will resume activities in
Côte d’Ivoire. My delegation therefore calls on all our
traditional partners and invites new and potential
partners to mobilize to give substance to the hope of
what the emergence of democracy in our country could
represent and achieve for the rapid development of our
continent. Yes, support for ensuring that the will of the
people of Côte d’Ivoire is respected will help to
strengthen democracy on the African continent and the
well-being of our peoples, and especially a well-trained
younger generation, which, even more than our natural
resources, remains the true wealth of our continent.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on my list. I invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

11-29790

9
