L.

M. Application of the Republic of Georgia

Application of the Republic of Bosnia and Henegovina

Decisions

Decisions

At its 3078th meeting, on 20 May 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina400 for
membership in the United Nations to the Committee on the
Admission of New Members for examination and report, as
provided in rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3090th meeting, on 2 July 1992, the Council.
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application ofthe Republic ofGeorgia<IOJ formembership in the
United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3079th meeting, also on 20 May 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members401 conceming the application of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for admission to membership in the
United Nations.

At its 3091st meeting, on 6 July 1992, the Council discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members404 conceming the application of the Republic of
Georgia for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 755 (1992)

Resolution 763 (1992)

of 20 May 1992

of 6 July 1992

The Security Council,

The Security Council,

Having examined the application of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for admission to the United Nations,41.i

Having examined the application of the Republic of
Georgia for admission to the United Nations, 403

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Georgia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
Adopled without a vote al the 3091st
meeting

Adopted without a vole al the 3079th
meeting

Decision

Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution
755 (1992), the President made the following statement on
behalf of the members of the Council: 402

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution
763 (1992), the President made the following statement on
behalf of the members of the Council: 405

"1 am pleased, on behalf of the members of the Council,
to extend our congratulations to the Republic ofBosnia and
Herzegovina on the occasion of the Council's recommendation to the General Assemblythat Bosnia and Herzegovina
be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

"The Council hasjustrecommended that the Republic
of Georgia be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of the
members of the Council, I congratulate Georgia on this
happy and historie occasion. We look forward to this
further strengthening of the principle of universality.

"We note with great satisfaction Bosnia and Herzegovina's solemn commitment to uphold the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
include the principles relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the non-use of force, and to fulfil ail the
obligations contained in the Charter.

"Georgia's solemn commitment to uphold the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which include the principles relating to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use of force, is noted
with great satisfaction by the members of the Council. Ali
the members of the Council look forward to the day, in the
near future, when Georgia will join us as a Member of the
United Nations."

"Ali the members of the Council are confident that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will make a significant contribution to the work of the Organization."

116
