so

General A11embly-Twenty-fifth SeHion

Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
D.

Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic
Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

2638 (XXV). Special International Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 2578 (XXIV) of 15
December 1969,
Considering Industrial Development Board resolution 29 (IV) of 30 April 197011 on the Special International Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization,
Noting the report of the Executive Dir~ctor on. the
Special International Conference of the Umted Nations
Industrial Development Organization,12
Bearing in mind the proclamation of t_he Seco~d
United Nations Development Decade, with special
reference to the goals and policy measur~s related to
industrial development that are mcluded m the International Development Strategy for the Decade as
adopted by the General Assembly on 24 October
1970, 18
1. Decides to convene a Special International Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at the highest possible level of governmental representation, to be held in Vienna from 1
to 8 June 1971 following the fifth session of the
Industrial Development Board, in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of Industrial Development
Board resolution 29 (IV);
2. Requests the Executive Director and the Advisory
Committee for the Special International Conference
to prepare the document~tion for the Confer~nce in . a
concise and comprehensive way and sufficiently ID
advance to enable the Industrial Development Board,
at its fifth session, to undertake comprehensive consultations and preparatory work in this respect;
3. Considers that this preparatory work should be
undertaken with due regard to the relevant discussions
in the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Special International Conference
to transmit its report through the Economic and Social
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 16 A/8016), p. 166.
12 Jbid., Twenty-fifth Ses:i,on, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/8073.
18 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

Council to the General Assembly for consideration at
its twenty-sixth session.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.
2639 (XXV). Report of the Industrial
Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 2152
(XXI) of 17 November 1966,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its fourth session, 1 '
Keeping in mind the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, adopted by the General Assembly on 24
October 1970,1 ~
1. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its fourth session;
2. Urges the Industrial Development Board to ensure that all the resources available for the activities
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization shall be used, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2152 (XXI}, to serve most
effectively the objectives of industrialization within the
framework of the Secoud United Nations Development
Decade;
3. Stresses the need to provide the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization with adequate
manpower and resources for its field activities to enable
it to give greater substantive support. for the imp~ementation of a larger number of pro1ects for the mdustrial development of developing countries;
4. Recommends that the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, taking into
account the country-programming procedures, study
ways and means of increasing the number of projects
for which the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization is designated as executing agency;
5. Recognizes the need to increase further the cooperative endeavour of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the countries participating in it to improve its operational programmes and
field activities;
6. Reaffirms the importance of the programme of
industrial field advisers and urges the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to
provide the necessary financing for a larger number
of field advisers, bearing in mind the need for, and
the importance of, the strengthening by the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization of its
links with the field;
1. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to take all the necessary measures to ensure, within the new provisions
of the Programme, the continuity of the programme of
Special Industrial Services, which has proved to be
highly effective as a flexible instrument of assistance
to meet the particular requirements of the developing
countries in the field of industry;
8. Draws the attention of Governments to its invitation to provide additional resources through voluntary
contributions to the United Nations Industrial Develop14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8016).
15 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
