United Nations

S/PV.4161

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4161

st meeting
Tuesday, 20 June 2000, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Levitte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Duval
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Ward
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Issouf Maiga
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-48960 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4161

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Judge Claude Jorda, President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Judge Jorda to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 14 June 2000 from the Secretary-General and its
enclosures, document S/2000/597.
Members of the Council also have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 12 May 2000 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council, and of a letter dated 14 June 2000
from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Judge Claude Jorda, President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
I now call on Judge Jorda.
Mr. Jorda (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me first to express my gratitude for the honour
you have bestowed on me by providing me with the
opportunity to address the Council. I say this not just
on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of the
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY), who appointed me to my
post in November 1999. This is yet another indication
of the Council’s unflagging interest in our work.
Quite recently the Council received and heard the
Prosecutor, Mrs. Del Ponte. She spoke of her concerns
and of her criminal policy. Of course, her statement
related mainly to her work. The Council will not be
surprised, therefore, that shortly thereafter, the
President of the ICTY has come here to speak in his
capacity as a judge to share with the Council the
judges’ concerns about the functioning of the Tribunal.
I will be presenting these concerns on the basis of a
report we prepared, which I had the honour of filing
with the Secretary-General on 12 May last. This is
what I wish to brief the Council on.
Why are we seeking to improve, or even to
reform, the ICTY? In the document presented in
support of our proposals which was circulated to the
Council, several answers to this question can be found.
I will therefore limit my comments to emphasizing
some of the most outstanding points.
What we are saying is that the time has come to
put forward proposals designed to make our Tribunal
more effective. In this respect, we are taking up the
objectives of the Expert Group mandated by the
Secretary-General to evaluate the effectiveness of the
Tribunal’s activities, pursuant to the General
Assembly’s resolution of 18 December 1998. As the
Council is aware, that Group studied every aspect of
the Tribunal’s functioning for more than six months.
The very significant and productive work of this Group
gave rise to 46 particularly relevant recommendations,
which have been of great benefit to the Tribunal. I can
answer questions in this respect if the Council deems it

S/PV.4161

advisable. Indeed, many of these recommendations
have already been implemented, or will soon be.
The Council may wonder why a further report is
necessary or why new proposals are needed. It is
because the perspective here is different, even
complementary.
The analytical and reflective work done by the
judges is primarily judicial and consists of the judges’
views of their own activities. More than that, however,
this is their first attempt to project themselves into the
future using as a starting point a critical evaluation of
their strictly judicial activity. Our report does not
supplant that of the Expert Group but is, in some
respects, a forward-looking extension of it.
The conclusion we have reached is that, on some
points at least, the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia must be reformed. Reform is
needed because the Tribunal is about to succeed in its
mission or, to be more precise, the missions entrusted
to it in 1993 by the Security Council.
Behind this apparent paradox are several facts
that must be taken into account in order to assess the
need for this historic instrument of international justice
to move once and for all out of the age of official
recognition to that of universal credibility, the only one
that is truly of importance to anyone seeking real
progress in the field of human rights.
More than six years after its establishment, has
the Tribunal met these expectations? Has it achieved
the missions entrusted to it?
If one attempts to move away from the scepticism
that surrounded this institution’s first steps, recalling
that the Tribunal was set up at a time when the conflict
was still raging and when the leaders, the main players
in the conflict, were — and to some extent are still —
the heads of their Governments, one can objectively
conclude that the Tribunal has fulfilled many of the
hopes placed in it.
But it is impossible to gloss over the difficulties
encountered, which, in several respects, prevent me
from feeling any kind of self-satisfaction. The opposite
is true, I think. An unflinching review must be the
starting point for suggesting ways to initiate reforms
designed to transform a tentative success into a
decisive and irreversible step in the progress of
international humanitarian law.

Let me return to the responsibilities of the
Tribunal. To judge those responsible for “ethnic
cleansing”, to render justice to the victims, to prevent
recidivism and to work on ensuring that history is not
rewritten by blind revisionism was, and is, the
immense task entrusted in November 1993 to the 11
judges from the five continents who were elected by
the General Assembly.
Let us be clear: the establishment of the Tribunal
has not prevented recidivism. The fall of the Srebrenica
enclave and, later, the hundreds of thousands of
Albanians expelled from Kosovo are seared into the
hearts of those who believe in the exemplary virtue of
justice. Perhaps this weapon was not in and of itself
sufficient, or perhaps it was too tentative, to succeed in
driving away the deadly fumes of nationalism by threat
alone.
Establishing the truth behind events and
preventing all forms of revisionism have always been
the underlying objectives of all international criminal
justice systems, and in particular the system practised
in The Hague. Much has been accomplished on that
score. The atrocities committed and the plans that were
their inspiration are no longer merely the subject of
media accounts or of the descriptions of commissions
of experts, which are always vulnerable to polemic.
These events have entered into the realm of
incontrovertible judicial evidence. Vukovar, Sarajevo,
Srebrenica and so many other places where acts of
cruelty took place have also become legal sites through
the trials of the main persons accused who played the
principal roles in what happened.
But prosecuting and trying those responsible is
nevertheless the raison d’être of any criminal court.
When it comes to an extraordinary type of justice, such
as that rendered in The Hague, and because the most
serious crimes committed against humanity are
involved, that justice must also be especially
exemplary. I think we would all agree on this. That
justice must also conform to the highest standards of
humanitarian international law in respect of both the
victims and the accused. In short, it must move that law
forward, a law that is constantly being reborn.
As regards the strictly judicial record, and in view
of the background on which this institution was
created, I believe one would need to be a partial or very
partisan observer — and it is true that there are still
many of those today — not to credit the Tribunal with

3

S/PV.4161

a certain amount of progress. I would like to recall here
that — beginning with absolutely nothing, neither a
body of judicial or procedural rules, no logistical
capacities, no budget, facilities or accused persons —
in six years the Tribunal has adopted a number of rules
and directives, including the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence, to which we shall return, the Detention
Rules, and the directive on the assignment of defence
counsel. It has set up its Detention Unit along with its
Victims and Witnesses Section. The Tribunal has
indicted 96 individuals — 36 of whom are currently in
detention — rendered 16 judgements on the merits of
cases and issued several hundred interlocutory
decisions and orders of various sorts, including some
on very important matters for which there was no
international precedent. Above all, however, I believe
it has demonstrated what is most essential: the fact that
an international judicial institution is both feasible and
operational.
Nonetheless, the time seems ripe to ask questions
as to the Tribunal’s future and to attempt to anticipate
many of the difficulties that I have spoken about, and
to which I shall return, which if not got under control
and resolved may put at risk the accomplishment of its
mission and compromise its very raison d'être. We feel
that the time is now right. The Tribunal has reached a
turning point in its history. Its very success, like many
internal or peripheral factors, has led us to propose a
number of measures to those who have the political
responsibility for deciding what is to become of the
Tribunal in the future, namely, the Security Council.
First, there are the evident and significant
political changes in the Balkan region, changes that
may even be said to be accelerating and whose impact
must be measured. These are followed by other factors
that must be considered, such as the increasingly
assertive support of the international community; in
response to our constant calls, it has ensured that we
have ever-more active cooperation with regard to
arrests, which are now increasing regularly. The
Tribunal is, as a result, confronted with the matter of
“quantitative” management, even though it cannot
yield as regards the exemplary and “qualitative”
character of its proceedings. But no matter how
exemplary our trials seek to be, they have nevertheless
become increasingly complex as judges deal with
questions and problems for which no ready-made
solutions exist in international criminal law.

4

The perspective of the Office of the Prosecutor
should also be included. I would like to repeat that this
body is completely independent of the judges, as it
should be. Here I am referring to criminal policy,
which we do not make, and which will be followed
much more regularly in the months and years to come.
Several dozen investigations are ongoing, which, when
added to those already conducted and completed, will
bring almost 200 accused persons to The Hague. Ms.
Del Ponte confirmed this figure to the Council two
weeks ago.
Is it conceivable that high-level political and
military officials — whether they have surrendered or
have been arrested — would spend long months in
detention awaiting trials? Pre-trial detention has
already become lengthy, which has given rise to
disputes over requests for provisional release. As the
Council knows, and I shall not go into detail, some of
those requests have been granted by judges. It is
paradoxical that such a situation should arise at a time
when the Tribunal is pressing for the arrest of all those
it has indicted.
Lastly, and not least important for both us and the
Council, the place the Tribunal now occupies within
the mechanism of international humanitarian law,
especially in view of the establishment and
implementation of the International Criminal Court,
places a degree of responsibility on the Council and on
us. In this regard, there is no question that much of
what is being done in The Hague will serve, at best, as
an example of what should be done and, at worst, as an
example of what should not be done. By demonstrating
that universal criminal justice is possible and feasible
the Tribunal has in some respects assisted in the putting
in place of a more permanent judicial organ. Still, this
demonstration must continue until the end. A failure of
the Tribunal for whatever reason would deal an
extremely heavy blow to the future Court at the very
moment that many States are on the verge of ratifying
the treaty that established it.
It must be noted that the Tribunal’s prospects are
worrisome and that it is now necessary to anticipate
what may happen. The workload of the Tribunal is
currently so heavy that, if no remedy is found
immediately, the institution’s very credibility will be
called into question. We owe the accused a trial that is
of course fair, but also one that is expeditious. We owe
expeditious trials to the victims and also to the
international community, which has placed its faith in

S/PV.4161

us. It is true that although the need for expeditiousness
is an excruciating problem for all advanced legal
systems, the need in an international criminal justice
system is even more critical, because crimes recede
into the past and are increasingly removed from the
commission of the criminal acts themselves. The
collection of evidence is often in the hands of the
States involved in the conflict or, as the Council is
aware, even in the hands of other States involved in the
interposition or peacekeeping forces. The diplomatic
and political component inherent in an unprecedented
judicial institution creates the major problems facing
the Tribunal. These are all factors that do not
contribute expeditiousness. They also explain why the
procedural system, despite the many changes designed
to accelerate matters, still leaves trials too much in the
hands of the parties.
We must be clear. The prospective study that the
Tribunal has just conducted shows that if nothing
changes — either with regard to criminal policy, the
rules of procedure or the Tribunal’s format and
organization — and that if, conversely, all the
elements, especially the political ones, are moving
towards an unavoidable increase in cases, then there is
no doubt that the Tribunal’s original 1993 four-year
mandate, which was renewed in 1997 for an equal
duration, will need to be extended not once, not twice,
but at least three or four times. But from my point of
view, this situation would penalize both the accused
and the victims. International justice would not be any
grander as a result.
What should be done then? What should be
proposed? I did not come before the Council to offer
only a diagnosis. Far from wanting to paint an overly
dramatic picture, I believe that things should instead be
properly considered. By that I mean that we must be
aware that problems exist that are related to the very
vitality of the institution and not to any type of possible
debility. We are faced with a “growing pain” that we
must control rather than letting it control us.
After having considered the entire range of
possible solutions — at least those falling within their
province, the non-political solutions — and after
having analysed all the advantages and disadvantages,
the judges unanimously supported a flexible, pragmatic
solution that combines internal procedural, practical
and organizational reforms and, of course, reforms that
would reinforce the Chambers’ trial capacity. I would
like to generally describe what is proposed.

The idea is simple: the practice of an initially
highly adversarial procedure has shown us that more
initiative and manoeuvrability should be left to the
judges, who in the final analysis are the sole custodians
of the universal values that underpin the missions
assigned to them. This trend, which began in 1998,
relates first and foremost to the pre-trial phase, that
phase between the initial appearance of the accused
following his arrest and the beginning of the
proceedings themselves. This phase was put under the
control of a pre-trial judge, a Tribunal judge working in
this capacity. In the plan presented to the Council, this
phase, known as pre-trial case preparation, would be
handled in part by professional legal experts, who
themselves would be acting under the authority and
control of the judges. I emphasize this point because I
know it can raise some questions on the control and
authority of judges.
This phase would make it possible to have an
ongoing, fruitful dialogue with the parties, in order to
give us a trial pruned of all its useless branches and
focused on the real factual and legal issues. This pretrial phase of the case would be — and this is not the
least of its advantages — dealt with on a priority basis
by the judges right after the accused’s initial
appearance. The accused would then see his case being
dealt with immediately following his arrest, which is
not always the case today because of the large
workload of judges, whose time is almost completely
taken up by hearings. The pre-trial phase would thus be
conducted on an uninterrupted basis, free of the
chronic bottlenecks in the Chambers.
However, the fluidity gained at the pre-trial phase
is meaningful only if the many trials — that is, the
many hearings — can be held as soon as they ready.
This is the second aspect of the proposed reform,
which, naturally, complements the first. In order to deal
with the significant number of trials awaiting them —
61, I think — and without formally rejecting the
creation of additional trial chambers along the lines of
what was adopted at our request in 1997, the judges
then also opted for a flexible model adaptable to the
necessarily changing situations that the Tribunal has
been facing and will continue to face.
The creation of a pool of Judges who would be
called on as soon as a case was trial-ready, and only for
that one trial, seemed to us a solution with merit in
several respects. It would be best suited to the irregular
pace of the indictments, arrests or even important

5

S/PV.4161

incidents that may affect the pre-trial phase. Since the
ad litem judges would be called to The Hague for a
specific case only, many more judges, and
consequently many more States, would participate in
the work of international justice.
The document that has been prepared shows the
high level of productivity that can be expected from the
proposed combined solution. In practical terms, the
period of the mandate assigned to the Tribunal — at
least insofar as the first-instance trials are concerned,
and I will return to this later — could be shortened to
terminate at the end of 2007, instead of 2016, a gain of
9 years; that is, half the time. We can therefore hope
that at the time the International Criminal Court is set
up, our International Criminal Tribunal will have
completed its task at least in terms of first-instance
trials. Of course, appeals would remain. That alone
presents particular complex problems because it is
attached to the appeals proceedings in the Rwanda
Tribunal, judges from The Hague will take up the
Rwanda appeals. In that regard, we support the idea of
reinforcing the Appeals Chamber with two additional
ad hoc judges, as recommended by the Expert Group.
Let me add that the solution of resorting to ad litem
Judges will be valid for the Appeals Chamber because
by 2007 first-instance trials will have been concluded. I
believe there are 14 Tribunal judges who could
complete the cases under appeal.
The judges are aware that these proposals will not
resolve all the questions. We also know that their
implementation raises many questions. However, while
the judges have exceeded their role to a certain extent,
they have also presented their reflections on a set of
outstanding questions, on which the judges are
sometimes divided.
The statutory implications were also considered.
In this respect, the plan appears to be overly focused on
the Tribunal’s productivity. It is true that that remains
our highest priority. However, other aspects relating to
the Tribunal’s operation have not escaped our attention.
Through two permanent working groups — the rules
committee, presided over by the British Judge Richard
May, and the judicial practices working group, presided
over by the Portuguese Judge Almiro Rodrigues — the
judges are constantly striving to improve the way they
themselves operate, I can assure the Council.
I would, moreover, like to state that the proposed
changes would require an amendment to the statute. I

6

appreciate how difficult this would be, but an
amendment was already made in 1997. I believe it is
legitimate for an institution in existence for almost
seven years to make adjustments requiring a legal
basis, which amendments to the Rules of Procedure
alone would not provide. Changes dealing with the
establishment of ad litem judges could also be used to
introduce into the statute several other modifications
dealing, for example, with additional judges for the
Appeals Chamber, as recommended by the Expert
Group of which I spoke a moment ago; or with the
important matter of compensation for persons unjustly
detained or prosecuted; or with the suggestions made
here by Ms. Del Ponte two weeks ago relating to
compensation for victims funded by the seizure of the
revenues of the convicted. Subject to the opinion of my
colleagues, I fully support those suggestions.
Lastly, I would like to add that the document
presented to is not a budgetary document. That is true.
Such an analysis does not fall within the jurisdiction of
the judges. Nonetheless, mindful of the financial
burden represented by the Tribunal — $95.8 million
per year — the Judges, I can assure the Council, have
made their own proposals, always bearing in mind this
important aspect of the proposed reform. In this
respect, recourse to ad litem judges seems to be the
least costly solution, when compared to the creation of
additional Chambers with permanent judges.
Above all, however, given that our demonstration
may not have been entirely conclusive, it appeared
especially clear that this solution would make it
possible, I recall, to set a reasonable expiration date for
our work — at least in the first instance — and that, in
budgetary terms, the time differential — permitting
savings of almost 10 years of mandate time — when
compared to any other solution and, a fortiori, when
compared to the status quo — needed to be considered.
Concretely speaking, I would ask the Council to
review all the problems linked to the operation of our
Tribunal, which is also the Council’s own. Not
everything must be done immediately, but I believe
that, at first, and after some time for reflection, perhaps
in the framework of a working group — to which I
would wish to participate on behalf of the Tribunal in
whatever capacity would be most useful and timely —
the Statute could be amended in order to introduce at
least the principle of appointing ad litem judges, if not
a number of such judges themselves. The mechanisms
for selecting and assigning judges to cases present very

S/PV.4161

important problems which the judges themselves have
discussed. Recourse to these judges would, of course,
remain subordinated to the needs of the Tribunal.
I would conclude my rather lengthy briefing by
saying that the judges are not unaware of the difficult
and complex effort again being asked of the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular. They feel that everything which has been
accomplished to date argues in their favour, so that the
confidence placed in this unprecedented institution will
be maintained. We can, of course, continue to make
progress amongst ourselves and will continue to do so.
However, one must not believe that justice, as rendered
in The Hague — which, since 1993, has been bearing,
together with Arusha, many of our hopes for the
implementation of more permanent and universal
justice — can be created and, especially, developed
without a sustained effort on the part of one and all. I
would quote the most recent observations of our
institution, those of the Organization itself — as
represented by the Expert Group, mandated in 1998
and reporting in November, just six months ago.
“To the extent that there may have been
expectations that the Tribunals could spring to
life and, without going through seemingly slow
and costly developmental stages, emulate the
functioning of mature experienced prosecutorial
and judicial organs in national jurisdictions in
adhering to a high standard of due process, such
expectations were chimerical.” (S/2000/597, para.
264)
By establishing the Tribunal in 1993, the Security
Council took an historic decision, one of the greatest
challenges since Nuremberg, stating that crimes against
humanity or genocide, conceived and committed by
man in the name of racist and xenophobic theses,
would not go unpunished. It redounds to the Council’s
honour that it said and did this.
By taking up this challenge, the judges at The
Hague feel that, in their courtrooms, they have been
able and are able, with impartiality — yes,
impartiality — tenacity and conviction, to hear the
cries of the victims and contribute in this way to
ensuring that, in history’s memory, the tragic events
which occurred in this region are neither forgotten nor,
what is more serious, distorted into a kind of
revisionism which, as we know, represents a danger to
democracies. On behalf of my colleagues, I ask the

Council to allow us to continue and to complete this
exalting task.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Jorda for a briefing that was eloquent and characterized
by great vision and clarity. He gave us specific
proposals on how to improve the functioning of a
Tribunal that our Council created in 1993. This
Tribunal is an essential element of the return to peace
in the former Yugoslavia, because we all know that
there can be no peace without justice. The Tribunal,
however, also represents considerable progress in
international law and the universal conscience. Hence,
the important of today’s debate. The smooth
functioning and effectiveness of the Tribunal are of
concern to us. What we have to say will help it fulfil
the important task that we entrusted to it.
I now call on members of the Council.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Judge Jorda for introducing the
report before us.
We welcome the efforts of the judges of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY) to improve the
functioning of that body of international criminal
justice. We understand their frustration at the pace and
methods of the functioning of the Tribunal. For our
part, we, too, have serious reservations about the work
of that international body.
When it established the Tribunal, the Security
Council believed that the ICTY would make an
important contribution to settling the crisis in
Yugoslavia and that it would fulfil this task unburdened
by political considerations. Unfortunately, however, we
have seen political ambitions emerge in the activities of
the Tribunal and a clear anti-Serb line has been
adopted. Having predetermined for itself the main
culprit in the Yugoslav tragedy, the Tribunal
nevertheless often turns a blind eye to cases of noncompliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law by other parties to the conflicts.
When it comes to reports of violations committed
by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Tribunal
immediately issues indictments and gets down to work,
as, for example, in the case of the situation in Kosovo.
However, if questions arise — for instance, concerning

7

S/PV.4161

the actions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) — the Tribunal, even in the face of such
obvious facts as the deaths of innocent civilians, the
destruction by air strike of civilian targets, finds no
grounds for launching an investigation. We are
appalled by the Tribunal’s failure to act in response to
ongoing ethnic cleansing against Serbs and other
national minorities in Kosovo.
With respect to the judicial activities of the
Tribunal, we cannot fail to recall that, when the statute
of the body was being drafted, it was assumed that the
ICTY would strictly apply only existing norms of
international humanitarian law. The statute says
nothing about the right of the ICTY to create any new
law. In practice, however, an entirely different picture
has emerged. In recent years, the Tribunal has
repeatedly tinkered with the norms and rules of
international humanitarian law to suit its own purposes
and interpreted them at it own convenience. Moreover,
exploiting the lack of any real control by the
international community over the elaboration of the
rules of procedure and evidence, the Tribunal has
introduced into these documents some very legally
dubious practices, such as handing down sealed
indictments and submitting them to international
organs.
Also wrong was the 1996 decision taken by the
Tribunal, behind the Security Council’s back, to
conclude a memorandum of understanding with NATO,
which virtually sanctioned the special operation by the
NATO contingent in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose
purpose was to track down indictees. This runs counter
to the mandate of the Stabilization Force in Bosnia. Let
me recall that the memorandum remains secret and has
yet to be submitted to members of the Security
Council.
In our view, then, the ICTY is not helping, as it
should, to normalize the political process in the former
Yugoslavia. Moreover, the Tribunal’s activities have
had a destructive impact on the process of reaching a
settlement in the Balkans. This situation cannot fail to
be of concern to us. In our view, the Security Council
needs to engage in a thorough, careful consideration of
this matter.
We are convinced, for example, that the
Tribunal’s Rules of Procedure and Evidence, as well, of
course, as the amendments made to them, should be
approved by the Security Council. Moreover, the

8

activities of the Tribunal should be brought into
conformity with the resolutions of the Security
Council. If we do not do this in the near future, the
Tribunal will no longer be viewed as an impartial organ
handing down fair international justice.
With regard specifically to the proposals
contained in the report of the President of the ICTY,
Judge Claude Jorda, these are controversial in many
respects; we do not think they have been the object of
sufficient work. It is our understanding that there is a
lack of unanimity on these proposals among the judges
of the Tribunal as well. It is noteworthy that two years
ago the Security Council, at the Tribunal’s request,
increased the number of judges. At that time, Ms.
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald justified the creation of an
additional trial chamber by assuring the Council that it
would significantly speed up the Tribunal’s discharge
of its mandate. But that measure has yielded virtually
no results.
Judge Jorda’s report includes the rather
discouraging conclusion that, if those against whom
indictments have already been issued and those now
under investigation were brought to justice, the
Tribunal would require 15 to 20 years to deal with all
cases. That forecast, of course, makes us think hard
about whether so long a time is advisable for the
functioning of what is supposed to be an ad hoc body.
The solution being proposed to resolve this
situation — the appointment of ad litem judges —
needs careful analysis. At first glance, it does not
inspire particular optimism in us. Very careful study is
required also of the financial implications of the
proposed innovations.
Thus, while we are certainly prepared to consider
the judges’ proposals, we think it is important to
conduct a wide-ranging, thorough analysis not only of
those proposals but also of other views on how to
enhance the effectiveness of the work of the ICTY, in
particular the ideas set out in the report of the Expert
Group to Conduct a Review of the Effective Operation
and Functioning of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, contained in document
S/2000/597, along with ideas to be found in other
available documents.
If it is necessary to change the statute of the
Tribunal, as the President of the ICTY proposes in his
report, the question must be approached in a

S/PV.4161

comprehensive fashion on the basis of a comprehensive
analysis of the work of the Tribunal and bearing in
mind the need to redress the well-known deficiencies
in that work. That is the position we shall adopt when
we consider the proposals regarding organizing the
work of experts in the Security Council to discuss
possible amendment of the statute of the ICTY.
We reaffirm that Russia will support the activities
of the Tribunal on the condition that these are strictly
in keeping with the mandate adopted by the Security
Council for that body.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Judge Claude Jorda for his report and for his briefing.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia is an organ of the international
community, empowered to dispense justice on its
behalf. It is imperative that the Tribunal receive the
unequivocal support of the international community so
that the message is clear to those who have engaged in
egregious criminal acts against humanity that they will
not escape with impunity. That message must be
understood by all.
In that regard, we must ensure that the system of
justice we have established operates under procedures
that are fair and impartial. The Tribunal has been
criticized in the past for long pre-trial delays after an
indictee has been taken into custody. We recognize that
some of those delays may be directly related to dilatory
tactics employed by defence counsel. However, we are
also aware that the problems in the system identified
by Judge Jorda bear most of the responsibility for the
delays. As Judge Jorda is fully aware, justice delayed is
justice denied.
We hold to the view that justice must be swift and
certain. We also recognize that pre-trial release, though
a viable option for national courts, is not a practical
approach for an international criminal tribunal. The
reasons are obvious and do not need elaboration.
In that regard, my delegation believes that full
consideration of the report and recommendations
presented by Judge Jorda is timely and appropriate.
The changes in the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
that have been adopted so far by the Tribunal will
undoubtedly help improve the efficiency of the
Tribunal and move the trial process forward. We
recognize, however, that these changes in the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, which must evolve over time

and with experience, will not be enough to achieve the
desired result. Expansion of the capacity of the
Tribunal at the pre-trial, trial chamber and appeals
chamber levels requires urgent attention.
In that regard, we believe the recommendations
that Judge Jorda has presented to us with regard to the
appointment of the ad litem judges deserve our
consideration. This proposed expansion in the capacity
of the Trial Chambers, coupled with the
recommendation for legal officers delegated to perform
pre-trial functions, should improve the Tribunal’s
efficiency in its dispensation of justice.
As Judge Jorda has explained, these two changes
in the Tribunal will allow for additional Trial
Chambers, with the obvious desired result. The period
from arrest to trial will be reduced significantly. Both
changes are, therefore, of equal importance.
My delegation has been concerned about the
structure of the Appeals Chamber, in particular the fact
that the judges of the Trial Chamber have this dual
responsibility. We believe this creates a situation in
which the Appeals Chamber may find it difficult to
operate with impartiality and might be tainted by the
trial process. The appeals process should be fair and
impartial and should be above reproach. In this regard,
the recommendation to establish a permanent Appeals
Chamber, insulated from the trial process, is worthy of
our support.
The recommendation to appoint two judges from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to the
Appeals Chamber also should be given serious
consideration.
The recommendations that we revisit the statute
of the Tribunal to improve the Tribunal’s efficiency
must be seriously considered by the Security Council.
We will have an opportunity to evaluate the changes
that have been recommended, and my delegation looks
forward to participating in this process, while taking
into consideration the views of the international
community, and also bearing in mind the mandate of
the Tribunal.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting today. Let me join everyone else in
welcoming Judge Jorda to the Security Council.
Judge Jorda, I would like to thank you for your
presentation. I apologize for being unable to hear all of

9

S/PV.4161

it, but I will read it carefully. I already have the
highlights, and I want to begin by expressing my
Government’s strong support for your efforts and to
take note of the fact that, like our President for the
month of June, you come from France, and I am
therefore doubly delighted to be bracketed between two
such distinguished representatives of the international
community and of the Government of France.
At the outset, I would like to talk about four
things: your work in general, and the Balkans, Rwanda
and Sierra Leone specifically, because these issues
embrace a core goal of the United States, which is to
find every means possible to bring to justice people
who might sometimes escape the law if it is left only to
domestic purposes. So important is this issue in the
eyes of my Government that Secretary of State
Albright has created a special position simply for this
issue, filled by my friend and old colleague, David
Sheffer, who has come up from Washington again
today to join us at the Council for the second time in
two weeks. He is seated behind me to my right, and I
welcome him back to the Security Council again today.
The United States remains committed to bringing
to justice those responsible for war crimes in the
former Yugoslavia. Creating these Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda is an historic
achievement. Perhaps they were not perfect in every
respect, because they were setting new precedents at
every stage, but they are historic, and they must
succeed. Our Government is committed to that. Any
criticisms we may make — in terms of operations,
management, budgets, processes — must be understood
at all times within the context of the fact that this is
criticism from friends, designed to improve operations.
The objectives of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
now almost five years old, cannot be fulfilled until the
people responsible for these crimes are in the
jurisdiction of the war crimes Tribunal and prosecuted.
I am delighted that Mr. Krajisnik is now in The Hague,
and I await the day when Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Miladic
and others will be delivered to The Hague. I also want
to point out in the clearest possible terms that longterm peace and stability in the Balkans will not be
possible as long as the current leadership in Belgrade is
in power. Those people who have been indicted also
should be brought to justice.
My Government welcomes Judge Jorda’s
proposals on ways to streamline the Tribunal’s

10

operations in order to reduce the current backlog and
improve the efficiency of the Court. This is vitally
important. Much of the criticism that has been directed
at the Tribunal’s operations has validity. Let us not
shrink from the truth, even when it is critical, because
we must deal with the problems in order to make the
process work. In particular, we support his two
principal recommendations, on the delegation of pretrial management responsibilities and the designation
of ad litem judges to increase trial capacity.
Above all, we must ensure that any reforms
reinforce rather than distract from the core mandate of
the Council. Our task is to strengthen the Tribunal’s
ability to bring criminals to justice. We would oppose
any changes that would weaken the Tribunal’s capacity
to do the important job set before it. We must ensure
that our efforts to streamline the Tribunal do not in any
way complicate the ability of the Prosecutor to
apprehend those at large.
President Jorda, while I know that your primary
responsibility in addressing us today is to discuss your
work in the former Yugoslavia, your presence here
reminds us of the important role that justice and
reconciliation play in peace processes around the
world. Nowhere is this need greater than in Sierra
Leone.
Mr. President, with your permission, I would like
to address that issue, because it is directly related to the
subject that we are here to talk about today. As we have
discussed in this Council before, no mistake should be
made about our Government’s attitude towards the
leaders of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), who
have created this terrible tragedy in Sierra Leone. We
do not believe that Sierra Leone can have a peaceful
and stable future until they are brought to justice. In
recent weeks, and in recent days, I have had talks with
many members of the Council, members of the
Secretariat and Carla del Ponte about this important
issue. We take note of the fact that, according to wellconfirmed press reports, President Kabbah has already
addressed communications to the Secretary-General on
this issue and that he has asked for the extension of
some international war crimes umbrella to cover the
people about whom we are talking, the leaders of the
RUF.
We look forward to hearing the expert views of
the Secretary-General and of the experts in the Legal
Division on how to proceed. Some form of extension of

S/PV.4161

the international war crimes umbrella to cover these
odious people must be undertaken. The actual details,
as we have heard in this Council from Mr. Zacklin,
who I see is with us today, are something that we need
to learn more about. I look forward to hearing a
serious, sustained discussion of the options before us.
My Government would like to do whatever is to be
done swiftly and efficiently. Creating a new tribunal
probably would not fulfil that criteria, as Mr. Zacklin
himself has indicated previously, but some form of
international umbrella, as suggested by the President of
Sierra Leone and as proposed by many other people
here. This is something that I believe must be looked at
very positively and with a view towards action at the
earliest possible opportunity.
I want to also note with very high approval that
when the Lomé Agreement was signed last year the
Secretary-General of the United Nations noted in a
reservation, as the Secretary-General’s representative
witnessed the Agreement, that Lomé could not be
considered an obstacle to the prosecution of those
charged with fundamental violations of international
humanitarian law. That was an important and farsighted reservation set down by the Secretary-General
and his staff in the Office of Legal Affairs. I commend
them for their foresight, and I take note of that
reservation with the highest approval from my
Government.
Our Government is committed to the rapid
creation of a vigorous internationally backed
mechanism, or the extension of existing mechanisms,
to address these grave acts of inhumanity. We look
forward to hearing the views of the Secretariat, the
views of Judge Jorda and Carla Del Ponte, and those of
other members of the Security Council. We look
forward to working in partnership with the Government
of Sierra Leone to move forward in this direction.
Finally, let me turn to the question of Rwanda.
This Tribunal has obviously moved more slowly than
any of us are satisfied with, but it has moved, and
although we are concerned about some inefficiencies in
it — inefficiencies that we have addressed and will
continue to address directly with the people
responsible — I want to reaffirm our Government’s
support for it.
Mr. President, I thank you for calling a meeting
on this issue of immense importance. You will recall
from our previous work in regard to ending the war in

Bosnia that France and the United States never
wavered in their support of the war crimes Tribunal,
and that without that Tribunal the Dayton Peace
Agreement would not have been possible in its present
form. I am deeply concerned at attacks on it that have
been uttered here today by other delegations. While
specific criticisms are always welcome, the charges of
bias are not only not proven, they are not accurate. The
countries uttering these criticisms were full participants
in the Dayton process. They agreed to what was being
done, and I do not think that the criticisms are justified,
valid or productive.
Again, Mr. President, thank you very much for
the opportunity to address you and Judge Jorda. I
welcome him, on behalf of our country, to this great
Chamber to share his views.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation is
grateful to Judge Jorda for his briefing, for his report
on the operation of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and, most of all, for
his inspiring leadership as President of that institution.
The negotiations on the establishment of the
International Criminal Court have shown time and
again that the example of the two Tribunals — the one
on the former Yugoslavia and the other on Rwanda —
is crucial for the establishment and further
development of individual criminal responsibility for
universal crimes.
We appreciate the careful attention the Tribunal
has paid to the report of the Expert Group, which has
conducted a review of the effective operation and
functioning of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and we note that it has
subscribed to several of its recommendations.
At this time, my delegation will not go into the
selected measures that could be taken to improve the
Tribunal’s operation. Most of these, obviously, are to
be welcomed, but some require further reflection on
our part.
We are aware that Judge Jorda’s report, presented
on behalf of the judges of the Tribunal, is before the
Security Council on account of its mix of potential
diplomatic, legal, administrative and financial
implications. I believe we can all agree that the effect
of the increasing number of indictments and arrests on
the average trial length should be our greatest concern.

11

S/PV.4161

The report is right in making mention of the evergreater expectations of the international community.
The Tribunal has undoubtedly proved itself, but the
international community seems to have suspended its
judgment until the most senior officials are arrested
and brought before the Tribunal. By then the problems
described in the report must be solved.
The report rightly points out that it is difficult to
imagine the senior political and military leaders of the
countries involved in the conflict spending many
months on remand before their trials can begin.
All the same, Judge Jorda has warned us not to
dramatize the problem, but he has also stated that the
Tribunal has reached a turning point in its history. It is,
of course, largely a matter of disposition and attitude
whether one would describe a turning point as
dramatic, but let us agree that the matter is of the
utmost importance.
During the almost seven years of its operational
existence, the Tribunal has managed to form itself into
a fully operational judicial instrument. It has already
demonstrated that universal criminal justice is possible
and feasible, and in this respect it has played a crucial
role in the inception and establishment of the
International Criminal Court.
But we are not there yet. We should not
underestimate the importance of this suspended
judgment on the part of the international community.
The belief that universal criminal justice is possible
and feasible is taking hold, but it continues to face
scepticism and disbelief. This disbelief is also reflected
in some statements heard in the Security Council.
It is for that reason that the example offered by
the Tribunal, to quote the report, “must be exemplary
to the very end”. That is why, without going into the
detailed recommendations at this time, my delegation
will actively participate in the work of the legal experts
with a view to finding adequate solutions to the
problems facing the Tribunal.
Mr. Duval (Canada): I would like to thank all of
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their report on the
operation of the Tribunal, and thank especially
President Claude Jorda for meeting with us today to
discuss the recommendations set out in that report.
The work of the two Tribunals is extremely
important to end impunity for those who have

12

perpetrated the most heinous crimes. That is the
mandate which the Security Council entrusted to these
two institutions when they were created. It is therefore
incumbent upon us — the members of the Security
Council — to do all in our power to support the
Tribunals, without politicizing their work and
undermining the authority and legitimacy critical to the
fulfilment of their mandates.
Canada categorically rejects claims that the work
of the ICTY is biased or in contradiction with the
mandate that the Council has entrusted to it. These are
claims simply not substantiated by facts.
My delegation is committed to working
constructively with all Council members to improve
the effectiveness of the Tribunals. For the thousands of
victims of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, the wheels of justice are turning too slowly.
We must find ways to expedite the work of both
Tribunals, recognizing, of course, the imperatives of
impartiality and respect for the rights of the accused.
Canada recognizes that international justice is
expensive. However, we are appreciative of the
implicit recognition in the reports that financial
resources are not unlimited and that the Tribunals must
therefore explore cost-effective options to achieve their
mandates.
We also welcome and completely endorse the
remarks of Judge Jorda as to the importance of the
work of the Tribunal in the ongoing efforts to establish
a permanent body, the International Criminal Court.
That work is occurring here even as we speak.
With respect to the report of the ICTY introduced
by Judge Jorda, it is an extremely useful start in our
efforts to achieve the objective of more efficient
international justice. As a preliminary reaction, Canada
generally supports the contents of the report. In
particular, we are interested in the two-pronged
approach recommended by the judges: first, partially
delegating certain pre-trial management tasks to senior
legal officers, and secondly, creating a pool of ad litem
judges.
The delegation of certain pre-trial tasks could
indeed shorten the length of proceedings, and the
designation of ad litem judges could allow more cases
to be heard simultaneously. It is an important
observation, we believe, that ad litem judges would
need to be properly integrated into the system, and it
would be valuable to include some former judges of the

S/PV.4161

Tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia in that pool to
ensure consistency with the jurisprudence and practice
of the Tribunals.
These recommendations bear further examination.
Canada would support the French proposal to establish
a Security Council working group of experts to
examine the contents of the report expeditiously and to
develop recommendations for changes to the ICTY
statute as appropriate.
In addition to the examination of this report by
Security Council members, it is important to consult
with others, including States that have made significant
contributions to the operation of the Tribunal. Also, it
will be important for the General Assembly to examine
certain aspects of the report — for example, those
recommendations that have financial implications.
I would like to conclude my statement this
morning by asking two questions of Judge Jorda. First,
could he provide us with more details of the judges’
vision of how the pool of ad litem judges would work?
And secondly, many of the recommendations in the
report of the Expert Group would improve the
efficiency of the ICTY. Can you, Judge Jorda, provide
information on the steps already being taken by the
different organs of the Tribunal to implement these
recommendations?
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
very warmly welcome the presence of Judge Jorda here
today. We have begun to study his report with great
interest and regard his speech to us this morning as
containing a good deal of extra material which we want
to study and take careful account of.
The United Kingdom, as he and the whole court
know, is very strongly committed to the work of both
the Yugoslav and Rwandan courts. We regard them as
effective and impartial, and we remain consistently
eager to ensure that they are able to undertake their
important task as efficiently as possible.
The success of the court so far is a tribute to the
work of everybody involved in it, but of course that
success has itself led to an increased workload of
trials —what Judge Jorda has called this morning the
management of quantity while preserving the quality of
the court. It is very important to consolidate the
Tribunal’s achievements in the development of
international humanitarian law, and their contribution
towards the restoration of international peace and

security more generally, by ensuring that indictees are
brought to trial quickly. That applies both to prompt
arrest and to surrender to the Tribunal, and, once in
custody, to minimum delay in bringing cases to court.
We are very pleased that the Tribunals are taking
these issues so seriously, and in particular that efforts
are already being made by the judges to act on the
recommendations of the Expert Group — for instance,
by streamlining pre-trial procedures and expediting
hearings. We look forward to seeing what difference in
practice these improvements might make.
We welcome Judge Jorda’s initiative in analysing
the work of the Tribunal and the possible future
demands on it. The proposals on how to manage that
workload represent an important contribution. As
Judge Jorda knows, the speed of trials has been an
issue of concern to the United Kingdom for some time,
and we appreciate the degree of flexibility that he has
now built into the proposals.
The Judge has assessed, we think rightly, that
certain options in the paper are not appropriate. The
immediate Balkan region, for instance, is not yet a
suitable site for trials because of reasons of political
stability and safety. We are not in favour of setting up a
second tribunal. The issue remains how best to make
the Yugoslav Tribunal work effectively.
We are not yet in a position to offer substantive
reaction to the recommendations, and will not be until
the implications — especially the financial ones — are
clearer. Further detailed discussion will then be
necessary, in which the United Kingdom will
participate actively. But we think that, in particular, as
others have noted before me, two key elements of the
proposals need to be looked at in detail.
The first is how, in practice, the increased use of
senior legal officers in the pre-trial process would
increase the efficiency and pace of the pre-trial phase.
We would like to discuss in more detail the thinking
behind that idea, as compared with a single judge’s pretrial responsibilities under the present system. The
second is, if an increased number of judges is required,
whether permanent or ad litem judges would be of
most benefit to the Tribunal. We understand that the
judges have considered both options, but we would
want to look carefully at the advantages and
disadvantages of opting for an ad litem system.

13

S/PV.4161

The United Kingdom is of the view that the
option of an additional trial chamber deserves
consideration, though the cost implications have to be
studied.
The effect of these proposals on the other organs
of the Tribunal, including the staffing implications, will
need to be looked at in detail. One issue for the judges
which is not covered in the report is the impact of
increased efficiency at the pre-trial and trial stages of
the Appeals Chamber. We note that the judges agreed
with the recommendation of the Expert Group for two
new judges to join the Appeals Chamber from the
Rwanda Tribunal, and we would be grateful for Judge
Jorda’s views on whether further measures at the
appeals level also need to be considered.
We are very grateful to have this discussion this
morning under your leadership, Mr. President. We
welcome Judge Jorda’s presence here and look
forward, as I said, to further detailed discussion.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We appreciate
the comprehensive briefing by Judge Claude Jorda on
the work of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY). We find his presentation very
engaging and full of substantive elements which need
the Council’s close attention.
Bangladesh strongly believes that the ICTY,
along with the Tribunal for Rwanda, have a historic
responsibility to perform. Therefore every effort should
be made to enable the two Tribunals to be credible and
functional in the best possible way. We also believe
that the performance of these Tribunals will have a
serious implication for the proposed International
Criminal Court.
We commend the improvements made in the work
of the ICTY since it was established. We also note that
work is under way to address areas where further
improvement is needed. We agree with the view that
the time is right to examine the future of the ICTY. The
reform proposals presented by President Jorda and the
recommendations of the Expert Group, constituted by
the Secretary-General upon the request of the General
Assembly in resolutions 53/212 and 53/213, are
relevant and important in designing improved practices
and procedures of the International Tribunals. The
prospective plan, as presented by President Jorda on

14

behalf of the entire bench of ICTY judges, has
presented very focused reform proposals and
recommendations. These, particularly the proposal for
ad litem judges and the Appeals Chamber, should get a
positive nod from this Council. The comments of the
Secretary-General and the observations of the
Prosecutor on the recommendations of the Expert
Group are valuable additions. The Council will look
into all these documents.
I would like, at this point, to highlight the
following four aspects for consideration. First, we
attach importance to the need to ensure justice without
delay. President Jorda has presented this aspect most
strikingly in his statement. The enormous magnitude of
the task and the need for prompt and effective delivery
of justice has necessitated that the Tribunal should
have adequate capabilities. We should look favourably
at recommendations 20 and 21, on the increase in the
number of judges and legal assistance personnel. We
would like to emphasize that resources should be
commensurate with responsibilities.
Secondly, we support the recommendation of the
Expert Group that the indictees having a major
responsibility be brought to justice in the first place,
rather than minor perpetrators. We are seriously
concerned that some major political and military
figures have remained at large. The Council should
consider ways and means to secure their surrender or
arrest for trial. The humanitarian laws will certainly be
better protected if individuals in the higher chain of
command are brought to justice.
Thirdly, the outreach programmes of the
Tribunals to develop public information programmes in
the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere throughout the
world regarding the work and objectives should be
strengthened. We agree with the Prosecutor that a most
effective form of outreach would be the hearing of
ICTY proceedings in the former Yugoslavia.
Fourthly, we need to firm up the process for
taking our decisions on the ICTY reform proposals and
on the recommendations of the Expert Group in the
Council. In order to consider these, we would support
the formation of an informal working group, which,
within a stipulated time period of, for example, three
months, would submit its recommendations for
approval by the Council.
Finally, this meeting has afforded us an
opportunity to discuss the future of the ICTY. We hope

S/PV.4161

that we will have similar occasions to discuss the
Rwanda Tribunal in the near future.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Judge Jorda, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for his report and his briefing. The
Chinese Government believes that the independence
and impartiality of the ICTY, as an organ of
international criminal justice, are extremely important.
The Tribunal should not be affected by international
politics and other factors; yet it has become a political
tool. The authority of the ICTY can be ensured only
through its independence and impartiality. Only in this
way can the work of the ICTY withstand the test of
history.
In this regard, there are many areas of the ICTY
that need to be improved, which is one of the problems
facing the ICTY. We hope that the ICTY will become a
real, independent and impartial organ of international
justice; it is not one now because it is affected too
much by politics. Some representatives just gave
examples that I will not repeat. I believe my criticism
is constructive. I hope that the ICTY will work towards
becoming more independent and impartial.
Of course, we know that the ICTY faces other
problems, as was mentioned by Judge Jorda. It faces a
lack of trial capacity, which seriously constrains the
trial process. In order to ensure the rights of the
accused to a speedy and fair trial, it is necessary to
consider taking appropriate measures to speed up the
trial process. We are very gratified by the assessment
report submitted by the Expert Group appointed by the
Secretary-General. This report provides a detailed
analysis of the operations of the ICTY and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
includes specific recommendations and measures that
warrant our further serious consideration.
In his report and briefing, Judge Jorda made
reference to the establishment of the pool of ad litem
judges in order to address unforeseen trial needs. This
is a very interesting idea that might be helpful in
expediting the trial process. Adding ad litem judges
requires amendments to the statute. It also involves
many important legal and technical details and
resources. The Security Council cannot make hasty
decisions on this. Time is needed by all sides to further
study the opinion of the Expert Group and the report
submitted by President Jorda on behalf of the judges

and the Tribunal in order to find a definitive solution,
taking all factors into account. We are willing to
consider any measure that will help the Tribunal
administer justice and expedite the trial process.
In considering the option of adding ad litem
judges, we believe that equitable geographic
distribution and balance among the world’s major legal
systems should be considered. The proper way to select
the ad litem judges is by election by the General
Assembly. As for the cost of ad litem judges, various
options should be seriously considered on the basis of
the opinion of the Expert Group. Furthermore, there
should be equal opportunity in selecting ad litem
judges to participate in trial work.
As for the streamlining of the pre-trial process,
we have noted that the Tribunal has been carrying out
appropriate amendments and adjustments to its Rules
of Procedure and Evidence, in accordance with the
opinion of the Expert Group.
However, in carrying out any amendment, the
Tribunal should strictly abide by its statute and the
resolutions of the Security Council. As for the pre-trial
stages, practical administrative work can be handled by
the Trial Chambers’ senior legal officers, under strict
and clear mandate, while the Trial Chambers closely
monitor them in this regard. Efficiency should not be
achieved at the expense of the strict conduct of the trial
procedure and the fairness of the trial.
In conclusion, please allow me to express my
thanks again to Judge Jorda, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, for his work.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
welcome Judge Jorda, the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY), to the Council and to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing. We found his comments
very interesting and useful, as are the proposals
contained in the report on possible ways and means of
improving the operation of the Tribunal and
streamlining its working procedures.
Previous discussions in the Council on the work
of the ICTY, including the most recent briefing of the
Tribunal’s Prosecutor, undoubtedly underscored the
important role the ICTY plays in meting out justice and

15

S/PV.4161

healing the wounds caused by the human tragedy that
shook the former Yugoslavia and continues there. No
less important is the Tribunal’s role in the process of
reconciliation and restoring peace in the region. It is
therefore imperative for that judicial institution to
maintain the highest standards of impartiality and to
remain free of any political considerations in its
activities, although, as we can see, that is most difficult
to achieve. It is from this perspective that any proposed
measures to expedite and rationalize its proceedings
should be looked at in the first instance.

Another important aspect that is worth
mentioning in the context of the report before us is
that, when considering ways to improve the operation
of ICTY, the Security Council should in no way create
the impression that the similar problems now facing the
International Tribunal for Rwanda are less important or
pressing. I think that the changes contemplated for
ICTY would be difficult to approve without adopting
the same approach to the problem of the workload of
the Rwanda Tribunal, and these two issues should be
considered in conjunction.

We recognize the huge workload facing the
Tribunal. Of course, the need for changes is obvious.
Based on the perspective that the Tribunal will
complete its task by the year 2016, I should simply like
to ask a rhetorical question: Could one have imagined
that the Nuremberg tribunal would end its work in
1968, 23 years after its creation?

Finally, I would like to mention yet another
matter that we consider to be an important part of the
effective operation of the Tribunal, which is the need
for a wider dissemination of information regarding the
activities of the Tribunal and its role in establishing the
rule of law and promoting reconciliation in the
Balkans. We welcome the launch last fall of an
outreach programme with a focus on countries of the
former Yugoslavia. At the same time, we would like to
encourage the Tribunal to broaden the activities of that
programme to other countries of the region and to
make it more public-oriented.

The questions raised in the report are rather
complex and, apart from the proposals to introduce a
new category of ad litem judges and to delegate a large
part of pre-trial work to senior legal officers, include
such issues as the long-term plan of the Tribunal’s
activities, the length of its mandate and its future
relations with the International Criminal Court. My
delegation welcomes this forward-looking analysis
undertaken by the Tribunal and supports a thorough,
action-oriented examination of all these issues by the
Security Council in an appropriate agreed format. The
potential financial implications should, of course, be
examined too.
While looking forward to that review, I would
like to indicate one issue of concern to my delegation:
the absence of judges from Eastern Europe in the
Tribunal. While this question, as of now, remains in the
hands of the General Assembly, we think that this
situation should be addressed. Can anyone imagine the
Rwanda Tribunal without African judges? The nonelection of the only Eastern European candidate to the
ICTY last year was indeed disappointing. A wide
representation of judges from all regional groups in the
Tribunal, as in the case of practically all United
Nations organs, including the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda — is important for the
effectiveness and credibility of that body. We believe
that this issue should be taken into account when
considering the proposed changes in the Tribunal’s
statute.

16

Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Through you, Sir, I should like to thank the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY),
Judge Claude Jorda. His briefing reveals the challenges
that must be met in order to improve the Tribunal’s
functioning.
When the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia was established, international
experience in that field was rather scant. The lack of
precedents required its institutions, rules and practices
to adopt innovative solutions relating to the customary
procedures of international courts.
While the novelty of the establishment of the
Tribunal made it necessary to amend rules of procedure
and evidence on various occasions, we believe that the
Tribunal is doing excellent work that has made it a
vanguard institution and a very valuable benchmark for
the international community. Its wealth of experience
has been put to good use by the International Criminal
Court. Those who have worked to secure the prestige
that the Tribunal enjoys today — in essence, the
judges — deserve our highest recognition.

S/PV.4161

We have considered the report of the Expert
Group in document A/54/634, submitted to the Security
Council by the Secretary-General on 15 June. We have
also considered document A/54/850, which contains
the opinions of the Tribunals for Rwanda and
Yugoslavia on the 46 recommendations made by the
Expert Group, as well as last month’s report of the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

ad litem judges, we consider that guarantees regarding
a trial defence and being tried before the competent
judge suggest that these should be chosen by election
rather than by appointment by the Secretary-General,
especially as these would not be substitutes, but true
judges with full judicial powers. If such a decision is
taken, we should also review the limitations on their
powers set out in the proposed article 13 ter of the
statute.

These documents closely analyse the experience
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia over the course of more than five years of
work and make specific recommendations. They
demonstrate the various challenges that the Tribunal is
confronting, arising, inter alia, from the workload and
the shortfall in human resources and time required for
trial preparation and the prosecution of indictees,
resulting in lengthy periods of detention without trial.

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
first to thank the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
Judge Claude Jorda, for his clear briefing and for the
useful information he provided to members of the
Security Council on the important subject of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

It is our understanding that the analysis in such
documents must be carefully considered by the
Security Council. We support the idea put forward by
the President of the Council that a group of experts be
established to assess the various recommendations and
to make a proposal. We agree that the broadest and
most transparent dissemination of information must be
ensured in the process so that all States Members of the
United Nations, which will be financing the measures,
may be familiar with its development.
The report submitted by President Jorda last May
assesses the various options and makes the choices that
the judges consider to be most appropriate. These
basically consist in appointing a pool of 12 ad litem
judges, delegating certain competencies to senior
officers of the Trial Chambers during the pre-trial
period and adding two judges to those of the Appeals
Chamber, who would come from the Rwanda Tribunal.
My delegation can concur with those
recommendations, but wishes briefly to mention a few
points. We think that, despite the great merit of the
recommendations made by the judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, a Security Council group of experts should
assess all proposals that have been made, rejecting
none of them out of hand.
We consider that the appointment of ad litem
judges in addition to the permanent judges is a very
good option; because of its flexibility, it is used in
many national systems. But if it is decided to appoint

We have carefully examined the report and the
recommendations of the Expert Group to Conduct a
Review of the Effective Operation and Functioning of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We have also taken note of the proposals offered by the
judges of the ICTY, which relate to the situation and
the future prospects of the Tribunal. We have some
preliminary comments in that connection.
We consider that the practical problems and
difficulties described so clearly by the Expert Group
and by the members of the Tribunal deserve
consideration. Procedural constraints and difficulties
relating to reducing the duration of trials are acute
questions. We consider that the judges’ plan to improve
the functioning of the Tribunal should be studied in
depth by the competent bodies. Here, we support the
French proposal to establish an informal Security
Council working group which would receive
contributions by States Members of the United Nations
in the context of a discussion of ways to enhance the
effectiveness of the International Tribunal.
Let me stress the link between justice and
reconciliation. Members will agree that this is of great
importance for the future of the Balkans region and for
peaceful coexistence among all communities.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation too would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this
meeting of the Security Council to hear a briefing by
Judge Claude Jorda, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

17

S/PV.4161

We welcome the presence of Judge Jorda in the
Council Chamber, and we thank him for his
comprehensive and enlightening briefing on the work
of the Tribunal and, particularly, on the various
proposals relating to the future operation of the
Tribunal.
We agree that it is timely for the Council to take
stock of the work of the Tribunal, and are therefore
grateful for the in-depth analysis of the work of the
Tribunal presented to the Council; I am confident that
it will facilitate the Council’s arriving at appropriate
decisions
on
the
various
proposals
and
recommendations presented to it.
While we are gratified that the Tribunal has now
become a fully operational international criminal court,
we are nevertheless concerned at the long delays faced
by the Tribunal. We therefore welcome this in-depth
consideration of the work of the Tribunal, and look
forward to participating actively in the Council’s
decision-making process on this issue. We appreciate
the extensive nature of the proposals, which are all
intended to ensure the effective functioning of the
Tribunal. We are particularly grateful for the pros-andcons analysis to which each proposal is subjected,
which clearly will help Council members to make the
right decisions.
Clearly, because of their many implications, the
proposals will have to be closely examined by Council
members. We welcome your proposal, Mr. President,
that a Security Council expert group be set up to assist
Council members in their consideration of the solutions
recommended in part III of the report submitted by
Judge Jorda. With respect to the consideration of those
recommendations, my delegation is in favour of a
simplified and pragmatic approach that will lead to
expediting the trial process but that will not sacrifice,
or compromise on, its quality. We are prepared to
support any approach that will ensure that justice is
done.
The meting out of justice to persons who have
been indicted for war crimes, genocide and other
crimes against humanity is vitally important for the
international community, not just for the sake of
affirming our common humanity and civilizational
values, but also because of the pragmatic political need
to correct past wrongs through the legal process,
thereby contributing concretely to the healing and
reconciliation process. This is particularly imperative

18

in respect of the Balkan region, whose peoples were
traumatized by the upheavals of the recent past in the
wake of the genocidal policies of the Belgrade regime.
Notwithstanding those heinous policies and
crimes, the Tribunal must be commended for the high
professionalism of its conduct and for the fact that
persons are indicted and put on trial as individuals, not
as nationals of a particular State. We are confident that
the Tribunal and all of its officers will continue to be
guided by the principle of strict impartiality. It should
not be unduly perturbed by unfair and unjustified
criticisms levelled against it. The reason why many of
the indictees come from a particular ethnic group is
obvious to anyone who has followed developments in
the Balkans; it is no mystery.
My delegation will not pronounce itself on the
various proposals at this stage. Suffice it to say that we
find that many of them have a lot of merit and that they
deserve the serious attention and consideration of the
Council. We are particularly attracted to the proposals
relating to ad litem judges, to the creation of an
additional trial chamber and to partially delegated pretrial management. We will look at them in the context
of all their implications, particularly the legal and
financial implications. We will be constructive in our
approach.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We too are grateful to
Judge Jorda, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for his
useful briefing and for the report on the Tribunal. That
report contains specific proposals and measures to
improve the operation of the Tribunal. I would like also
to thank the entire bench of judges of the ICTY for the
service they continue to render to the international
community, the service which is especially valued and
cherished by the children of the region who lost their
brothers and sisters, their mothers and fathers during
the war in the former Yugoslavia.
Indeed, the report meticulously provides us with a
comprehensive review of the work of the ICTY in
terms of what has been done, what needs to be done
and how to go about doing it.
It is useful, therefore, to indicate that my
delegation is studying the report with keen interest, not
only as it relates to the former Yugoslavia but also
because of the resonance it has on the International
Criminal Tribunal on Rwanda (ICTR).

S/PV.4161

On balance, we wish to express our appreciation
that the Tribunal has demonstrated its determination to
take aboard the recommendations by the Group of
Experts. We do believe that in spite of the problems
borne in the application of new institutions, both
Tribunals have passed the test of time as viable
instruments for dispensing justice in exemplary
fashion.
In this context, Namibia hopes that the Hague and
Arusha processes will stand out as exemplary
mechanisms from which sufficient lessons can be
drawn for the future International Criminal Court.
Having said that, let me pose the following
questions. The first one concerns the ICTR. We
understand that the report on the Tribunal is in the
pipeline, but, all things being equal, what are the
similarities and complementarities, if any, between the
two Tribunals? The second question is predicated on
the assumption that you, Mr. President, operate in the
realm of political affairs; and if that is true, which I
believe it is, how do you handle political pressure from
Member States and people like me? How do you ensure
the independence and the impartiality of the Tribunal?
Thirdly and lastly, in your personal opinion, will these
mechanisms bail us out on the future of the
International Criminal Court?
Finally, Mr. President, we look forward to the
report of the ICTR. My delegation expresses its
readiness to work with the other members of the
Council, as well as the entire United Nations
membership, in an informal working group to study the
recommendations and proposals of the judges with
regard to improving the working methods and practices
of both Tribunals.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Namibia for the questions
he asked.
Speaking in my national capacity, allow me to
say, Mr. President, how delighted we are to welcome
you here during the French presidency of the Security
Council. You preside over a Tribunal that certainly
deserves praise rather than criticism.
The month of June is marked in many ways by
the theme of international justice. We know that the
preparatory commission for the International Criminal
Court is to adopt some important texts before 30 June,
including the Court’s rules of procedure. As far as

France is concerned, on 9 June it was my honour to
deposit France’s instrument of ratification to the Rome
Statute. The Security Council held its first public
meeting of the month of 2 June to hear the Prosecutor
of the two International Tribunals, Mrs. Carla del
Ponte. Furthermore, in recent days the Council has
received several proposals to strengthen the capacity of
the two International Tribunals to do their jobs. These
were proposals prepared by the judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) that you have explained to us, Mr.
President. We have also received proposals prepared by
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). Lastly, the Secretary-General has also
given us an important report of the Group of Experts to
evaluate the effectiveness of the activities and the
operation of the two International Tribunals, requested
by the General Assembly, as well as comments on it
made by the Tribunals.
This, indeed, is a wealth of material for our
discussions. The delegation of France is determined to
contribute to a rigorous examination of all of these
ideas and recommendations. This is why we have
suggested to Council members that an informal
working group be established to carry out this
examination and submit its conclusions to the Council
in the near future. We are confident that this group will
be able to get to work very soon.
For now, I wish to describe to you the spirit in
which the French delegation tackles this debate. When
it established the International Tribunals, the Security
Council demonstrated its conviction that it was
possible to reconcile the needs of independent justice
with the needs of a penal policy reflective of the
parameters of peace, democracy and international
reconciliation. In order to merge these needs, it is
essential constantly to work towards greater
effectiveness in the procedures of the Tribunals.
The time-frame of international justice cannot be
compared to that of domestic judicial systems. Delays
and prolonged procedures which are accepted at the
domestic level do more harm to international trials. We
already know that public opinion and the States
concerned in the former Yugoslavia, as in Rwanda,
have sometimes challenged the legitimacy of the
international Tribunals. The impact of their work for
States, for the public and for the victims depends
largely on the speed of the procedures.

19

S/PV.4161

We have no illusions here. The question of how
long it takes for justice to be done is not merely a
question of legal technique. It is truly a political issue.
If justice is delayed, peace is also delayed. How can we
hope for a speedy return to peace in the regions
concerned if the procedures of the International
Tribunals drag on for 15 years or more? To find an
answer to this question, several areas deserve our
attention, and I merely wish to mention three of them.
First is the number of judges. This number was
already increased through the creation of a third
chamber for each of the two Tribunals two years ago.
We know that this number cannot be increased
indefinitely. By way of comparison, we must be
mindful of the fact that there will be only 18 judges in
the International Criminal Court, whereas for the ICTY
there are 14 judges, who have a limited area of
geographical competence. There are nine judges for the
Rwanda Tribunal.
The creation of ad litem judges, proposed by the
judges of the ICTY, is one avenue that should be
explored. It does give rise to some questions relating to
the status of these judges, their number and the method
of electing them. We are prepared to discuss these
questions in an open spirit.
The judges for the ICTR believe that expanding
the staff in the Appeals Chamber should be a priority.
This is where the main bottlenecks seem to lie. The
proposal that you supported seeks to create two
additional posts for judges within the ICTR in order to
replace those that will be required to serve in the single
Appeals Chamber of the two Tribunals. This solution
would have the advantage of being easily quantifiable,
and it would mean that the two Tribunals would enjoy
equal status.
The second area that we deem to be important
relates to the powers of the judges and to the
strengthening of the pre-trial phase. It is important that
judges have the necessary authority to conduct the
debates, and the experts put forward by the SecretaryGeneral have stressed this very point. They recommend
better oversight by judges of procedures, in particular
an expansion of the functions of pre-trial judges. This
idea, we believe, deserves consideration.
I would recall, by the way, that the Statute of the
International Criminal Court grants important
prerogatives to judges, both during the pre-trial phase
and during the actual trial. That Statute also creates a

20

pre-trial Chamber which is an outstanding example of a
synthesis of legal traditions. The negotiators have
clearly tried to remedy the main procedural defects in
the International Tribunals. This reflects the way the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence have evolved in the
two Tribunals, and these have been repeatedly amended
to give the judges better oversight over trials and to
prevent these from lasting too long.
The third area relates to participation by the
victims. The Statutes of the Tribunals contain only
articles on the protection of victims and on the return
of their property. The Statute of the International
Criminal Court, on the other hand, contains specific
provisions that give victims the right to participate in
the proceedings, set up a system for the protection of
threatened or traumatized witnesses, and, above all,
create machinery to compensate them. Victims can
transmit information to the Prosecutor in order to open
proceedings, and also are entitled to be informed of
how a trial is going and to speak in an autonomous
capacity during a trial.
It is probably not possible to guarantee perfect
conformity between the provisions of the International
Criminal Court on victims, which are very well
developed, and the Statutes of the Tribunals. The
Prosecutor of the Tribunals has, however, drawn our
attention to this subject, and we must revisit it.
In conclusion, we must bear in mind the fact that
States have the primary responsibility for combating
the most serious crimes. Our objective is not to deprive
States, even those that are just emerging from a
conflict, of the possibility of doing the work of justice
and recollection which is necessary for national
reconciliation. Here I am thinking of Cambodia and
perhaps also of Sierra Leone.
The Security Council took a decision to create ad
hoc courts in cases where the States concerned were
either unable or unwilling to prosecute criminals. We
have the responsibility to help guarantee the effective
functioning of this international system of justice that
we have created. We must also keep in mind the idea of
the reform and strengthening of national judicial
systems, which one day will have to take over.
Finally, we must never consider that the existence
of the International Criminal Tribunals makes it
possible for the Security Council to abdicate its
primary responsibilities for the maintenance of peace.
Criminal justice is a powerful instrument for the

S/PV.4161

punishment and the prevention of atrocities. But it is
up to us primarily, right here in this very Chamber, to
promote political solutions to current conflicts, which
increasingly are complex ones whose internal aspects
are dominant. Justice is a necessary dimension, but it is
only one dimension of the complex comprehensive
settlements that we need to work out.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on Judge Jorda to respond to the many
comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Jorda (spoke in French): Let me for a brief
moment speak to you directly, Sir — not in your
capacity as President — to express my satisfaction at
hearing France conclude this very rich exchange of
views by stating that it is here that political issues are
settled, not in The Hague or in Arusha.
I shall nonetheless attempt to respond to those
questions relating to criminal policy, because the
representative of the Russian Federation touched upon
them, as did, more indirectly, the representative of
China and, in a more general manner, other speakers.
Secondly, I shall group together a number of
comments. I apologize beforehand to speakers who had
wished to enrich this debate — to which I have
attempted to contribute the comments of my
colleagues — in case I am not able to respond to all of
their comments.
Thirdly, let me comment on the establishment of
a working group, which I think has been agreed to
unanimously around the table. Although, of course, I
do not have to express a view, because it is not my
place to do so, let me say that personally I believe it
can only work to our advantage. The reason is that
many aspects of the proposals, as representatives have
indicated, definitely require deeper reflection. You, Mr.
President, mentioned several of these aspects with
respect to the concrete proposals I had the honour to
put forward.
I do not wish to take up too much time, but,
having made those three preliminary comments, let me
attempt to cluster my responses concerning the
political issue, which I think was raised by several
delegations, in particular by the representative of
Russia. I should like perhaps to offer certain
clarifications regarding the ad litem judges and the pretrial proceedings. This may seem to be a more

technical issue, but it does require clarifications
beyond those that the Council’s working group is to
provide. I think also that the recommendations
submitted by the Expert Group to the Council require a
certain amount of clarification — and here I am
thinking of the statement made by the representative of
Canada. I shall spare the Council the list of 46
recommendations, but I will provide an overview.
I think that there is a fourth issue that includes
Rwanda and the Appeals Chamber, which was of
interest to several delegations. Finally, concerning the
working group, perhaps I could ask the Council one or
two questions, if the President does not deem it too
impertinent.
The political issue has come up again and again
since the establishment of the Tribunal, when it was
said that it was a political tool. Consider the nature of
an international tribunal that theoretically is established
by a political body. However, the issue of this
Tribunal’s having been set up by a political body has
been put to rest by its decisions, in particular - and here
I would recall what was mentioned by the Ambassador
of Russia - with respect to the Tadic affair.
I think that it can be acknowledged around this
table that there are two bodies in the Tribunal that work
independently. There is the Prosecutor, who is
independent, organizes his own work and, above all,
has an opportunity to prosecute. As I understand it,
prosecutors in all countries have the opportunity to
prosecute. I even have the impression that this is
currently the case in Russia.
Then the impartiality of judges, I think, is
something that should not be called into question
because — let me recall it here — the numerous
indictments made by the Tribunal on political questions
also go through a judge. I will refer later to sealed
indictments.
In order to give the Council a more specific
answer — and without interfering with the policy that
Ms. Del Ponte described to the Council — I would
simply say that it is true that figures speak eloquently.
It is also true that of the 68 current indictments, 45 are
of persons of Serb origin. But I would also like to say
to the representatives who touched on this question that
it has never been written anywhere into the rules of
procedure nor into the statute that the atrocities were
committed in equal proportion throughout the
territories in which they occurred. Nor was the number

21

S/PV.4161

of accused persons ever to be automatically the same in
the three groups.
But I would especially like to point out something
that serves as a response to a question asked of Ms. Del
Ponte by the Council, namely, the problem of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) vis-à-vis a report
she herself made public a few days ago, specifically on
13 June. I would say that prosecution is one thing —
and I was a prosecutor for a very long time during my
career — but it is evidence that guides prosecution. A
prosecutor cannot undertake a prosecution unless he
has evidence. But in an international jurisdiction
evidence is not made available by national
investigators, police or police inspectors. It is provided
through the cooperation of States. In this connection,
we must note that the countries that complain the most
about the partiality of the Tribunal — and I am
thinking especially of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia — are the weakest when it comes to
cooperation.

of using ad litem judges. In fact, as the Council has
seen from the document that has been distributed to it,
in the course of a whole day of meetings almost half of
the judges agreed on some very important points.
I think the working group will be addressing
many of those points, including the matter of elections
or nominations and the drawbacks and advantages of
the two methods. Appointment is faster. I would also
point out that it is also legitimate. It exists in other
international jurisdictions, where ad hoc judges are
appointed. It even exists in the Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia itself. When a judge dies or
stands down he is replaced through appointment by the
Secretary-General, upon the advice of the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. This
has occurred at least five times since 1993 including, I
must say, in my own case.

For example, I can tell the Council that of the
current 28 fugitives, 27 are of Serb origin. Moreover,
of the 27 of Serb origin, 22 were accused without
sealed indictments. I will refer later to the issue of
sealed indictments. If 22 Serbs were not indicted under
sealed indictment, then that demonstrates that the
International Criminal Tribunal at some point had to
deal with serious matters relating to coercion and the
carrying out its decisions. I would emphasize that
nothing in the statute or the regulations prohibits the
use of sealed indictments, provided they are, like other
indictments, confirmed by a judge. In other words, the
Prosecutor must not only initiate the giving of evidence
that would lead a judge to agree to an indictment —
and that applies to all indictments — but he must,
above all, show that it is useful to keep the indictment
secret. I do not wish to go further into details because
there are other questions to be addressed.

The question of costs will also be a subject under
the purview of the working group. We did not want to
go into a very detailed cost analysis. But we
nevertheless thought that the matter of cost depends on
the number of ad litem judges that are employed, which
would also depend upon the formula chosen. In this
regard, the opinion of judges is divided. I will point out
that a slight majority — and, at any rate, thinking on
this is evolving at The Hague — felt there should be a
mix of permanent judges and ad litem judges. I
mention this so that it may add to the Council’s
examination of the issue. In other words, when a threejudge Chamber has concluded with its work, it can then
break up and then one or two permanent judges could
be paired with an ad litem judge to respond together to
questions related to the training of the ad litem judges
and their ability to deal with the various very specific
areas of international humanitarian law and
jurisprudence that may come up. I think that in this
way training would occur in a very natural way,
perhaps even better than in the past.

Let me touch upon the issue of ad litem judges
and their status from the perspective of the conditions
of their service and their costs. These questions have
been raised. With regard to costs and the status of the
judges, this is something that is obviously within the
domain of the working group that the Council will set
up. Moreover, the Council itself, and we judges, have
tried to move forward the thinking process on this
issue. In this regard, someone — I do not remember
who — said that the judges were not unanimous. That
is not true. The judges are unanimous on the principle

But we also do not hide the fact that whenever
new judges are appointed or elected, those judges
arrive at a court that is in the midst of activity; nor that
new judges are obliged to become engaged
immediately in trials. I am thinking in particular of the
three latest judges, who joined the Tribunal in 1997.
They did not have the luck — or the bad luck — that I
had in the same situation in 1993, of arriving in a court
where there were, as I mentioned earlier, no accused
persons, a situation which is currently completely
different.

22

S/PV.4161

The question of preparations for hearing — a
problem that I believe the representatives of France and
the United Kingdom have both touched upon — is one
that makes it possible for me to express our thoughts.
As the statute sets out in article 65 and others,
preparations for hearing at the International Criminal
Tribunal have nothing to do with the pre-trial chamber
and do not deprive the judge of any of his jurisdictional
functions. As a jurist I salute the establishment of a
pre-trial chamber in the future permanent court, but
especially for the efficiency it will bring to that court.
If I recall correctly, the pre-trial Chamber will have
numerous jurisdictional powers. In particular, it will be
able to exercise control over indictments and make
decisions on rules, petitions, inquiries and so on. For
those who have practised law in countries on the
continent, the pre-trial Chamber established in the
Rome Statute is a jurisdictional chamber similar to an
indicting chamber. The same is not the case in
preparations for hearing.
Preparations for hearing are a judicial and
administrative mechanism aimed at speeding up trials.
I will even go so far as to say that I believe that the
future Court will need to put in place a pre-trial
mechanism. Trial preparation activities focus directly
on preparing cases.
I would like to point out that our Rules of
Evidence and Procedure currently give trial preparation
judges certain jurisdictional powers but place them
under the control of the chamber to which he belongs.
Those powers have never been, and will never, be
delegated to the judges. One could ask, what use is
that? Well, it is useful in many ways because, as things
stand now, a chamber is assigned about four cases.
Currently, Chambers 1, 2 and 3 of the Tribunal have
four cases each. There are now four trials under way at
The Hague. But each Chamber also has three other
cases, so I would say that trial preparation activities are
carried out every day. The parties must be convened
every day. Motions have to be reviewed every day.
Attempts must be made daily to reach agreement and to
determine who the witnesses are that the parties plan to
call. This is the kind of work that I refer to as human
costs, and that kind of work means that the trial
preparation judge, who would be a trained professional
having from 15 to 20 years of professional experience,
would be a contribution to the Chamber in the form of
support to the judge in carrying out trial preparation
activities. We do not wish to take away any

jurisdictional powers, to the extent that whenever a
dispute or contentious point arises, a trial preparation
judge must report them to his chamber.
I think that the Council’s working group will
work on this question, but it seems to me that there is
really no danger, and there will be even less danger
once this question has been dealt with. I remind
members that we are a Tribunal most of whose current
members are from common law systems. I can tell the
Council that this matter has been taken up. This trial
preparation phase was conceived before 1998 and
institutionalized in 1998, and it has just been improved
following the recommendations of the Expert Group;
the judges all agree and recognize that the preparatory
phase must be suitably carried out if a trial is to be
carefully studied and based on the real legal and factual
aspects of the case.
I would like to refer to the Expert Group. I do not
wish to go into excessive detail, but let me say that the
Expert Group concluded its work in the period of
November-December 1999. It took a long time to have
it translated into the various languages. On 30 March I
signed a response, on behalf of my colleagues, relating
to the recommendations of the Expert Group. In
response to the speaker who said that there should be
another expert group — there is the informal working
group established by the President — but I do not think
that a new expert group needs to be established. The
Expert Group, mandated by a General Assembly
resolution of 18 December 1998, analysed the Tribunal,
the entire range of its operations. To our great
satisfaction, the Expert Group did not have any major
criticism of our institution.
In response to the representative of Canada, there
are 46 recommendations stemming from the Expert
Group’s work. Of those 46 recommendations, I can
state — and provide the proof if there is enough
time — that all those relating to expediting trials were
anticipated by the Tribunal. They were even
acknowledged by the Expert Group as being judicious.
They were all immediately implemented. The main
ones are those relating to the contamination of judges,
which is a very complex matter when there are only 14
judges, or really 9, since 5 are in the Appeals Chamber.
But a recommendation was made, and we immediately
put that into our Rules of Procedure and Evidence. We
have recast the trial preparation procedure. We have
also reduced the number of excessive petitions, and

23

S/PV.4161

most judges of the Tribunal are trying to cut back oral
petitions.
I do not wish to take up too much time, but to the
Ambassador of Canada I will say that I am prepared to
write a letter to give clarification on the number of
provisions. One or two were not acknowledged by the
Tribunal judges, those that are excessively authoritative
or peremptory provisions — the Deputy Registrar will
correct me if I am wrong — on remuneration of the
defence counsel. It is a very delicate matter. The Expert
Group faces a considerable problem, which is that the
overall system does not lead to expeditiousness, but to
slowness. When positions are polarized, the parties do
not think about the cost that this represents in terms of
investigative resources for the prosecution or for the
defence. It is a very delicate issue. The Expert Group
has made a proposal, and we have submitted it to the
standing committee on amendments to the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence. I will not conceal the fact that
opinions are divided to such an extent that I have
decided to put this matter on the agenda of our next
plenary meeting, on 13 and 14 July.
I wish to address the next-to-last point, which is
Rwanda and the Appeals Chamber. I have not talked
about Rwanda. I am not the President of the Rwanda
Tribunal. I do not think the President of that Tribunal
would have been happy had I done so. But we did take
up the Rwanda question in a way that concerns me very
directly, as President of the Appeals Chamber. It is true
that we met in plenary meeting, since we form part of
the Rwanda Chamber. Ambassador Scheffers will
remember that in February we convened a plenary
meeting of the judges of Rwanda and The Hague with
the five judges of the Appeals Chamber. We felt
unanimously that the proposal of the Expert Group that
two more judges should be added to the Chamber
would be the best remedy, or one of the best remedies,
to deal with the considerable caseload. I will give an
idea of the considerable caseload. The Rwanda Appeals
Chamber has 15 or 16 interlocutory appeals and 6
substantive appeals relating to very highly placed
leaders in the country. The ICTY has fewer
interlocutory appeals, because we have a better system
of selecting appeals, but there are 6 or 7 substantive
appeals. Obviously, the caseload is very heavy, since
they are the same five judges.
There are many problems in the Appeals
Chamber, relating to the number of cases and more
important matters that the recommendations of the

24

Expert Group could help us resolve. It is a problem of
stabilizing the so-called Appeals Chamber. Our
Appeals Chamber is not stable as far as its composition
is concerned. It is not worthy — and I say this
publicly — of a great international system of justice.
Please be assured that this is not intentional. We have a
problem of contamination in cases related to historical
and political matters. Justice and politics eventually
merge. Unless all those accused of a given act are
arrested at the same time, the trials begin one after the
other, and after a time, since they are dealing with the
same context and the same criminal area, the judges
have to recuse themselves or are called upon by the
parties to recuse themselves. So there is an increasing
number of judges who are contaminated. This is a
considerable problem for the Appeals Chamber.
I will give another example. I am the President of
the Appeals Chamber. After I was elected on 16
November, I was almost immediately contaminated
vis-à-vis all the ICTY cases because I had participated
in those cases at different levels. I had to ask another
judge to be the fifth judge in the Appeals Chamber.
The problem is the normative role of the Appeals
Chamber. If we are to expedite procedure, we must
have jurisprudence available in the Appeals
Chamber — for example on the idea of internal or
international armed conflict. Something of this sort
should be carefully defined by the Appeals Chamber.
But the changing composition of the Chamber — not to
mention our Tribunal’s legibility, which, I agree, is not
very good — means it cannot always agree on its
normative role. That is why we think the proposal of
the Expert Group is a judicious one. We also find it
judicious from another point of view: how, at the dawn
of the third millennium, can we say that the Rwanda
Tribunal cannot participate, in one way or another, in
appeals as long as the judges are not contaminated?
Therefore, I think the proposal for two additional
judges is a reasonable one.
Regarding whether ad litem judges should be
used, there is flexibility in that solution. If the principle
of ad litem judges is included in the statute, then the
principle may have to be followed even in the Appeals
Chamber. But I do not think so, because if ad litem
judges make a meaningful contribution, if the mandate
of the Tribunal concludes in 2007, then I think the
current 14 judges would be able to finish the cases
before them without reinforcements.

S/PV.4161

I am not sure if I have answered everyone. I am
sorry if I have spoken at length.
Let me conclude on the working group. I support
the Tribunal in that initiative, which I think would be
the most productive one. We need the Council. I think
the Council knows that. It established the Tribunal. We
have become increasingly clear, legible. I say this for
those who may have made critical remarks about our
Tribunal.
Let me digress here. Those who criticize the
Tribunal should come to The Hague and hear the cries
of the victims who are turning to us. They should go to
the universities to study how the immense body of
jurisprudence that we have developed at the Tribunals
in The Hague and Arusha has opened up an entire
scientific universe of progress in the evolution of
international humanitarian law. I had yet another
demonstration of this yesterday morning when I spoke
before the preparatory committee for the rules of
procedure.
Yes, we do need the Security Council. I am not
asking merely for more and more money. That is not
what I am saying. What I am saying is that we could
perhaps use some additional funds, but on the condition
that they be included in a forward-looking plan. We
cannot implement never-ending reform. It is easy for
judges to ask for an additional Chamber, as we did in
1997, but of course we had reasons then to act that
way. Today, however, I cannot come to the Security
Council for an additional Chamber without offering
some forward-looking context for these three
additional judges, only to return two years hence to say
that it is not enough and that we want yet another
Chamber. That is not my vision of my role as
President. I believe that the work of the Security
Council’s informal group should be forward-looking;
that, I believe, is how progress can be made.
In conclusion, let me make two points. As to the
timetable, I believe that it should be quite tight,
because any change in the statute takes time. Members
of the Council know that better than I do. Moreover,
these amendments must be coordinated with the
budgetary schedule, which is very heavy. There must
be a degree of harmonization in that regard. Let me
recall that there is another factor that will have an
impact, but that should prompt us to get down to work
quickly: 2001 is an election year for judges. Judges
involved in a trial who are not re-elected by the

General Assembly or who wish to stand down and
leave the Tribunal must conclude their trials. That is
what happened in 1997. That must be taken into
account when costs are being assessed.
That is why I wish to offer this modest bit of
information. I believe that the idea of the ad litem
judges is that they would get involved before the
election of judges in 2001, whose terms of office will
come to an end in November. I wonder whether I shall
have to come to ask the Security Council, as I did in
1997, to anticipate those elections. Why? The
Chambers are working full time. In February, Chamber
I, for instance, will have concluded two trials and
started a third. Those judges will have to remain at the
expense, worthy as it is, of the Tribunal. That is why I
would say that the timetable of several months which
the Council is setting for itself to consider and, I hope,
validate our proposals is a good thing.
Lastly, I would like to risk saying that we should
be very grateful if the Security Council were to consult
us on technical matters as it progresses in its work. The
history of the Tribunal has frequently been marked by
texts or decisions, the consequences of which have not
always been carefully considered by the various
parties.
I apologize to some speakers for not having
responded to their questions. I wish to thank all those
who have offered their unreserved support not to me,
but to the Tribunal. I shall convey it to my colleagues. I
emphasize that I am very much alive to all the
constructive criticism that has been expressed in this
very beautiful and prestigious Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Jorda for giving us specific, well-reasoned and
enthusiastic answers to the various questions that have
been asked of him. We have taken good note of his
suggestion concerning the pace of work of the working
group that will now certainly be established by the
Security Council. We have also taken due note of his
suggestion that the informal working group keep in
contact with his Tribunal. As Judge Jorda suggested, I
am sure that we will have the honour and pleasure of
welcoming him back here once again. I certainly hope
so.
There are no speakers remaining on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

25

S/PV.4161

Security Council will, of course, remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

26
