United Nations

S/PV.4805

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4805

th meeting
Wednesday, 6 August 2003, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Antonio
Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Chungong Ayafor
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Smirnov
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/1998/287)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-45937 (E)

*0345937*

S/PV.4805

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua
New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/287)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Fiji, Japan, New Zealand
and Papua New Guinea in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aisi (Papua
New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Savua (Fiji),
Mr. Motomura (Japan) and Mr. MacKay (New
Zealand) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Noel Sinclair,
Head of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Sinclair to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Noel Sinclair, Head of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville. I now give
him the floor.

2

Mr. Sinclair: Since the briefing given to the
Council on 28 March 2003 by Mr. Danilo Türk,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
has taken some dramatic steps forward. The most
significant of these was the completion of stage II of
weapons disposal, as required by the Agreement. Since
there could be no numerical criterion to follow to
determine that completion, the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) decided to base itself
on the principle of effectiveness — how the people of
Bougainville feel as a result of what has been achieved.
UNPOB therefore undertook an island-wide
process of consultations, in the course of which it was
able to ascertain that the people of the island were
feeling a level of confidence and security that they had
never felt at any time since the crisis ended. The people
expressed a uniform desire for UNPOB to verify the
end of stage II of weapons disposal, so that elections
for their autonomous Government could be held as
soon as possible. They were, of course, aware of the
presence of uncollected weapons in the various
communities, held by former combatants, by
businessmen, by criminals, and also by supporters of
Francis Ona, whose continuing separation from the
peace process is a source of concern to them all.
However, they did not consider that these factors
should delay implementation of the Peace Agreement.
They expressed much faith in what their autonomous
Government could do to deal with the challenges posed
by outstanding weapons and by Francis Ona.
Recognizing the very fundamental and serious
nature of the responsibility for verification, and
recognizing also the consequences of that act, UNPOB
gave the most careful and detailed consideration to the
views expressed by the people, weighing the risks
involved in going ahead with the Agreement against
those involved in not doing so. On the basis of such
reflection and analysis, UNPOB formed the
judgement — and so informed the Peace Process
Consultative Committee — that stage II of weapons
disposal had come to an end and that the weapons
disposal plan had served its purpose.
On 30 July last, UNPOB made this verification
and certification to the National Government. The
Minister of Bougainville Affairs gave the appropriate
advice to the Governor General, and the internal
procedures required for the head of State to gazette the
relevant notice have been observed. It is expected that

S/PV.4805

very shortly the constitutional amendments and the
Organic Law on Peace-Building on Bougainville will
become fully operational. With that act, a new era will
have dawned in the relations between the National
Government and Bougainville, and a significant
milestone will have been reached in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. The stage will
have been set for the next steps to be taken, including
the holding of elections for a Bougainville autonomous
Government, in the context of the autonomy
arrangements.
Where preparations for autonomy are concerned,
consultations have been taking place between the
National
Government
and
the
Bougainville
Administration
on
a
number
of
fronts
simultaneously — on the making of a Bougainville
Constitution, on law and justice, and on the Interim
Joint Supervisory Body, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of arrangements for the
establishment and operation of the autonomous
Bougainville Government.
Where the funding of constitutional and electoral
activities is concerned, the Bougainville side is
currently preparing a detailed budget that would cover
further meetings of the Bougainville Constitutional
Commission and of a Constituent Assembly, which
would finalize and adopt a Constitution, as well as
other elections-related expenses. Following the
approval of the budget by the provincial authorities,
decisions need to be made on the sources of funding.
Some work still needs to be done in all of these
areas, but UNPOB believes that the completion of
verification and certification will serve as a stimulus
for the advancement of these activities. The Minister
for Bougainville Affairs is due to visit the island very
shortly. UNPOB expects that this visit will be an
opportunity for all outstanding obligations to be
cleared, so that movement towards the full
implementation of the autonomy arrangements can
proceed with all deliberate speed.
Meanwhile, the process of weapons collection
continues, and will continue — for verification of stage
II does not mean the end of that process. UNPOB is
therefore pushing ahead with its Operation Continuing
Vigilance and Final Phase programmes, which seek the
collection of greater numbers of uncontained weapons
and their storage in secure conditions. Last week we

contained 20 such weapons in two locations on the
island.
According to the Peace Agreement, the parties
have four and half months after the coming into effect
of the constitutional amendments to make a decision on
the final fate of the contained weapons. The National
Government and the Bougainville Resistance Force
have both indicated a preference for destruction, while
the Bougainville Revolutionary Army prefers secure
storage. The two factions are due to meet shortly in
order to seek a unified position on the question of the
final fate of the weapons. UNPOB has been requested
to preside over that consultation, which will take place
during the last week of August.
In keeping with the concerns expressed by the
people in the pre-verification consultations, it is
essential that efforts be intensified by all concerned to
ensure Mr. Ona’s participation in the peace process, or,
at the very least, that he maintains his position of
respect for that process. UNPOB, for its part, will do
all that is possible to help achieve that goal.
In the remaining months of our mandate, UNPOB
will continue to work hard to ensure that the peace
process keeps moving forward. This will require
sustained effort and continuing commitment by the
parties to the Peace Agreement. On the basis of
experience, we are confident that we will be able to
continue to rely on all of the parties to manifest these
attitudes. We believe also that we will be able to
continue to rely upon the support of the regional
partners and of the international community in general.
In this process, we are happy to have the
cooperation and support of the newly established
Bougainville Transition Team, the successor to the
Peace Monitoring Group, which completed its mission
on 30 June last. We already have a relationship of solid
cooperation with the BTT. We exchange views and
information on developments in the peace process. We
cooperate in contacts with Bougainvilleans throughout
the island, and the BTT played a most valuable role in
getting the majority of the participants in the last PPCC
meeting to Buka and back to their villages. The BTT is
also assisting UNPOB in checking and recording
weapons collected, and it also presented its first report
on ceasefire violations to the Committee. ÜNPOB is
very grateful for that cooperation of the BTT, and we
express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
contributing Governments.

3

S/PV.4805

With the withdrawal of UNPOB at the end of this
year, a special responsibility will devolve on the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in terms of
providing continuing international support for
Bougianville’s peace consolidation efforts. It is
essential that UNPOB and the Department of Political
Affairs work closely with UNDP in order to ensure
continuity of United Nations activities on a sound and
sustainable basis after December 2003. To that end, the
consultations are under way with UNDP on various
issues so as to develop a joint approach for the smooth
transition. Meanwhile, UNDP itself is in the process of
formulating phase II of its rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development programmes on the island.
In summary, therefore, the situation in
Bougainville is that stage II of the weapons disposal
plan has been declared completed. The parties have
already begun to talk seriously among themselves
about stage III, for which they have a deadline in the
middle of December. While the Bougainvilleans work
on this aspect, they are at the same time working to
advance the autonomy aspects of the Agreement, most
importantly finalization of the Constitution and the
holding of elections. There are challenges in all those
areas, some of which are huge, but the will is there to
persevere and to overcome.
Within the limitations imposed by its current
financial situation, the National Government is
showing a high level of sensitivity to maintaining its
record of compliance with its obligations under the
Agreement. The people of Bougainville are showing
determination to move beyond weapons and to begin to
concentrate on elections, on building institutions and
on taking charge of their destiny.
Undergirding all those efforts, UNPOB’s
impartiality, neutrality and energy remain available to
the parties, as we try to ensure that weapons that are
collected are kept secure, that outstanding issues in the
relations within and between communities are resolved
in accordance with Bougainville traditional methods
and that Bougainvilleans are well informed about what
is happening where implementation of the Agreement
is concerned, what the developments signify and what
role they can play in advancing them. Closer towards
the end of this year, Council members may wish to turn
their attention to ways in which the Council can render
support to them as they seek to strengthen their peace
and make it irreversible.

4

The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting. I would like to
preface my comments by saying that I apologize to the
President and the Council members for the lateness of
the aide-memoire, which I hope was useful, late as it
was. We also note that we have sent the members of the
Council documentation and statements from the Papua
New Guinea Government in the past several weeks.
My delegation appreciates and thanks the
Security Council for the opportunity to open
consideration of an agenda item of the greatest
importance to the people and Government of Papua
New Guinea: the peace process and the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea. I
deliberately refer to the item as one for consideration,
rather than debate, as it concerns matters on which
there are no significant differences among members of
the United Nations or the parties involved in the peace
process on the ground.
There are three issues that I will cover. The first
one is verification, the second is regional support for
the peace process, and the third is preparations for
autonomy, restoration and development.
In terms of verification, the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has judged
that implementation of the agreed weapons disposal
plan contained in the Bougainville Peace Agreement
has progressed to the point at which it can verify that
stage II of the plan has been achieved. Stage II is
defined as the time when weapons are held in secure,
double-locked containers, with the containers
supervised and one of the keys held by UNPOB.
Ambassador Sinclair submitted his report
verifying and certifying that achievement to the
National Government on Tuesday, 29 July 2003. The
presentation took place at the National Parliament
House of Papua New Guinea, in Port Moresby, in front
of the acting Prime Minister, Hon. Bart Philemon,
ministers and members of Parliament, diplomats
accredited to Papua New Guinea, senior officials and
media representatives who came to witness and report
on the event. Consistent with the requirements of the
new Part XIV of the Papua New Guinea Constitution,
which gives legal effect to the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, the responsible minister officially then

S/PV.4805

advised the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea
that the report had been received.
The notice bringing the new Part XIV of the
Constitution and the new organic law on peacebuilding in Bougainville into full operation is expected
to appear in the National Gazette later this week. I note
that Ambassador Sinclair also mentioned that in his
presentation.
The framework for the establishment and the
gradual assumption of increasing responsibility for the
exercise of powers, functions and control over
resources and the day-to-day operations of the
autonomous Bougainville Government will then be in
place. So will the guarantee for a referendum among
Bougainvilleans on Bougainville’s political future in
another 10 to 15 years, when certain agreed conditions
apply. The referendum will include a separate
independence for Bougainville as an available option.
The outcome will be subject to the final decisionmaking authority of the National Parliament of Papua
New Guinea.
A significant feature of the new constitutional
arrangements is that they can be changed only if a
proposal for change is supported by a two-thirds
absolute majority of members of the National
Parliament of Papua New Guinea and by the
Bougainville legislature set up under those
arrangements.
As Ambassador Sinclair has recognized in his
verification report, the changes that follow the
verification report mean that “relations between the
National Government and Bougainville become
transformed for all time”.
The readiness with which the parties involved in
the Bougainville peace process agreed to make
UNPOB responsible for initiating such critical
constitutional changes was a mark of the faith all of
them had in the neutrality, independence and integrity
of the United Nations and its representative on the
ground, Ambassador Sinclair and UNPOB. The
reception the parties gave the draft report, when the
Chairman, Ambassador Sinclair, presented it to the
Peace Process Consultative Committee (PPCC) on 25
July, showed that they continue to have similar
confidence in the United Nations, UNPOB and
Ambassador Sinclair. The way in which all the parties
have maintained such confidence at a critical turning
point in the peace process, when uncertainty is

otherwise likely to rise, is very much to the credit of
the United Nations bodies and officials involved in this
process. It is also a product of the verification process
itself.
As members of the Security Council will recall,
Papua New Guinea has always believed that
verification should be based on the widest possible
consultation. Our position has been endorsed by all of
the parties involved in the Bougainville peace process.
UNPOB has applied it with energy and care. Genuine
verification cannot just be a matter of counting the
number of guns handed in, or of comparing that
number with an uncertain estimate of the weapons at
large previously or now.
As Ambassador Sinclair rightly observes in his
verification report, the Bougainville Peace Agreement
is intended to lay a solid foundation for the creation of
a society characterized by genuine peace and the
restoration of civil authority under a democratically
elected autonomous Government. The foundations of
such a society can only be feelings of mutual security
and confidence within and among various communities
of Bougainville. The weapons disposal plan is an
essential element in promoting a secure foundation for
the required feelings of mutual security and
confidence.
It was accordingly appropriate — indeed
necessary — for Ambassador Sinclair to proceed on the
basis of consultations, after consulting widely at
community level around Bougainville with former
combatants and political leaders of all major factions
and with the Transitional Consultative Council, in
which leaders of the main political bodies representing
the people of Bougainville consult with each other and
the National Government of Papua New Guinea.
Ambassador Sinclair was also willing to provide
clarification of his verification report, when requested,
to the Government of Papua New Guinea.
The final step in the process, before Ambassador
Sinclair formally submitted the final report to the
National Government, was the presentation of the
report to the PPCC, where the parties involved in the
Bougainville peace process could receive and review it
together. The only significant absentee from the
consultations was Francis Ona and his remaining
supporters outside the peace process in the so-called
“no-go zone”, around the Panguna Mine site.

5

S/PV.4805

The consensus of the parties involved in the
peace process and the PPCC meeting on 25 July was
that the report is balanced, comprehensive and frank.
This view was reached in light of a number of
considerations, including the way in which
consultations had been conducted all around
Bougainville, the report’s acknowledgement of the
work still to be done to rid Bougainville of the fear and
threat of the gun, and UNPOB’s careful assessment of
the risks involved in deciding whether and when to
verify and certify that stage II has been achieved.

For this reason, the Government of Papua New
Guinea and other parties involved in the peace process
continue to call for reconciliation, and the active
involvement of Francis Ona and Me’ekamui in
practical peace-building. Now is the time for them to
play a direct part in shaping the future Government of
Bougainville. The Government of Papua New Guinea
continues to recognize the positive contribution Francis
Ona and his group have made to the Bougainville
peace process by not deliberately disrupting it on the
ground.

In basing its assessment on the evidence provided
both from practical weapons disposal and through
widespread,
in-depth
consultations,
UNPOB
acknowledges that it alone is responsible for making
the final judgment on verification. That is the basis on
which the parties agreed that UNPOB should verify
and certify stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan. The Government would have it no other way.

Meanwhile, the Government continues to urge the
Bougainville parties to meet and decide on the final
fate of the weapons without further unnecessary delay.
I am therefore pleased to be able to inform the United
Nations that the PPCC has agreed that the meeting will
be held on Nissan Island, in the Bougainville province,
as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made,
probably in a few weeks.

The most significant gap in practical weapons
disposal and the Bougainville peace process as a whole
arises from the way in which Francis Ona and his
remaining supporters close to Panguna have chosen to
remain outside this process. But even here, progress is
being made. In practice, those who continue to remain
outside the Bougainville peace process have generally
respected the peace which has been achieved.

The Government of Papua New Guinea firmly
believes that destroying the guns at the earliest
practicable opportunity is the only truly effective
option and the only way in which guns will be removed
not only physically, but from the minds of the people in
Bougainville. It is also the best way by far of ensuring
that scarce human and financial resources are not
wasted on providing security for guns and containers,
but rather used to support the economic and social
recovery for which people around Bougainville and the
rest of Papua New Guinea continue to work, hope and
pray.

As the verification report recognizes, citing a
letter from Francis Ona to Ambassador Sinclair, the
Me’ekamui Defence Force does not intend,
“to enter into any unnecessary conflict or war.
The war is well and truly behind us as our
military objectives have been achieved and our
struggle must, as it has, progressively move on
into new directions and areas.”
In such circumstances, it is indeed distressing to
see various documents circulating in Bougainville,
purportedly expressing the views of Francis Ona and
the remaining hard core of Me’ekamui supporters that
there is a conspiracy to undermine the Bougainville
peace process or undertake other unwelcome activities
in Bougainville. The alleged conspiracy is variously
said to be between the Government of Papua New
Guinea and others — sometimes a mining company or
companies, and sometimes the United Nations. The
circulation of such untrue and implausible ideas is, at
best, a sign of isolation.

6

Thus, verification and certification of stage II do
not mark the end of UNPOB’s role and responsibilities
on the ground. In citing the initiatives UNPOB is
taking to promote further practical weapons disposal,
the report recognizes this reality. Not only does
UNPOB remain responsible for supervising and
holding one of the keys to each stage II container, it
has a continuing role in relation to the making and
implementation of the decision at stage III of the
agreed weapons disposal plan. If the parties do not
reach a mutually acceptable agreement at stage III,
then UNPOB has a further possible role and
responsibility in relation to determining whether or not
elections for the autonomous Bougainville Government
should go ahead or should be deferred, in which case it
will have a say in the length of any deferral.

S/PV.4805

UNPOB’s ongoing role and responsibilities
underline the urgency of holding the stage III meeting
between the parties to the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and implementing its outcome. This means
that UNPOB will still have a great deal of very
important, indeed critical, work to do in order to
complete its agreed assignment under the Bougainville
Peace Agreement by the end of this year.
I turn now to regional support for the peace
process. The Bougainville peace process has benefited
from the generous support not only of the United
Nations, but of Papua New Guinea’s friends in the
region and development cooperation partners around
the world.
The neutral regional Truce Monitoring Group
(TMG) was established first, in late 1997. It was then
replaced by the similarly neutral regional Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG), when the agreement
implementing the permanent and irrevocable ceasefire
was signed on 30 April 1998. Both the TMG and the
PMG consisted of personnel from Australia, Fiji, New
Zealand and Vanuatu. The men and women who served
in the ranks, both civilian and military, were unarmed.
From a peak of just of over 300 personnel at the start,
the PMG has gradually been reduced in size as the
peace process gathered strength and become
increasingly capable of sustaining itself on the ground.
As members of the Security Council will recall,
all of the parties involved in the Bougainville peace
process were concerned when it was announced that
the PMG would cease operations on 30 June 2003. The
gap it would leave would be experienced directly by
the people who gained confidence from its continuing
presence. It would also be felt by UNPOB, which
relied on the PMG for logistical and other forms of
support.
I am therefore pleased to report that the
contributing countries have agreed to provide a
Bougainville Transition Team (BTT) to support the
peace process until the end of this year.
The BTT, consisting of 17 civilian personnel from
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu, will be
much smaller and have a more narrowly focused
mandate than the PMG. It will, of course, continue to
be unarmed. In view of concerns expressed when the
Security
Council
previously
considered
the
Bougainville peace process and UNPOB, I am pleased
to advise that the protocol establishing the BTT gives it

the explicit function of cooperating with United
Nations observers, on agreed terms and conditions.
Papua New Guinea is grateful for the positive
way in which the BTT contributing countries have
responded to the request by the National Government,
on behalf of the parties, for the continuing availability
of a neutral regional body to support the peace process
and assist UNPOB logistically and in other ways.
Ambassador Sinclair has mentioned some of the ways
it is assisting.
Finally, I would like to turn to the preparations
for autonomy, restoration and development. Weapons
disposal and the full operation of new constitutional
arrangements lay the foundations for progress in other
areas, but they do not build peace on their own. Given
our experience of the challenges involved in
implementing major constitutional changes of our own
and our close observation of peace processes in other
countries, Papua New Guinea is only too well aware of
the many diverse and, often, complex challenges which
have to be met and overcome.
That is why the Government is working closely
with leaders and officials in Bougainville to finalize
immediate arrangements to improve policing and
access to courts and increase the availability of
correctional services in Bougainville. We are also
consulting on plans for the medium and long term.
In every case, the Government is conscious of the
need to maintain consistency with the letter and spirit
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement, including the
consultations and cooperation which are the agreed
keys to implementation.
Other steps towards creating conditions in which
the autonomous Bougainville Government can be
established and begin operating include consultations
on the development of the Bougainville constitution.
The Government is trying its hardest, in difficult
economic and budgetary conditions, to allocate funds,
personnel and other support to facilitate progress
towards self-sustaining peace and the transition to
autonomy in Bougainville. In doing so, we continue to
rely on the support of our development cooperation
partners. Australia, the European Union, Japan, New
Zealand and others should know how much we
appreciate the resources they provide.
Among members of the United Nations family of
organizations, the United Nations Development

7

S/PV.4805

Programme (UNDP) stands out for the strong and
effective support it provides for practical weapons
disposal, community development and the training of
former combatants, in particular. The UNDPcoordinated cocoa and coconut rehabilitation project is
an especially noteworthy and successful instance of an
activity which facilitates both economic and social
recovery, as well as the reintegration of former
combatants, by providing large numbers of rural
smallholders with employment, incomes and hope
based on self-help.
The United Nations Children’s Fund provides
support for restoration and development across a broad
range of activities, including immunization, HIV/AIDS
awareness, malaria control, education, child protection
and trauma counselling.
Other areas in which Papua New Guinea will be
seeking advice and other forms of assistance include
public sector reform and other preparations for the
establishment of the autonomous Bougainville
Government.
Priorities include the provision of opportunities
for training, re-training and upgrading the skills of
public sector personnel and potential recruits. They
also include support for capacity-building and
institutional strengthening, both in Bougainville and at
the national level, so that the cooperation necessary to
give full effect to the joint creation embodied in the
Bougainville Peace Agreement can receive the support
it requires at both ends.
As development cooperation partners work to
integrate their activities in Bougainville into national
projects and programmes, the Government requests
them to continue giving appropriate attention and
priority to the particular character of the post-conflict
situation in Bougainville. The need to reintegrate
former combatants and their communities remains a
major concern.
As my remarks have, I believe, made clear, the
peace process in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea,
remains a national priority, pursued on a bipartisan
basis. Papua New Guinea is accordingly grateful for
the support the international community continues to
provide.
The Government has accepted, and acted on,
UNPOB’s verification report and certification, as the

8

constitutional
amendment
implementing
Bougainville Peace Agreement requires.

the

As UNPOB’s host, Papua New Guinea will
continue to fully support its efforts to fulfil its agreed
responsibilities under the Lincoln, ceasefire and
Bougainville peace agreements and, in doing so, help
to secure lasting peace by peaceful means.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Ambassador Sinclair for his
detailed and clear briefing. More generally, I would
like to thank the staff of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) for the work that they
have accomplished. I would also like to thank our
colleague from Papua New Guinea for the
clarifications that he provided. I would further like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Peace
Monitoring Group and its contributing countries on
their activities.
I would like to make three brief comments. First,
the conclusion of stage II of weapons disposal is, of
course, a welcome development after more than a year
of successive delays. We must now move on to stage
III — the final decision on weapons disposal —
without delay.
Secondly, we believe that establishing contacts
with Francis Ona with a view to bringing him into the
peace process should be continued. Such a dialogue
should not, however, result in any delay in the priority
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
Thirdly, we would like to encourage the efforts of
Papua New Guinea and of all the parties. Such efforts
must be directed towards setting a date for the speedy
organization of elections in Bougainville, the effective
holding of those elections and, finally, the
establishment of an autonomous Government.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first welcome
Ambassador Sinclair and thank him very much for his
very informative and complete report; we appreciated it
very much. I would also like to thank the representative
of Papua New Guinea for his statement. He gave us a
very encouraging and positive assessment.
I am very pleased that stage II could finally be
completed. We greatly appreciate the commitment of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) in that matter. In that context, we would also
like to assure the countries participating in the Peace
Monitoring Group of our greatest appreciation. We

S/PV.4805

warmly welcome the further regional engagement of
Australia and New Zealand in the Bougainville
transition team, in which they will shortly be joined by
Fiji and Vanuatu.
We must not, of course, forget the active
involvement of the people of Papua New Guinea and
Bougainville, without which the ongoing peace process
will not be able to succeed. Their support for the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville and
their active participation in the weapons collection
have led to the verification of stage II. Furthermore,
Papua New Guinea showed its commitment to the
peace process by facilitating the quick acceptance and
implementation of arrangements which were required
for the Bougainville Transition Team to take up its
work.
Given the full ownership of this process by the
people of Bougainville and Papua New Guinea, the
departure of the United Nations Office by the end of
this year will, in our view, be the right next step. For its
last month in action, UNPOB should set out a rigid
timetable to ensure the progress of constitutional work.
Therefore, all possible assistance should be made
available to Ambassador Sinclair and his staff. In our
view, the Secretariat is indispensable in this respect.
With regard to stage III, we highly recommend
the complete destruction of all weapons, as a lasting
peace cannot be ensured otherwise. The parties should
be aware that without an agreement in this regard the
peace process might be held up and the holding of
elections might also be delayed unnecessarily. We hope
that the meeting announced by the representative of
Papua New Guinea will be successful in that regard.
The achievements reached thus far show that the
peace process is under way and will not be stopped.
Therefore, efforts to have Francis Ona and his
movement join the peace process should be maintained.
At the same time, he needs to know and to understand
that the peace process and the people of Bougainville
cannot wait for him.
In conclusion, let me say that Germany will
continue, within the framework of the European Union,
to contribute to the further development of a
functioning civil society in that region.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
associate myself with the remarks of the two previous
speakers in thanking Ambassador Sinclair very much

for his careful account of the situation, welcoming the
details that the Ambassador of Papua New Guinea has
offered us, congratulating the Peace Monitoring Group
on their role and urging continuing regional
engagement.
The picture is an upbeat one. We are pleased, of
course, that stage II of the weapons disposal plan has
taken place. I think it can be fairly said that the new
constitutional arrangements that result are historic for
Papua New Guinea, and I would like particularly to
congratulate Ambassador Sinclair and his Office for
their role.
I have just two brief points to draw from this. The
first relates to the continuing separation of Francis Ona
and his supporters from the peace process. As
Ambassador Sinclair said, that must be a source of
concern to all. We welcome the efforts of all
concerned, including the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), in trying to bring
Francis Ona and his supporters on board the peace
process. It will be right to continue to try to do so, but I
join France and Germany in agreeing that this must in
no way delay the peace process.
My second point is an obvious one. It is the need
for continued and exclusive focus on delivering
progress and momentum in stage III. We do not wish to
see any further delays in that process, which means that
there are a tight four and a half months within which to
work. So, it was good to hear from Ambassador
Sinclair and to have confirmed by our colleague from
Papua New Guinea the commitment of the Papua New
Guinea Government to moving forward briskly on
arrangements for autonomy, on the finalization of the
constitution, on the transfer of resources to
Bougainville and on preparations for early elections.
As both Ambassador Sinclair and the representative of
Papua New Guinea have underscored, these too, in
addition to weapons containment, are essential to
building the self-sustaining peace to which we all look
forward.
Mr. Simancas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), Ambassador
Noel Sinclair, for the information that he has just
provided. Before the Peace Monitoring Group leaves
Bougainville, I would also like to express our gratitude

9

S/PV.4805

for the work and support that Australia, New Zealand,
Fiji and Vanuatu have provided to Bougainville.
In that regard, Mexico welcomes the decision by
those countries to send representatives to the
Bougainville Transition Team to follow up on the
peace process. That kind of initiative sends the clear
message that the international community attaches
importance to the advancement of the peace process
and the establishment of an autonomous and
representative Government in Bougainville.
Finally, stage II of the weapons collection plan
has been successfully concluded under the watchful
supervision of Ambassador Sinclair. Bearing in mind
the experience gained in other conflicts where a delay
in the final disposal of collected weapons has been
used by some disruptive elements to resume hostilities
or return to criminal activities, it is essential for the
Security Council to urge the Peace Process
Consultative Committee to begin disposal of weapons
as soon as possible. In a society that has opted for
dialogue, tolerance and understanding, there is simply
no place for weapons.
Throughout the peace process, the cooperation of
the Government of Papua New Guinea has been
essential. It is now important for the State bodies to
reach prompt agreement on a draft constitution for the
island so that elections may be held as soon as possible
to establish an autonomous and democratic
Government in Bougainville. However, political
progress is not sufficient if it does not go hand in hand
with essential economic and social development.
Therefore, it is essential for the donor community to
support the establishment of sustainable economic and
social conditions by channelling resources towards
infrastructure, education, health and development
projects. In these efforts, reintegration and
rehabilitation of ex-combatants should be promoted.
That in turn will contribute to a peaceful transition to a
political future for Bougainville.
Finally, I wish to express once again Mexico’s
gratitude for the work carried out by Ambassador
Sinclair and his staff, whose commitment has been
reflected in positive progress towards achieving a
lasting solution to the conflict in Bougainville.
Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation too is grateful to Ambassador
Sinclair for his thorough briefing. We thank the
representative of Papua New Guinea for further

10

clarifications on the peace process. We support the
efforts of the parties in implementing the Bougainville
Peace Agreement and we welcome the commitment of
the Papua New Guinea Government and the
Bougainville communities to a peaceful settlement.
We note with satisfaction the positive progress in
the peace process and the constitutional stage that it
has entered as a result of the successful completion of
stage II of weapons disposal. This was possible on the
basis of broad-based consultations and the confidence
that was placed in the United Nations Political Office
in Bougainville (UNPOB). We also highly commend
the work of UNPOB, headed by Mr. Sinclair, in
moving forward and achieving results in the peace
process. Much work remains to be done, and there are
concerns that not all parties concerned are involved in
the peace process. We believe that the political efforts
of UNPOB and the Papua New Guinea Government
must be continued, and we fully support these efforts.
We believe that the UNPOB mandate will be
successfully completed within the established time
frame.
We greatly welcome the regional efforts made,
including the activities of the Political Monitoring
Group, which completed its work on 30 June. We hope
that the Bougainville Transition Team, comprising
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu, will
accomplish its mission and contribute to the successful
implementation of the peace process. We believe it is
important to continue and intensify cooperation
between the United Nations Development Programme
and other bodies of the United Nations in supporting
regional
organizations
and
the
post-conflict
reconstruction and peace-building processes in
Bougainville.
Mr. Antonio (Angola): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Bougainville. I should also like to express
my thanks to Ambassador Sinclair and to our colleague
from Papua New Guinea for this briefing, which
provided an update on the situation in the territory.
My delegation highly appreciates the progress in
the political process since the adoption of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, particularly the
significant improvement in the constitutional aspect.
The Bougainville Constitutional Commission has been
working to arrive at a consensual Bougainville
constitution. The Peace Monitoring Group, whose

S/PV.4805

mandate expired on 30 June, has been succeeded by the
Bougainville Transition Team. The completion of stage
II of the weapons disposal plan has been verified and
certified by the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). We welcome all those
achievements; they are proof of the unequivocal
determination of the people of Bougainville to reach
peace. Therefore, we should like to join those who
have called upon Mr. Francis Ona to join the positive
trends that are occurring in the territory.
A new Bougainville constitution is a central part
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement. It is
therefore important that the draft constitution be
finalized and submitted to the Constituent Assembly of
Bougainville for adoption as a step towards the
achievement of goals set for the transitional period, an
essential element in the shaping of Bougainville’s
future. With the completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal plan, the constitutional process can proceed
swiftly with a view to holding elections as soon as
possible.
My delegation would like to express its
satisfaction at the increased cooperation between Papua
New Guinea and Bougainville. The spirit of
commitment and trust between them has also been
demonstrated in other areas, such as the demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants into society and
the rebuilding of infrastructure.
My delegation hopes that Bougainville will be
one more case of a successful post-conflict situation.
Peacemaking and peace-building are often closely
interrelated. That interrelationship requires a
comprehensive approach in order to preserve the
results achieved. We are convinced that the United
Nations will continue its sustained peace-building
efforts in Bougainville, in particular to address
pressing issues of security and stability in that area by
establishing and increasing the capacity of the local
political structures.
My delegation encourages the recently created
Bougainville Transition Team to monitor fulfilment of
the commitments assumed in the Action Plan. In that
context, Angola welcomes the contributions of
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu. We also
support the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme and of other agencies in this
post-conflict rehabilitation period. We express our
gratitude to the donors — particularly countries in the

region — for their assistance. It is also gratifying to
hear renewed commitments with regard to the future
sustainable development of Bougainville.
In conclusion, we should like to commend the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville and to
express the hope that it will continue to work to
achieve the goals set out in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, which, in our opinion, remains a consistent
objective in shaping the future of Bougainville.
Ms. Menéndez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Sinclair for
his briefing today and to congratulate him on his work
at the head of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB).
We have noted with satisfaction the positive
developments in the fields of disarmament and the
political process in preparation for autonomy, despite
the fragility of the processes, about which Ambassador
Sinclair himself informed us.
Actually, I have little to add to what was said by
the delegations that preceded me, so I shall limit
myself to asking a question of Mr. Sinclair. In his
statement, the subject of cooperation between UNPOB
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to ensure a smooth and effective transition in
the post-UNPOB phase was very interesting to me. He
said that there is a series of consultations between
UNPOB and the UNDP on a number of issues to
develop joint efforts and a joint approach. I should like
to know if he could be a bit more specific as to what
those areas of cooperation would be in order to ensure
such an effective and smooth transition in the future.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to express my appreciation for the
convening of this public meeting to inform the Council
of the recent activities of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB). In addition, I am
grateful to Ambassador Sinclair for his briefing, and I
thank the Permanent Representative of Papua New
Guinea for his statement.
We welcome the completion of stage II of the
weapons disposal plan, a process that UNPOB has
facilitated and accelerated. We welcome the holding of
broadened consultations with the national Government,
political leaders, leaders of various factions and the
people of Bougainville themselves, which has given
everyone the opportunity to discuss the progress in the

11

S/PV.4805

peace process. In that connection, one of the most
important elements is the strengthening of mutual trust
and of the sense of security in the community. We
particularly value the fact that the completion of this
process allows Section XIV of the national
Constitution, the new organic peace-building law, the
autonomous Government of Bougainville and the
elections to enter into full force.
We recognize the importance of the new
Constitution as central to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement of August 2001, which is why we
emphasize the considerable progress achieved as well
as the active participation of the island’s population. In
particular, we consider the second draft, which was
finalized in May, to be of great importance. Therefore,
we believe it is essential that the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission continue its work, using
that text as a basis.
Moreover, we share the view expressed by a
number of previous speakers that it is necessary to
ensure that the international community support with
the necessary resources a number of priority areas,
such as finalization of the establishment of the
Constituent Assembly in Bougainville. Assistance in
preparing for elections is also essential.
We welcome the growing cooperation between
the authorities of Papua New Guinea and the leaders of
Bougainville. We reiterate our gratitude for the work
done by the Peace Monitoring Group over the past five
years and wish every success to the Bougainville
Transition Team, which has recently begun its support
efforts.
Like others, we recognize the invaluable
contributions made by Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu, inter alia. We would like to highlight in
particular the support that must provided in promoting
trust in this peace process in the transition towards an
autonomous Government.
Finally, we wish to note that, in order for peace to
be sustainable, an effective administration and a viable
economy must be established. Accordingly, the
relevant bodies of the United Nations must coordinate
their efforts in Bougainville closely with those of the
international donor community in order to establish and
consolidate peace. In this context, we welcome the
efforts made by the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Children’s Fund in
the area.

12

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to
Ambassador Noel Sinclair and his team for the
outstanding work they have done in Bougainville. We
wish them every success in their future efforts to bring
peace, security and stability to the people of
Bougainville.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ambassador Sinclair for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Bougainville. I would like
also to welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea at this table and
to thank him for his statement.
Pakistan supports the work of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
appreciates the efforts of all the parties which have
worked to seek, facilitate and implement a peaceful
solution to the conflict in that territory. We appreciate
in particular the Government of Papua New Guinea’s
courageous decisions and strong commitment to peace.
These have been crucial to the success of the peace
process.
We welcome the completion and verification of
stage II of the weapons disposal plan under UNPOB’s
supervision, which took place last month. This was a
crucial step in triggering the constitutional process.
That process will clear the way for elections for an
autonomous Government in Bougainville next year, as
well as the eventual holding of a referendum in which
the people of Bougainville will exercise their right of
self-determination, in accordance with the provisions
of the Lincoln and Arawa agreements.
Pakistan strongly supports this path, which the
parties have courageously agreed to follow. However,
more needs to be done to encourage those groups
which remain outside the peace process to join it.
Peace is the only solution, and this process, painstaking
though it is, remains its best guarantor. However, to
sustain peace, it is crucial to promote and sustain
socio-economic development. The two are indivisible.
Therefore, we urge the donor community to contribute
generously not only to the financing of the peace
process but also to the promotion of long-term socioeconomic development.
Pakistan regards the mandate of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville, which expires
at the end of this year, as crucial for building peace as
well as trust in that territory. We hope that the role of
the United Nations in Bougainville will not end with

S/PV.4805

the expiry of UNPOB’s mandate and that the United
Nations will continue to work there and to stay the
course in facilitating the full implementation of the
peace process.
In conclusion, I cannot but express the wish that
the very successful role of mediation and facilitation
played by the United Nations in Bougainville could
also be replicated in another, albeit far more
longstanding and dangerous, dispute which remains on
the Security Council’s agenda — the issue of enabling
the exercise of the right of self-determination by the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We share many of the sentiments expressed by other
speakers so far around the table, and I think that there
is a clear message of Council support to which I want
to add. We similarly thank Ambassador Sinclair for his
briefing and, more importantly, for his effective efforts
to promote lasting peace and to complete the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB). I wish also to thank our colleague the
Ambassador of Papua New Guinea for his informative
contribution to the discussion this morning.
We are encouraged by the progress that is
obviously being made, as is apparent in both
presentations, and we very much welcome the fact that
the completion of stage II of the weapons disposal
process has been verified. We support moving forward
with stage III expeditiously and, hopefully, with the
participation of all concerned. It is important to move
forward.
We also particularly want to commend Australia
and New Zealand, as well as Fiji and Vanuatu, for
having taken such a positive initiative in supporting the
peace process in Bougainville with the creation of the
Bougainville Transition Team. This is an important
element of regional support for the parties and, indeed,
for the international community and the United Nations
as a whole.
With less than six months left before UNPOB’s
mandate expires, we know that the United Nations and
UNPOB will be working hard to ensure completion of
the remaining tasks by December 2003, helping to
create the basis for the establishment of Bougainville’s
autonomy. UNPOB and the parties will have our
support and encouragement.

Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Cameroon welcomes the convening today, at
the request of the Government of Papua New Guinea,
of this public meeting on the situation in Bougainville.
We appreciate the excellent briefing given by Mr.
Sinclair, who brought to our attention some very useful
information on recent developments in the peace
process in Bougainville. We welcome also the
important information given to us by the representative
of Papua New Guinea. These briefings are testimony to
the unstoppable momentum of the peace process.
However, challenges remain with respect to the
establishment in Bougainville of an autonomous
Government and to the holding of a referendum.
The completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal process on 30 July last represents a significant
step towards peace. We welcome the firm commitment
of all the parties to this conflict, since the signing of
the Lincoln ceasefire agreement, to work to restore
peace and in particular to develop a new political
dynamic on the island — one that is more respectful of
the character and of the deep-seated convictions of the
185,000 men and women of Bougainville.
The excellent work of UNPOB remains vital to
achieving this objective. We also appreciate the
manifold and valuable role played to date by Mr.
Sinclair, Head of UNPOB, and his team, particularly in
speeding up weapons collection and helping to promote
the constitutional process and to better inform the
people of the stakes involved.
Regarding the Government of Papua New
Guinea, its commitment to peace has recently been
reflected in a number of actions and initiatives, which
we view very favourably. Such is the case of the
withdrawal, with the help of Australia, of the national
Defence Force from Bougainville; of the participation,
which we view positively, of the Government of Papua
New Guinea in the Bougainville constitutional
consultation process; and, above all, of the respect for
the terms of the memorandum of understanding that
envisages a mechanism for consultation between them
on all aspects of implementation of the autonomy
arrangements.
We also particularly appreciate the excellent work
done by the States members of the Peace Monitoring
Group (PMG), which have contributed to stability and
to restoring confidence in the peace process over the
past five years.

13

S/PV.4805

The creation on the margins of the 30 June 2003
Sydney, Australia, meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Pacific Islands Forum of the
Bougainville Transition Team, which broadly inherits
the competencies and means of the PMG, gives us the
assurance that the risk that the peace process will break
down is under control. In that regard, we wish to
commend the Pacific States, particularly Australia,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Vanuatu, for
their noteworthy commitment to peace in Bougainville.
We call on them to continue those efforts in order to
accompany that province towards peace and
development.
But to achieve that, the population of
Bougainville will need to give the international
community further indications of its will for peace. In
fact, the success of coming stages depends mainly on
that will and on that commitment to peace, as is only
proper.
Concluding
the
constitutional
process;
completing stage III of weapons disposal, which should
lead to a final decision on the fate of the weapons
collected in stage II; and the holding of elections
leading to the establishment of an autonomous
Government: those are all steps that urgently involve
the people of Bougainville. For our part, we are certain
that they will be able to meet those challenges within a
time frame that is in keeping with the UNPOB
mandate, which will end on 31 December 2003.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
ultimate objectives of the entire peace process are the
development and the well-being of the people of
Bougainville.
Until now emphasis has been placed on the
political aspects of the process. The parties to the
conflict, the international community and the various
parties must make more of a commitment in the future
to economic processes, without which peace and
stability would be illusory. Therefore, the programme
for the reintegration of former combatants will need to
be a priority task if we wish to maintain, throughout
the transition, a spirit of consensus that takes account
of the particular situation of the parties and that
ensures a climate of law and order. We welcome the
actions already taken in that regard by the donor
community, and the United Nations Development
Programme particularly.

14

Peace in Bougainville is possible. It is within our
grasp. One last effort is necessary to achieve it, and we
are confident that the people of Bougainville and the
international community will be able to achieve it,
transforming this challenge into a new success for
peace and development.
Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in
French): I wish at the outset to express my delegation’s
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open meeting. It demonstrates well the Council’s
interest in the question of Bougainville.
Like other speakers, I too would like to thank
Ambassador Noel Sinclair, Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), for his
briefing on recent developments in implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. My delegation
welcomes with satisfaction those recent developments,
which confirm the hope aroused by the progress made
in implementing stage II of the weapons disposal plan,
of which we spoke here last March.
We are particularly pleased to emphasize the
importance of having concluded stage II, which is
crucial to the future of the island inasmuch as it opens
the way to the constitutional process that should lead to
autonomy. The report on that subject, officially
submitted to the Government of Papua New Guinea by
the Head of UNPOB on 29 July, makes clear reference
to this.
In addition, the recent deployment to
Bougainville of a civilian Transition Team after the
departure of the Peace Monitoring Group is to be
welcomed because it signals a short-term settlement of
the question of Bougainville and the cessation of
UNPOB activities in December 2003, in accordance
with the Council’s earlier decision.
While we should be pleased with the progress
made, my delegation believes that there are still
important challenges to be addressed. The effective
participation of all the protagonists in the ongoing
peace process and the reintegration of former
combatants are priorities, in order to reach a final
settlement of the conflict.
In that context, we are also convinced of the
crucial need to ensure the economic development of the
island, without which peace cannot be a sustainable
reality. That is why we reiterate our appeal to the donor

S/PV.4805

community to become more fully involved for the
economic and social development of Bougainville.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to UNPOB for the tangible
results achieved in implementing the Bougainville
Peace Agreement. Finally, we encourage the civilian
Transition Team in its efforts to restore peace and
stability.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Ambassador Sinclair, the
representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
comprehensive briefing. I also appreciate the briefing
by the representative of Papua New Guinea.
On 29 July, Ambassador Sinclair submitted to the
Government of Papua New Guinea a report verifying
and certifying the completion of the work of stage II.
The relevant Papua New Guinea constitutional
amendment and the new organic law have begun to be
formally implemented. Implementation of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement has yielded preliminary
results, for which the Chinese Government feels
greatly encouraged.
At present, the Bougainville peace process
continues to face the task of weapons disposal in stage
III. Important work, such as establishment of a
constituent assembly to review and adopt a constitution
and the holding of elections for an autonomous
Government, will be successively carried out.
I shall discuss a few points concerning the peace
process.
First, efforts should be continued to step up the
weapons collection programme. Success in creating a
constitution and holding elections will depend upon the
success of the weapons collection programme. We
appeal to the various parties to be flexible in order to
reach a consensus on how to dispose of the weapons
already collected and to conclude the work in stage III.
This will help promote confidence among the various
parties and will increase the sense of security among
the people of Bougainville and their confidence in the
peace process.
Secondly, former combatants should be
reintegrated into society and plans should be made for
them. Weapons collection and disposal is only one
element of the security situation. Only by successfully
reintegrating the former combatants and guaranteeing
that they lead stable lives will security risks be

eliminated. China greatly appreciates the work done by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
in this regard.
Thirdly, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) and the Bougainville
Transition Team (BTT) should continue to play an
important role. Under the leadership of Ambassador
Sinclair, UNPOB has made positive contributions to
the peace process in Bougainville. China appreciates
and will continue to support the work of UNPOB. At
the same time, we appreciate the important role played
by the outgoing Peace Monitoring Group during its
tenure. We welcome the establishment of the BTT.
China encourages UNPOB to continue to conduct
full consultations with the Papua New Guinea
Government and the relevant parties, in order to try to
consistently promote the achievement of the various
goals provided for in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement.
Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): We appreciate the
convening of this open meeting on the situation in
Bougainville. I join the previous speakers in extending
our gratitude to Ambassador Sinclair for his
informative briefing. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea for his
presentation.
Bulgaria welcomes the progress made since the
last discussion concerning Bougainville in the Council,
and we pay warm tribute to the work of Ambassador
Sinclair and his team in Bougainville.
We highly appreciate the conclusion of stage II of
the agreed-upon weapons disposal plan contained in
the Bougainville Peace Agreement, verified and
certified by the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). The official presentation of
the verification report by Ambassador Sinclair creates
the conditions for the constitutional laws implementing
the Bougainville Peace Agreement to become fully
operational. It will open new opportunities for the
people of Bougainville to exercise their right to selfgovernment and self-determination, including through
the election of an autonomous Government and the
holding of the Bougainville referendum. In this context
we welcome the efforts of the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission.
The Peace Monitoring Group (PMG), in close
collaboration with UNPOB, provided active and

15

S/PV.4805

efficient support for the Bougainville peace process.
The decision of the PMG to curtail its activities is a
positive sign of confidence in the sustainability of the
peace process. We highly appreciate the readiness of
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu to continue
their assistance to the peace process on the ground
through the Bougainville Transition Team (BTT). We
note that the civilian team of the BTT will cooperate
with the United Nations observers in respect of the
objectives of the Lincoln Agreement, subject to such
terms and conditions as may be mutually determined in
consultation between the United Nations and the
Parties to the Protocol setting up the BTT.
We share the view that the neutral verification of
the conclusion of stage II of the weapons disposal plan
does not mark the end of the challenges to the peace
process in Bougainville. We support the efforts of all
parties to convince Francis Ona and his Me’ekamui
Defence Force to join the peace process. We emphasize
the importance of promoting dialogue and confidence,
and we think that the progress towards stage III of the
weapons disposal programme should not be hindered.
Finally, Bulgaria welcomes the contributions of
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children’s Fund and other United
Nations organizations to the peace process in
Bougainville. We would appreciate more information
with regard to post-conflict peace-building and
sustainability and the contributions of those agencies
during this phase of the peace process. We are
specifically interested in their contributions to the
process of reintegration and rehabilitation of former
combatants.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as Representative of
Syria.
We express our sincere thanks to Mr. Noel
Sinclair, Head of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), for his comprehensive
briefing, which shed light on the latest developments in
Bougainville. I would also like to express our support
to Ambassador Sinclair and his team, who have worked
so diligently in support of the peace process and
stability in Bougainville. We appreciate the efforts by
the friendly Government of Papua New Guinea and the
role it has played in support of the peace process in
Bougainville, in addition to its positive contribution
and collaboration, which we heard about in the

16

statement of the representative of Papua New Guinea
this morning.
There have been important developments since
the last briefing of the Security Council, on 28 March
2003, creating a sense of optimism regarding the
implementation of the necessary procedures to prepare
the new constitution in Bougainville for election of the
national Government. These developments include the
completion by the Peace Monitoring Group (PMG) of
its mandate last June; the succession of the PMG by the
Bougainville Transitional Team, which includes 15 to
17 civilian observers from Australia, New Zealand, Fiji
and Vanuatu; and the adoption by UNPOB of phase II
of the weapons disposal plan. We are looking forward
with the same sense of optimism to the implementation
of phase III of the plan.
Despite the positive comments that have been
made today and the general sense of optimism that is
prevailing, certain parties — in particularly Mr. Francis
Ona and his Me’ekamui Defence Force — are still not
participating in the peace process, and this is cause for
concern. We therefore hope that the various appeals,
and the other efforts that are being deployed, will
eventually result in a clear commitment by those
parties that are not participating in the peace process to
refrain from taking any actions or steps that would
hinder or delay the peace process. We also urge them to
participate in the Bougainville peace process.
Once again, we reaffirm our support for the Head
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
and his team for their efforts to promote the peace
process in Bougainville.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Fiji. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Savua (Fiji): It is my honour to make this
statement on behalf of the following States members of
the Pacific Islands Forum that are Members of the
United Nations: Australia, Kiribati, the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
Fiji.
Thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity to address the Security Council on the

S/PV.4805

subject of Bougainville. The countries of the Pacific
Islands Forum have been actively engaged in
supporting the Bougainville peace process for nearly
five years, including through the Peace Monitoring
Group (PMG), in which Australia, New Zealand,
Vanuatu and Fiji participated. The PMG worked
closely and cooperatively with the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB). Our support
for the peace process is continuing through the
deployment of the civilian-led Bougainville Transition
Team (BTT).
Both the PMG and the BTT reflect the
willingness of our region to work together to find
solutions to problems facing one of our members. We
firmly believe that, with the commitment and goodwill
of neighbours — and working in partnership with the
United Nations — we can work to address problems in
our region, while acknowledging that, ultimately, longlasting solutions must be found from within the
country. Our role is to facilitate the process by
encouraging and assisting the host nation to realize its
own goals.
We are gratified that the Bougainville peace
process has made substantial and encouraging progress.
We note in particular that an important milestone has
been passed with the recent verification, by UNPOB
Director Noel Sinclair, of stage II of the weapons
disposal process. With this development, the road is
now clear for the necessary legal changes to be made to
allow for Bougainville’s autonomy. We encourage all
parties to work to reach an early decision on the final
fate of the weapons in stage III, which will result in the
weapons
being
permanently
removed
from
Bougainville communities.
The role of UNPOB is even more critical at this
stage. It must remain seized of the import issue of
concluding the formal peace process before its mandate
expires at the end of the year. UNPOB will need to
work closely with the United Nations Secretariat to
find the best way forward in the remaining months of
its time in Bougainville.
The establishment of an effective and affordable
autonomous administration in Bougainville will bring
with it many challenges. The Pacific Islands Forum
region requests the Security Council to remain engaged
with the Bougainville peace process in the crucial
months ahead. Beyond that, we know that the support
and encouragement of the international community and

the United Nations system will remain important, as
work to build a credible law and justice system, an
effective administration and a viable economic base in
Bougainville continues.
Our region has done all it can to get Bougainville
where it is today. We appeal to the international
community to help us carry these efforts further.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open meeting on an issue to
which Australia and, as my colleague from Fiji has
said, all countries of the Pacific Islands Forum attach a
great deal of importance. We, like others, are grateful
for the comprehensive briefing provided by Mr.
Sinclair. We are also grateful for the typically
professional and comprehensive briefing provided by
my friend and colleague Ambassador Aisi of Papua
New Guinea.
We welcome the opportunity to address the
Security Council this morning during its consideration
of this issue. We have been a proud supporter of the
peace process, including through our leadership of the
four-country regional Peace Monitoring Group (PMG).
During its five-year deployment, the PMG helped
promote stability and build confidence in the peace
process. This included crucial support to the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB),
particularly in implementing the agreed weapons
disposal plan.
On 1 July, following requests for a continued
regional presence beyond the PMG, Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu deployed — as many have
remarked this morning — the small, unarmed civilianled Bougainville Transition Team (BTT). The decision
to deploy the BTT demonstrates once again the
capacity of the South Pacific community to work
together to meet challenges to peace and security in our
region. We are, of course, carrying forward that work
at the same time as we are working in Solomon
Islands — as all members are aware.
In many ways, the decision to withdraw the PMG
and deploy the BTT also reflects the progress that has
been made to date. This includes the negotiation and
signature of the comprehensive Bougainville Peace

17

S/PV.4805

Agreement,
and
strong
moves
towards
its
implementation. Since the Peace Agreement was
signed just under two years ago, around 1,900 weapons
have been contained, a constitution has been drafted
and the Papua New Guinea Defence Force has formally
withdrawn from Bougainville.
We welcome the recent verification of stage II of
the weapons disposal process by UNPOB Director
Sinclair. Verification will bring into effect Papua New
Guinea laws implementing the Peace Agreement and
allowing for Bougainville’s autonomy. We commend
all parties for the determination and commitment they
have shown to date, and urge them to press forward
with the final stages of the peace process. In particular,
parties must focus on reaching an early and credible
decision on the final fate of the weapons that
permanently
removes
the
weapons
from
Bougainvillean communities. They should also move
swiftly to plan for free and fair elections for their
autonomous Government.
There is, of course, no room for complacency.
UNPOB must remain seized of the important matter of
concluding the formal peace process before its mandate
expires at the end of the year. In particular, UNPOB
should focus on promoting an early and credible stage
III decision. The Secretariat in New York must be
closely engaged and must provide the guidance to
ensure that this occurs. In closing, we would note that
although much has been achieved, the challenges
facing Bougainville in the coming period are
numerous, and include establishing an effective and
affordable autonomous administration, developing
credible legal and judicial arrangements, and
encouraging economic development. Australia urges all
parties to remain seized of these challenges, and is
itself committed to providing the parties with ongoing
support. We hope that the international community and
the United Nations system will also stand ready to
assist in these endeavours.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of New
Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let be begin by
recording my thanks to the Council for once again
enabling this discussion of the peace process on the
Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville to take place
in an open meeting. This appropriately allows for input

18

from the countries in the Pacific region that have been
supporting this process for the last five years,
politically, through the provision of personnel to the
Truce Monitoring and Peace Monitoring Groups, and
through the provision of development assistance.
Let me also express New Zealand’s thanks to Mr.
Sinclair and his team at the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), and to thank Mr.
Sinclair for his presentation and update here this
morning. Mr. Sinclair and his small Office have played
a key supportive role in cementing peace on
Bougainville, most recently by declaring that stage II
of the weapons disposal process, that of secondary
containment under a dual-key system, has been
completed. This is a welcome development. Much is
yet to be done, however, and it is crucial that Mr.
Sinclair and UNPOB use their remaining five months
on Bougainville to best effect.
New Zealand is pleased to learn of the plans to
hold a meeting to discuss the final fate of the weapons,
stage III, on Nissan Island off the Bougainville coast.
That meeting should take place as soon as possible.
The devastating effects of the ready availability of
small arms have been felt for too many years in
Bougainville; the damage that they can do to a society
is now readily apparent in Papua New Guinea’s
neighbour, the Solomon Islands. To enhance future
security for all Bougainvilleans, New Zealand urges the
factions to agree that the final fate of the weapons
contained should be no less than total destruction.
UNPOB should strongly reinforce and encourage that
approach.
New Zealand welcomes efforts to bring Francis
Ona and his small group of followers into the peace
process. However, I should stress, as I did when I last
addressed the Council on this issue in March, that the
peace process cannot wait for Mr. Ona. He has chosen
to remain on the sidelines, and the process has
progressed without him. If Mr. Ona wants to play a
future role in the new Bougainville, the best way for
him to do that is to engage in the peace process. But he
should not be allowed to hold a veto over it; nor should
his remaining outside of the process become a pretext
for choosing a course other than the total destruction of
weapons at stage III.
Like others, I should draw the Council’s attention
to the establishment of the Bougainville Transition
Team, which was created to provide ongoing support to

S/PV.4805

the peace process following the departure of the Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG) on 30 June. As Council
members are aware, Team members from Australia,
New Zealand and Vanuatu are now in place and are
working well with the Bougainville community, and
they will shortly be joined by personnel from Fiji.
While much smaller than the PMG, the Transition
Team demonstrates, as others have said, the ongoing
commitment of regional States to the peace process.
New Zealand’s support for the Transition Team
complements our ongoing commitment of other
assistance to the people of Bougainville delivered
through the New Zealand Agency for International
Development.
The enduring support for the Bougainville peace
process from States in the Pacific region has
demonstrated our commitment to assisting neighbours
in difficulty. The Pacific Island Forum-endorsed
Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands is
an extension of this approach, and New Zealand’s
commitment to assisting the Solomon Islands will be
similarly long-term. Bougainville, for its part, is well
on the road to lasting peace. The momentum now
established by the declaration of the completion of
stage II needs to be maintained while the United
Nations Political Office works towards the completion
of its mandate at the end of this year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Motomura (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank both Ambassador Sinclair and Ambassador
Aisi for having given us a comprehensive briefing on
the current situation in Bougainville.
I would like to welcome the report submitted by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) to the Government of Papua New Guinea on
29 July, which confirms the completion of stage II of
the weapons disposal plan in Bougainville. The
completion of stage II is indeed a demonstration of the
commitment of the concerned parties to the attainment
of peace, in particular on the part of the people of
Bougainville and of the Papua New Guinea
Government. This achievement is all the more
important as it opens a new stage in the peace process
and accelerates the progress towards the establishment
of autonomy in Bougainville. We sincerely hope that

this process will proceed smoothly, so that an election
to establish an autonomous Bougainville Government
may take place as soon as possible, hopefully some
time next year. We also expect that UNPOB will make
every effort to support this process as fully as possible
until the conclusion of its mandate at the end of this
year.
The Peace Monitoring Group (PMG), which
completed its activities in June, played a major role in
realizing the completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal plan. Following its establishment in 1998, the
Group also made a significant contribution by assisting
in the conclusion of the Bougainville Peace Agreement,
monitoring the peace and advancing the peace process.
Japan expresses its great appreciation for the activities
of the PMG and pays tribute to Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu, which participated in this
operation. We hope that the Bougainville Transition
Team, which has succeeded the PMG, will contribute
actively to further promoting the peace process.
During the third Japan-Pacific Islands Forum
summit meeting, hosted by my Government in
Okinawa in May, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi,
Sir Michael Somare, the Prime Minister of Papua New
Guinea, and other leaders participating in the meeting
set enhanced security in the Pacific region as one of the
priority policy targets in the document adopted by the
leaders entitled the Okinawa Initiative. Discussions
aimed at taking substantive action followed, based on
that document, and a joint action plan was also
formulated, which includes concrete measures to be
taken in order to enhance security in the region. On the
basis of that plan, my Government intends to support
promotion of the collection of small arms and light
weapons in Bougainville. In addition, we are now
considering
extending
specific
assistance
to
Bougainville in the areas of education, health, medical
services and infrastructure for the purposes of
improving
education
and
human
resources
development, stabilizing the life of Bougainvilleans
and strengthening their economy.
The Japanese Government continues to pay close
attention to developments related to peace in
Bougainville and reiterates its readiness to extend
assistance that it deems appropriate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Noel Sinclair so that he may respond to

19

S/PV.4805

questions raised
requested.

and

provide

the

clarifications

Mr. Sinclair: Before I respond to the questions
raised by the representative of Spain and the
representative of Bulgaria, I think it is my duty, first of
all, to express my sincere gratitude to all speakers for
the very kind and generous words addressed to the
mission, to myself and to my staff for the work that we
have done. We could not have accomplished what we
accomplished there without the very positive and
encouraging support that we have consistently received
from the Security Council. And I should like to place
on record our profound appreciation for the attitude
that the Security Council has consistently maintained.
I should also like to express to the representatives
of Papua New Guinea, Australia, Fiji, New Zealand
and Japan my sincere gratitude and appreciation for
their very kind and generous words addressed to myself
and to the staff of the mission. Once again, I wish to
place on record the importance that we attach to the
generous assistance that we have received from the
Peace Monitoring Group as a collectivity as well as
from its individual Governments, as well as from those
of Japan and Papua New Guinea.
The Government of Spain asked about the
consultations currently taking place between the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
with regard to securing the smoothest possible
transition for Bougainville. There are four points I
should like to make in that connection.
At this time, Bougainville enjoys the international
presence of UNPOB, the UNDP and the Bougainville
Transition Team (BTT). At the end of December,
UNPOB will have withdrawn and it is expected that the
BTT will withdraw. That will mean a very significant
change for the people of Bougainville. Bougainville
will have been functioning with a significant
international presence for the past six years, and
suddenly, on 1 January 2004, that presence will be
withdrawn. The UNDP will remain, and, with the
withdrawal of UNPOB and the BTT, it will have a
tremendous responsibility — an even greater
responsibility than it has now.
What I have been trying to do is to get the UNDP
accustomed to that fact: it will be alone in its task of
fulfilling whatever expectations Bougainvilleans may
have of the international presence on the island. UNDP

20

has been there for a number of years, and, in the phase
that will begin on 1 January 2004, it will be there to
assume all the responsibilities that devolve upon it.
UNDP has the advantage of continuity, and I have been
trying to encourage it to begin to prepare for assuming
those additional responsibilities resulting from the
withdrawal of UNPOB and the BTT.
We have not forgotten that Bougainville is now
emerging from a war, a very serious crisis that
destroyed not only physical infrastructure but also
social and intellectual infrastructure. One of the first
challenges that the Bougainvilleans will be facing in
their new autonomous Government will be that of
capacity-building. I believe that UNDP, being present
after we have withdrawn, will have a very important
role to play in terms of assisting Bougainvilleans in
developing their capacities.
There was an administration in Bougainville that
was effectively destroyed, in the sense that many of the
people who were working there left the island during
the crisis and others were killed — the whole system of
administration was destroyed. A very small group of
people now working under the Administrator is
responsible for causing Bougainville to function, and
that is quite a huge challenge for the very small
resource base that the island now has. I believe that,
after the end of this year, UNDP will be in a unique
position where it can help, through its technical and
other expertise, in developing and strengthening
Bougainville’s technical capacity. There is a need to
rebuild capacity in Bougainville.
Moreover, one of the first priorities of
Bougainvilleans right now concerns the question of law
and justice: the putting in place of a police force. The
police force and the justice system that existed in
Bougainville have been destroyed. And it is not simply
a question of restoring the service that used to exist,
because Bougainville’s police force had become so
much a part of the crisis — so much a part of the
Bougainvillean experience — that Bougainvilleans
would like something different now. They do not feel
that the Bougainvillean force that existed before has
any credibility on the island now, and they have their
own conception of what the new police force should
be. It must be different from what it was before; it must
be a force that is not as easily identifiable with the
national Government as the one that existed before the
crisis. They also have their own conception that it must
be a law-and-justice system — a police force system —

S/PV.4805

that also makes use of Bougainvillean traditions and
the Bougainvillean cultural experience.
It is one thing for them to conceptualize that, but
it is something else to put it into practice. That will
require many financial and technical resources, and I
believe that UNDP is well placed to provide the
resources that Bougainvilleans will need. It is true that,
where the question of putting a law-and-order system
in place is concerned, the Bougainvilleans are
receiving a great deal of assistance from Australia and
New Zealand. But it is clear to us that, after the end of
the year, when UNPOB and the BTT withdraw, there
will be room for a great coordinating effort on the part
of UNDP in terms of channelling and bringing together
offers of development assistance by countries of the
region, including Australia and New Zealand.
There is no shortage of offers to assist
Bougainville. Indeed, we have just heard a statement
by the representative of Japan indicating the readiness
of his Government to make assistance available to it.
I think that we have to avoid a situation in which
we have a number of offers going in parallel in
Bougainville. I believe that it is important that there be
good coordination among all of these aid offers, and
that the agency that is best placed to play this
coordinating role is the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). What we have been trying to do

is to get the UNDP to think in terms of preparing itself
to play such a coordinating role, so as to ensure that, as
one era ends, a new era begins, and that the transition
is as smooth as possible, without any gaps or holes that
would prejudice the progress of the autonomous
Government from the start.
During the past two years, we have also received
offers of assistance from the United Kingdom and New
Zealand intended specifically for community
development in Bougainville. Unfortunately, that
money is still lying unused, I say unfortunately because
there is a great need for community development
projects. I am trying to encourage the UNDP to put
some criteria in place, so that such projects can begin
to function immediately.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Sinclair for his statement and for the clarifications
he has provided us on the latest developments in
Bougainville.
There are no other speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

21
