8

General Assembly -

to submit the reports referred to in paragraph 21 of
resolution 302 (IV) as well as the annual budgets.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
917 (X). The question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid
of the Government of the Union of South
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of
race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South
Africa,
Recalling section E of resolution 377 A (V) of 3
November 1950, in which it expressed its conviction
that a genuine and lasting peace depends also upon the
observance of all the principles and purposes established
in the Charter of the United Nations, upon the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly
and other principal organs of the United Nations intended to achieve the maintenance of international peace
and security and especially upon respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all,
Reiterating its resolutions 103 (I) of 19 November
1946 and 616 B (VII) of 5 December 1952 in whi, 1
the General Assembly has declared, inter alia, that it is
in the higher interests of humanity to put an immediate
end to religious and so-called racial persecution and discrimination, and that governmental policies which are designed to perpetuate or. increase discrimination are inconsistent with the pledges of the Members under Article
56 of the Charter,
1

Noting that the United Nations Commission on the
Racial Situation in the Union of South Africa has now
submitted its third report,•

Tenth Session

6. Calls on the Government of the Union of South
Africa to observe the obligations contained in Article 56
of the Charter.
551st plenary meeting,
6 December 1955.

918 (X). Admission of new Members to the
United Nations 5

The General Assembly,
Having noted the general sentiment which has been
expressed on numerous occasions in favour of the widest
possible membership of the United Nations,
Having received the preliminary report6 of the Committee of Good Offices established by General Assembly
resolution 718 (VIII) of 23 October 1953,
Taking into account the statements about the admis·
sion of new Members made by permanent members of
the Security Council in the general debate at the present
session of the General Assembly,
Believing that a broader representation in the membership of the United Nations will enable the Organization to play a more effective role in the current international situation,
1. Expresses appreciation of the work and efforts
of the Committee of Good Offices ;

2. Requests the Security Council to consider, in the
light of the general opinion in favour of the widest possible membership of the United Nations, the pending
applications for membership of all those eighteen countries about which no problem of unification arises;
3. Requests further that the Security Council make
its report on these applications to the General Assembly
during the present session.
552nd plenary meeting,
8 December 1955.

1. Commends the United Nations Commission on the
Racial Situation in the Union of South Africa for its
constructive work;

919 (X). Treatment of people of Indian origin
in the Union of South Africa

2. Notes with regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa again refused to co-operate with
the Commission;

Having considered the report 7 of the Secretary-General relating to the question of the treatment of people
of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa, sub-.
mitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 816
(IX) of 4 November 1954,

3. Recommends the Government of the Union of
South Africa to take note of the Commission's report;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the Government of the Union of South Africa continues to give
effect to the policies of apartheid, notwithstanding the
request made to it by the General Assembly to reconsider its ,position in the light of the high principles contained in the Charter and taking into account the pledge
of all Member States to promote respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to race;
5. Reminds the Government of the Union of South
Africa of the faith it had reaffirmed, in signing the
Charter, in fundamental human rights and in the dignity
and worth of the human person;
4

Ibid., Tenth Sessi~1, Sutplrment No. 14 (A/2953).

The General Assembly,

1. N ates that the negotiations envisaged in resolution 816 (IX) have not been pursued;
2. Urges the parties concerned to pursue negotiations
with a view to bringing about a settlement of the question
of the treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union
of South Africa;
3. Invites the parties to report as appropriate, jointly
or separately, to the General Assembly at its next session.

554th plenary meeting,
14 December 1955.
5

See also resolution 995 (X).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/2973.
1 Ibid., agenda item 20, document A/300i.
6
