S/PRST/2010/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 September 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6389th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 September 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council in this regard recalls its resolutions and statements of its
President in relation to preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
“The Security Council recognizes the progress made in many regions of
the world towards building a more peaceful and stable environment. The
Council, however, acknowledges the evolving challenges and threats to
international peace and security including armed conflicts, terrorism,
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and small arms and light
weapons, transnational organized crime, piracy, drug and human trafficking.
“The Security Council thus reaffirms that international peace and security
now requires a more comprehensive and concerted approach. The Council also
underlines the necessity to address the root causes of conflicts, taking into
account that development, peace and security and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. To this end, the Council expresses its firm
commitment to contribute to the enhancement of the effectiveness of the
United Nations throughout the conflict cycle.
“The Security Council welcomes the considerable progress made in
refining and strengthening the United Nations preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding capabilities in recent years, and
pledges to continue to contribute to the adaptation of these tools to changing
circumstances. The Council also underlines that the relationship between these
tools is not always sequential and that it is necessary to use them in a
comprehensive, integrated and flexible manner.
“The Security Council stresses that the comprehensive and coherent use
of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding tools
is important in creating the conditions for sustainable peace. The Council
undertakes to provide the necessary political support to ensure this
overarching objective.

10-54939 (E) 230910

*1054939*

S/PRST/2010/18

“The Council also reiterates its strong support for the protection of
civilians and reaffirms its conviction that the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, particularly women and children, should be an important aspect of
any comprehensive strategy to resolve conflicts. The Council further reiterates
its opposition to impunity for serious violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
“The Security Council calls upon Member States to resolve differences
peacefully and draws particular attention to the importance of preventive
diplomacy as a cost-effective and efficient way of crisis management and
conflict resolution. The Council encourages and reaffirms its support for
endeavours aimed at enhancing the preventive capacities of the Member
States, United Nations, regional and subregional organizations. The Council
stresses, in particular, the importance of developing early warning, assessment,
mediation and response capabilities of these actors, as well as ensuring a
sound coordination among them.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General in using his good offices, his Representatives, Special
Envoys, mediators, as well as by regional and subregional organizations to
help facilitate durable and comprehensive settlements, and undertakes to
continue to support their work.
“The Security Council further commits to following closely existing and
potential conflict situations that may affect international peace and security,
engaging with parties undertaking preventive efforts, encouraging the steps
taken to de-escalate tension and build confidence, supporting efforts aimed at
mobilizing the necessary expertise and capabilities available in and to the
United Nations. The Council also recognizes the importance of enhancing
efforts, including coordination among bilateral and multilateral donors, to
ensure predictable, coherent and timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools.
“The Security Council underscores its commitment to continue to
enhance the overall effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping. In this
regard, the Council reiterates its support to ongoing efforts such as those of
the General Assembly and the UN Secretariat to bolster the effectiveness and
efficiency of UN peacekeeping and to upgrade the United Nations capacity for
successful planning, establishment, deployment, conduct, monitoring and
evaluation, as well as transition and completion of peacekeeping operations,
including those steps taken to speed the deployment of experts in policing and
rule of law. The Council in this regard welcomes efforts by the UN Secretariat
to advocate the development of partnerships among all stakeholders.
“The Security Council recognizes that peacekeeping operations have
become an increasingly complex undertaking, requiring an overarching
political strategy for each mission, a deterrent posture consistent with their
mandate, strong civilian and military leadership, adequate resourcing, as well
as experienced, trained and equipped military, police and civilian personnel,
with the ability to communicate effectively with local populations. The
Council also acknowledges the need for improved military expertise and
expresses in that context its intention to continue to look into the role of the
Military Staff Committee.

2

10-54939

S/PRST/2010/18

“The Security Council pays tribute to the invaluable role played by the
troop and police contributing countries in keeping and building a sustainable
peace in many volatile parts of the world and reiterates its commitment to
strengthen consultations with them, while encouraging Member States with the
necessary capabilities to contribute more police, military and civilian
personnel, including female personnel to UN peacekeeping and political
missions.
“The Security Council emphasizes that effective peacebuilding requires
an integrated and comprehensive approach based on coherence among
political, security, development, human rights, humanitarian and rule of law
objectives and that peacebuilding perspectives need to be considered starting
from the first stages of planning and implementation of peacekeeping
operations.
“The Security Council underlines that sustainable peacebuilding also
requires national ownership, the development of national capacities and
empowerment of people affected by conflict. The Council stresses the need for
continued progress by the Secretary-General in fulfilling his agenda for action
to improve UN peacebuilding efforts in order to better respond to the core
needs and priorities identified by the countries concerned. The Council looks
forward, in particular, to the outcome of the civilian capacity review.
“The Security Council also stresses the importance of progress in
refining roles and responsibilities for the key peacebuilding actors, and
welcomes in particular the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
promoting and supporting an integrated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding. The Council reiterates its support for the work of the
Commission and expresses its willingness to make greater use of its advisory
role. The Council looks forward to considering the facilitators’ report of the
2010 Review of the PBC.
“The Security Council recognizes that a comprehensive and integrated
strategy to peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding should involve all
relevant actors taking into account the unique circumstances of each conflict
situation. The Council further acknowledges that sustainable peace and
security can best be achieved through effective collaboration among all
concerned parties on the basis of their expertise.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to strengthening its
strategic partnerships with and support to regional and subregional
organizations consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter, in conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The Council also
underlines that it should continue to strengthen its partnerships with all other
relevant players at both the strategic level and on the ground, in particular the
General Assembly, ECOSOC, PBC, international financial institutions, such as
World Bank, and civil society.
“The Security Council also reaffirms the important role of women in all
aspects of the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and recognizes that a concerted and
determined approach that addresses the root causes of conflicts also requires a
systematic and comprehensive approach to women and peace and security

10-54939

3

S/PRST/2010/18

issues. The Council in this regard looks forward to marking the 10th
Anniversary of Resolution 1325 by taking action on a comprehensive set of
indicators on the basis of recommendations of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council is fully aware of the responsibilities bestowed
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, and of the collective aspirations
of the peoples of the world, which impel it to take effective action to maintain
international peace and security and eradicate the scourge of war. The Council
expresses its commitment to continue to fulfil its responsibilities in the most
effective manner and in full cooperation with its partners. It further recognizes
that successful accomplishment of this task requires a continuous process of
reflection and adaptation of its practices in preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding.”

4

10-54939
