10

General Assembly -

to be constituted in Ruanda-Urundi will give urgent
consideration to these problems", 5
Recalling that the Trusteeship Council and the Committee on Rural Economic Development have in the
past made various studies of the problem of population,
land utilization and land tenure system in RuandaU rundi,
Bearing in mind that the majority of the petitioners
are agreed that this problem is of vital importance to
the Territory,
Considering that a satisfactory land tenure system is
essential to the peaceful evolution and satisfactory economic development of newly independent territories,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authority
urgently request the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, under the technical assistance programmes, to
dispatch an expert mission to study the problem of land
tenure and land utilization in Ruanda-Urundi, in cooperation with the local authorities, with a view to determining how far the present system is prejudicial to
the Territory's social and economic development, and to
recommend corrective measures;
2. Expresses the hope that the Technical Assistance
Board and the specialized agencies concerned will give
favourable consideration to such a request.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1607 (XV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship Sy,stem in Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1276 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 and resolution 1410 (XIV) of 5 December 1959
whereby the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the
Secretary-General to initiate discussions with the Administering Authorities of Trust Territories with a view
to establishing, during 1960, in at least some of the
larger Trust Territories, such as Tanganyika, RuandaUrundi and New Guinea, United Kations information
centres in which the responsible positions would be
occupied preferably by indigenous inhabitants of the
Trust Territories concerned,
Having perused the report of the Secretary-General6
prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1410 (XIV), and observing therefrom that the
dissemination of information on the United Nations
among the peoples of the Trust Territories is still far
from satisfactory,
Keeping in view the special status of Trust Territories
and their inhabitants and also the General Assembly's
own special responsibilities under Chapters XII and
XIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating that it is essential, in the General Assembly's view, that the peoples of Trust Territories
should receive adequate information concerning the
purposes and operation of the United Nations and of
the International Trusteeship System, the principles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples contained in Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
5
Official Records of the General Assl'mbly, Fifteenth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/4404), part II, chapter II, para. 184.
'Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, documents A/4542 and Add.I.

Fifteenth Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on dissemination of information on the United Nations
and the International Trusteeship System in Trust
Territories ;

2. Considers that United Nations information centres
constitute one of the most important means of disseminating information about the United Nations in these
Territories;
3. Takes note of the statement of the representative
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland that, as a result of discussions between the
Secretary-General and the Administering Authority,
steps have been taken to establish, in the near future, a
United Nations information centre in Tanganyika;
4. Takes further note of the recommendation in
paragraph 224 of the interim report of the United
Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi 3 that a United
Nations information centre should be set up with all
possible speed in Ruanda-l:'rundi;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to establish, without any further delay, in
Tanganyika, Ruanda-Urundi and New Guinea, United
Nations information centres in which the responsible
positions would be occupied by indigenous inhabitants
of the Trust Territories concerned;
6. Invites the Administering Authorities to extend
their co-operation and assistance to the SecretaryGeneral in implementing the present resolution ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and mass publication and the widest possible
circulation and dissemination, in all the Trust Territories through all media of mass communication, of the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples ;
8. Requests that the information referred to in the
present resolution should be disseminated in the principal local languages as well as in the language of the
Administering Authority;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
for the Trusteeship Council at its twenty-seventh session and for the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1608 (XV). The future of the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under United Kingdom
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1350 (XIII) of 13 March
1959 concerning the future of the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration
in which the General Assembly recommended, inter
alia, that the Administering Authority take steps, in
comultation with the L'nited Nations Plebiscite Commissioner for the Cameroons under United Kingdom
Administration, to organize, under the supervision of
the United Nations, separate plebiscites in the northern
and southern parts of the Cameroons under United
Kingdom administration, in order to ascertain the
wishes of the inhabitants oi the Territory concerning
their future, and that the plebiscite in the Northern
Cameroons be held about the middle of November 1959
