United Nations

A/RES/62/167

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 70 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/439/Add.3)]

62/167. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that States Members of the United Nations have an obligation to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the
obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,1 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 2
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 3
0F

1F

2F

Noting the submission by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its
second periodic report concerning the implementation of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 4 its second periodic report on the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and its initial report
on the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 6 as a sign of engagement in international
cooperative efforts in the field of human rights,
3F

4F

5F

Taking note of the concluding observations of the treaty monitoring bodies
under the four treaties, the most recent of which were given by the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in July 2005, 7
6F

Noting with appreciation the collaboration established between the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization in order to improve the health
_______________
1

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
3
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4
E/1990/6/Add.35.
5
CRC/C/65/Add.24.
6
CEDAW/C/PRK/1.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/60/38), part two,
paras. 26–76.
2

07-47379

A/RES/62/167

situation in the country, and the collaboration established with the United Nations
Children’s Fund in order to improve the quality of education for children,
Recalling its resolutions 60/173 of 16 December 2005 and 61/174 of
19 December 2006, Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2003/10 of
16 April 2003, 8 2004/13 of 15 April 2004 9 and 2005/11 of 14 April 2005, 10 and
Human Rights Council decision 1/102 of 30 June 2006, 11 and mindful of the need
for the international community to strengthen its coordinated efforts aimed at
achieving the implementation of those resolutions,
7F

8F

9F

10F

Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 12 and of the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea submitted in accordance with resolution 61/174, 13
1F

12F

Welcoming the inter-Korean summit held from 2 to 4 October 2007 and the
Declaration on the Advancement of North-South Korean Relations, Peace and
Prosperity adopted on 4 October 2007 by the two leaders of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, as well as the recent progress
achieved in the six-party talks, and encouraging the improvement of the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including through
effective follow-up,
1.

Expresses its very serious concern at:

(a) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to recognize the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to extend
cooperation to him;
(b) The persistence of continuing reports of systematic, widespread and
grave violations of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including inhuman conditions of detention, public executions, extrajudicial
and arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and the rule of law,
including fair trial guarantees and an independent judiciary; the imposition of
the death penalty for political and religious reasons; and the existence of a
large number of prison camps and the extensive use of forced labour;
(ii) The situation of refugees and asylum-seekers expelled or returned to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and sanctions imposed on citizens of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who have been repatriated from
abroad, leading to punishments of internment, torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or the death penalty, and in this regard urges all States to
_______________
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
9
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
10
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), chap. II,
sect. B.
12
See A/62/264.
13
A/62/318.

2

A/RES/62/167

ensure respect for the fundamental principle of non-refoulement and to treat
those who seek refuge humanely;
(iii) All-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought,
conscience, religion, opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and
association, and on equal access to information, by such means as the
persecution of individuals exercising their freedom of opinion and expression,
and their families;
(iv) Limitations imposed on every person who wishes to move freely within
the country and travel abroad, including the punishment of those who leave or
try to leave the country without permission, or their families;
(v) The violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to
severe malnutrition, widespread health problems and other hardship for the
population in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, inter alia, women,
children and the elderly;
(vi) Continuing violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
women, in particular the trafficking of women for the purpose of prostitution
or forced marriage and the subjection of women to human smuggling, forced
abortions, gender-based discrimination and violence;
(vii) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of persons with disabilities, especially on the use of collective camps
and of coercive measures that target the rights of persons with disabilities to
decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children;
(viii) Violations of workers’ rights, including the right to freedom of
association and collective bargaining, the right to strike as defined by the
obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,1 and the
prohibition of the economic exploitation of children and of any harmful or
hazardous work of children as defined by the obligations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea under the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 2
2.
Reiterates its very serious concern at unresolved questions of
international concern relating to the abduction of foreigners in the form of enforced
disappearance, which violates the human rights of the nationals of other sovereign
countries, and in this regard strongly calls upon the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea urgently to resolve these questions, including through
existing channels, in a transparent manner, including by ensuring the immediate
return of abductees;
Notes the prompt reaction of the Government of the Democratic People’s
3.
Republic of Korea to the latest floods and the openness shown in seeking outside
assistance, and expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian
situation in the country, compounded by the misallocation of resources away from
the satisfaction of basic needs and by frequent natural disasters, in particular the
prevalence of maternal malnutrition and of infant malnutrition, which, despite
recent progress, continues to affect the physical and mental development of a
significant proportion of children, and urges the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take preventive and remedial action,
to facilitate access to humanitarian aid and measures to allow humanitarian agencies
to secure its impartial delivery to all parts of the country on the basis of need in
accordance with humanitarian principles, and to ensure food security, including
through sustainable agriculture;
3

A/RES/62/167

4.
Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to respect fully all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this
regard:
(a) To immediately put an end to the systematic, widespread and grave
violations of human rights mentioned above, inter alia, by implementing fully the
measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Commission on Human Rights, and the recommendations addressed to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the United Nations special procedures
and treaty bodies;
(b) To tackle the root causes leading to refugee outflows and criminalize
those who exploit refugees by human smuggling, trafficking and extortion, while
not criminalizing the victims;
(c) To extend its full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur, including by
granting him full, free and unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and to other United Nations human rights mechanisms;
(d) To engage in technical cooperation activities in the field of human rights
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, as
pursued by the High Commissioner in recent years, with a view to improving the
situation of human rights in the country;
(e) To extend to United Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors all
access necessary to allow them to carry out their mandates;
5.
Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at its sixty-third session, and to this end
requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Special Rapporteur to continue
to report his findings and recommendations.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

4
