A /68/PV.45

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

45th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 6 November 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sinhaseni
(Thailand), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 88 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/68/324)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.10)
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): This is
a new experience for me here, and I appreciate it very
much. Let me first thank you, Sir. I would like to
express my thanks to Director General Amano for his
report (see A/68/PV,43).
As a cost-effective, environmentally friendly
and climatically benign source of energy, nuclear
technology has gained a prominent position in the
sustainable development of nations, in particular in
the industrial, medical and agricultural fields and
in producing electricity. The inalienable right to
develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination, including
the inherent right to develop a full national nuclear
fuel cycle for peaceful purposes, is the very foundation
and one of the fundamental pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Those
inherent rights can never be suspended or restricted.

According to article IV of the NPT, not only shall
nothing in the Treaty be interpreted as affecting those
rights, but all parties have a firm legal obligation
“to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy”.
Furthermore, in accordance with article III, paragraph 3,
even the required safeguards
“shall be implemented in a manner designed
to comply with Article IV of this Treaty, and to
avoid hampering the economic or technological
development of the Parties or international
co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear
activities, including the international exchange of
nuclear material and equipment for the processing,
use or production of nuclear material for peaceful
purposes”.
Likewise, according to articles II and III of the
Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), the Agency shall seek to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world. It shall also foster
the exchange of scientific and technical information
and assist research on, and development and practical
application of, atomic energy for peaceful uses.
Accordingly, along with other statutory functions
of the Agency, to assist member States in research on,
and development and practical application of, nuclear
energy for peaceful uses is its primary responsibility.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-54995 (E)

*1354995*

A/68/PV.45

We believe that this role of the IAEA should be further
promoted. The IAEA should be allowed to work
impartially and professionally. That is necessary for
preserving the authority, efficiency and credibility of
the IAEA and the continued relevance and credibility
of the NPT.
In exercising its inalienable right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, Iran is committed to its legal
obligations. The Islamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear
activities are, and have always been, exclusively for
peaceful purposes. Iran continues to cooperate with
the IAEA. All activities in the Iranian nuclear sites are
under the 24-hour surveillance cameras of the Agency.
In addition, the resident inspectors of the IAEA regularly
visit those sites and measure and seal enriched uranium
containers. The Agency’s inspectors have carried
out over 8,000 person-days of inspection in Iranian
facilities, including 100 unannounced inspections.
Such an inspections record is unprecedented in the
history of the Agency.
Based on the most recent IAEA safeguards
implementation report, just in 2012, Iran dispatched
without delay over 4,000 accounting reports to
the Agency. On many occasions, as trust and
confidence-building measures, Iran has cooperated
with the Agency well beyond its legal obligations. As
a result, the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
in Iran has always been confirmed by all IAEA reports,
including its most recent report, dated 28 August 2013.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is determined to
continue its cooperation with the Agency based on
its Safeguards Agreement. According to the joint
statement by IAEA and the Islamic Republic of Iran
issued following the recent talks at IAEA headquarters
in Vienna,
“delegations of the Agency and the Islamic Republic
of Iran had a very productive meeting covering past
and present issues on the 28 and 29 of October here
in Vienna;
“Iran presented a new proposal on practical
measures as a constructive contribution to
strengthen cooperation and dialogue with a view to
future resolution of all outstanding issues;
“Following the substantive discussions it
was decided that a further meeting will be held
on 11 November in Tehran in order to take this
cooperation forward.”

2/13

06/11/2013

This indeed is a new chapter of cooperation with
the IAEA. We will continue this approach at the new
round of negotiations with the Agency. We stand ready
to make the upcoming negotiations a success. Based on
our new approach, we will continue our constructive
engagement with the parties concerned, in particular
the group made up of the five permanent members of
the Security Council plus Germany.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is determined to resolve
all outstanding issues through meaningful, time-bound
and results-oriented negotiations. The adoption of
a win-win approach is essential to ensuring that
negotiations will result in the removal of the legitimate
concerns of the other parties and the acknowledgement
of the inherent right of Iran to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, including to develop a full national nuclear fuel
cycle, and the lifting of all multilateral and unilateral
sanctions. Through its constructive engagement and by
presenting practical proposals, Iran has demonstrated
the seriousness of its desire to solve the outstanding
issues once and for all. Therefore, the other parties
should prove their genuine political will by seizing this
opportunity.
Mr. Back (Australia): Australia is pleased to have
the opportunity to commend Director General Yukiya
Amano for his briefing on the achievements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
challenges that it will face over the coming years (see
A/68/PV.43). We congratulate the Director General on
his election to a new term in that most important role.
Australia is honoured to a member of the IAEA
Board of Governors and a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for 2013-2014. We take very
seriously the responsibilities that that entails. Australia
attaches great importance to the central role played
by the IAEA in improving the safety and security
of nuclear activities, enlarging the humanitarian
contribution of nuclear technology and verifying
States’ non-proliferation commitments.
Australia fully supports the right of IAEA member
States to enjoy the benefits of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy in accordance with their international
obligations. All States members of the Agency must
work together to ensure an effective safeguards system.
Confidence in that system provides the necessary
assurances about the peaceful nature of nuclear
activities and is the basic foundation for nuclear trade
and cooperation, security and continuing progress on
nuclear disarmament.
13-54995

06/11/2013

Australia welcomes the Director General’s efforts
to improve the effectiveness of the safeguards system,
including in relation to the conceptualization and
development of safeguards implementation at the State
level. Australia urges all States yet to do so to bring into
force an additional protocol as soon as possible as an
essential step in ensuring the maximum effectiveness
of the safeguards system. As Director General Amano
reminded us in July, constant vigilance and collective
action are necessary to ensure nuclear security. This
year, we were pleased to note that the Agency and
member States continued along that path. Australia also
acknowledges the Agency’s efforts in implementing the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, including a series
of international experts meetings on topics central
to understanding the causes and consequences of the
Fukushima nuclear accident.
We strongly support the efforts of the contracting
parties to identify suitable options to enhance the
effectiveness of the Convention on Nuclear Safety,
which is the principal international instrument for
promoting the safety of nuclear power reactors. We also
support the Agency’s continued efforts to strengthen the
safety and security of radioactive sources, highlighted
as recently as last week at the Agency’s conference on
that subject in the United Arab Emirates.
In conclusion, the external environment in which
the Agency operates is highly fluid. The Agency must
maintain the capacity to respond quickly and effectively
to external developments be they related to nuclear
safety, physical protection, nuclear proliferation or
sustainable development. Australia will continue to
support Director General Amano’s efforts to strengthen
the contribution the Agency in promoting the use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in areas ranging
from cancer treatment to water resources and to the
cause of international peace and security.
Australia is pleased to co-sponsor and support the
draft resolution on the report of the IAEA (A/68/L.10).
Mr. Tilegen (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan wishes to
express its warm appreciation to Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for introducing a most comprehensive
analysis of the work of the Agency (see A/68/PV.43).
It highlights the current and future roles of the IAEA
in pointing the way for applications of nuclear energy
and technical cooperation, with a stronger focus also
on safety and security measures rather than purely
verification.

A/68/PV.45

Kazakhstan notes with great satisfaction its
collaboration with the IAEA on its own nuclear energy,
as well as on non-proliferation and disarmament
policies at the regional and global levels. The Agency
not only protects us from nuclear weapons and nuclear
terrorism but also advances human betterment through
peaceful purposes. To achieve that, it is important to
bring international legal norms into line with the reality
of de facto nuclear-weapon States.
At the same time, the greatest risks are associated
with States that are involved in the black market in
nuclear technologies. Compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by State
parties and the improvement of global mechanisms
for managing processes in the development of nuclear
power and the safety of nuclear facilities are therefore
of extreme importance. My country therefore proposes
conducting regular stress tests of nuclear plants
and protection systems and developing rapid rescue
responses under the auspices of the IAEA.
To harness nuclear capabilities for peaceful
purposes, my country collaborates with the Russian
Federation on making our uranium available for
enrichment at the National Nuclear Centre in Angarsk,
Siberia, for use as nuclear fuel in power reactors. We
are also working developing the Kurchatov Nuclear
Technology Park under IAEA surveillance.
We support the IAEA initiative to develop a new
non-political and non-discriminatory framework
for utilizing nuclear energy based on multilateral
approaches to the nuclear energy fuel cycle. Kazakhstan
is currently finalizing negotiations with the IAEA on
hosting a nuclear fuel bank on its territory.
Being part of the Central Asian Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone, Kazakhstan strictly abides by the
IAEA safeguards agreement. We also adhere to the
additional protocol in order to reduce the risk of nuclear
terrorism and the smuggling of nuclear weapons and
radioactive materials in the region. We collaborate
with the IAEA in order to address the environmental
concerns of ecological radiation specific to Central
Asia, as we are currently doing for north-east Japan.
My delegation endorses the IAEA road map proposed
at its most recent ministerial meeting.
Kazakhstan supports the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East as a
solution that supports peace in the region and therefore
commends the work of the IAEA towards that objective.

13-549953/13

A/68/PV.45

06/11/2013

Kazakhstan is ready to host any future deliberations to
move the process forward.

Tests and in the Nuclear Discussion Forum, initiated by
Kazakhstan together with the EastWest Institute.

We are consistently implementing the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism and Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
in order to strengthen measures to combat the illegal
trafficking of nuclear and other materials. In 2011,
with the support of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, we hosted a training
workshop under Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) for 30 experts from the Central Asian region,
funded by the Governments of Norway and the United
States of America. We are currently viewing prospects
for a similar training workshop in early 2014.

In conclusion, we look forward to another cycle
of even more productive collaboration with the IAEA
to address global issues of nuclear technology and
security.

As a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the Zangger Committee, Kazakhstan maintains the
strictest control over its equipment and installations
that enrich uranium and reprocess spent nuclear fuel.
It is diligently implementing the recommendations of
the first and second Nuclear Security Summits, held
in Washington, D.C., in April 2010 and in Seoul in
2012, respectively, and looks forward to The Hague
Summit in 2014. My country has ratified and acceded
to four major conventions of nuclear security, including
the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear
Damage.
In view of the growing importance of nuclear
energy, Kazakhstan has entered into an agreement with
the IAEA on technical cooperation for 2010-2015 to
develop nuclear energy for nuclear education, medicine
and agriculture, research reactor safety, nuclear
technology and radioisotope and radiation applications
for collective global human security.
An issue of great importance to us is that
Kazakhstan, though a key and responsible member
of the IAEA, is being denied the opportunity to
participate in the work of elective bodies because of the
rules of procedure currently in place. Kazakhstan fully
supports the early entry into force of the amendments
to article VI of the IAEA Statute, and we are confident
that a solution will be found. I would like to state that
Kazakhstan contributes regularly to the IAEA budget
and the Technical Cooperation Fund in fulfilment of its
financial obligations.
We thank the IAEA for its collaboration in the
observance of the International Day against Nuclear

4/13

Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): My delegation joins
others in thanking Director General Yukiya Amano
for his introduction of the 2012 annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see
A/68/324). Also allow me to congratulate Director
General Amano on being elected for a second four-year
term, a reflection of the confidence placed in him by
members of the organization.
Jamaica attaches great importance to the vital work
of the IAEA in fostering nuclear safety and security
and promoting peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
The Agency’s practical and meaningful technical
cooperation projects are greatly appreciated by my
country and many small developing member States.
It is in the promotion of peaceful uses of technology
to help improve the lives of people that Jamaica finds
its relations with the IAEA to be the most significant.
We have a strong interest in IAEA activities related to
nuclear science, technology and applications, and we
continue to benefit significantly from them.
Jamaica became a State party to the Regional
Cooperative Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear
Science and Technology in Latin America and the
Caribbean in November 2011 and attaches great
importance to its cooperation through that regional
mechanism.
We are pleased that the IAEA has been taking steps
to deepen its collaboration with the Caribbean. That
has no doubt contributed to the fact that a Caribbean
country has been among the group of new members
admitted in each of the last three General Conferences.
Those three are Dominica, Trinidad and Tobago, and
the Bahamas. Jamaica welcomes the IAEA’s increasing
efforts to collaborate with our subregion and continues
to take tangible steps to support those efforts through a
number of initiatives, including through the co-hosting
of subregional workshops.
Jamaica has benefited from projects in several
areas and is actively engaged with the Department of
Technical Cooperation, Division for Latin America, in
developing projects in areas of high national importance,

13-54995

06/11/2013

in particular health and water resources management.
The project in health complements the initiatives that
Jamaica and sister Caribbean Community States have
spearheaded in the United Nations and the World Health
Organization to address the grave challenges posed by
non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Our efforts are
focused on both prevention and cure. With regard to
the latter, we consider the use of nuclear medicine to
be critical. The support of the IAEA for our efforts
to re-establish a nuclear medicine capacity for the
management of NCDs, including cardiac diseases and
cancers, is therefore of vital importance.
In recognition of the value and importance of the
cooperation projects being undertaken with the support
of the IAEA, we have taken steps to meet our current
obligations in relation to the technical cooperation
agreements. We will make further efforts to meet
our obligations in that area, despite serious resource
challenges.
In the field of research and technology, we are now
embarked on the conversion of our reactor from highly
enriched uranium (HEU) to low enriched uranium
(LEU). We express appreciation to the IAEA and the
Government of the United States for the assistance
that is being given to Jamaica, in particular under the
Peaceful Uses Initiative. In fact, we are embarked on a
project, in partnership with the IAEA and the United
States, aimed at converting the fuel used in our nuclear
research reactor from HEU to LEU.
Nuclear technology is perhaps the most sensitive
field of human technological activity. The benefits and
dangers associated with the harnessing of the awesome
power of the atom require careful study, safety and
security protocols and measures, as well as constant
vigilance.
In the area of nuclear security, compliance by all
members of the international community with treaties
and mechanisms that govern the development and use of
nuclear material is most important. We look forward to
the elimination of all nuclear weapons and the securing
of a world free of all nuclear weapons. In the meantime,
we resolutely oppose any expansion in the number of
States developing or possessing nuclear weapons. It
is for those reasons that we regard the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and
compliance with it, to be of paramount importance. We
share the expressions of concern that have been voiced
regarding the failure of certain members to comply with
their obligations under the NPT, and we therefore urge

A/68/PV.45

all members to ensure that their nuclear programmes
are brought under the appropriate safeguards regime.
We remain supportive of actions to improve nuclear
security, given the lethal and devastating impact
that a nuclear disaster can have on our viability and
survival. For our part, we acceded to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials in 2005
and have signed the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
We continue to be disturbed at the frequent reports
on the loss of nuclear materials. We therefore support
the efforts of the IAEA Illicit Trafficking Database,
which records and analyses incidents involving nuclear
and other radioactive material in an attempt to identify
trends and/or characteristics to assist in the prevention
of the misuse of nuclear or radioactive material.
In conclusion, Jamaica is confident that the
valuable and practical cooperation that it has enjoyed
with the IAEA will continue and that the fruits of that
cooperation will redound to the benefit of all. We remain
deeply committed to the goals of this important Agency
and will do our part to ensure that nuclear safety and
security goals are maintained and strengthened through
compliance with the agreements and mechanisms on
which we are agreed.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Norway is pleased to
be among the sponsors draft resolution A/68/L.10, on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/68/324).
Disarmament and non-proliferation are a
cornerstone of Norwegian foreign policy. We place the
utmost importance on the universalization of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We therefore call upon States that have not yet done so
to join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States. The
IAEA plays a crucial role in sustaining the regime,
which is essential for international peace and security
and in moving forward towards our collective objective
of a world without nuclear weapons.
Norway reiterates its call for the full universal
application of the comprehensive safeguards agreement
and the additional protocol and stresses the need to
resolve all cases of non-compliance. We are deeply
concerned about the prolonged and grave challenges
to the non-proliferation regime posed by the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Syrian Arab Republic.

13-549955/13

A/68/PV.45

The IAEA must be given sufficient resources to
keep its safeguards capabilities strong and independent
and to be able to evolve safeguards in the light of new
challenges and technologies. Norway has therefore
been supporting the IAEA in developing the State-level
concept in the implementation of safeguards and
considers it as an objective, efficient and effective
measure in that regard. Norway supports multilateral
approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle and appreciates
the contribution by the Agency in setting up the low
enriched uranium fuel bank in Kazakhstan. Norway,
furthermore, values the contribution by the Agency in
resolving current outstanding proliferation concerns.
Norway will contribute financially to strengthening
IAEA capabilities in those activities.
The IAEA is the keystone of international nuclear
security cooperation. We welcome the International
Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global
Efforts, organized by the Agency in July. Effective
physical protection is crucial to preventing nuclear
material from falling into the hands of terrorists and
to protecting nuclear facilities against unauthorized
use and malicious acts. We therefore urge all States that
have not done so to become party to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its 2005
Amendment.
At the same time, we must recognize that other
multilateral efforts, such as the Nuclear Security
Summit process, the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004) and the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism are essential to
prevent nuclear weapons or sensitive nuclear material
from falling into the wrong hands. Those efforts are
mutually reinforcing.
Norway has devoted particular attention to
minimizing the use of highly enriched uranium and
greatly appreciates its excellent cooperation with
the Agency in this field. My country has contributed
substantial voluntary funding to the IAEA Nuclear
Security Fund.
Norway fully supports the right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, as stipulated by article IV of
the NPT. The purpose of multilateral fuel banks is
indeed to promote that right, while sustaining the
global non-proliferation regime. The application of
nuclear technology involves far more than generating
electricity. The IAEA provides essential technical
assistance in the use of nuclear technology in health
care, agriculture and water management. The Agency
6/13

06/11/2013

is an important partner as we intensify our efforts to
reach the Millennium Development Goals.
Fukushima reminded us once again that tragic
accidents occur and that their effects transcend borders.
We all have a stake in improving nuclear safety.
Over the past year, Norway has contributed and will
continue to contribute substantial financial resources
to the IAEA Action Plan for Nuclear Safety, including
for the Agency’s work to strengthen safety capacity in
developing countries that are embarking on nuclear
power programmes or have existing programmes. In
addition to improving nuclear safety, we must also do
more in emergency preparedness and response.
To conclude, the IAEA remains an indispensable
partner for our common security and development. We
must provide the Agency with the necessary political
support and ensure it is fully equipped to meet current
and emerging challenges.
Mr. Kebret (Ethiopia): It gives me great pleasure to
address this Assembly on behalf of my delegation on the
agenda item under consideration. My delegation would
like to thank the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano,
for introducing the Agency’s informative and
comprehensive report (see A/68/324), which details the
Agency’s activities during the past year in the areas
of nuclear technology, safety and security, nuclear
verification and technical cooperation, inter alia. We
also wish to congratulate Mr. Amano on his welldeserved re-election.
Ethiopia joins other delegations in welcoming the
Bahamas, Brunei Darussalam and Swaziland as new
IAEA member States as of this year. We consider
their decision to be another positive indication of the
importance of the work of the IAEA.
My delegation commends the IAEA for its continued
efforts in discharging its responsibilities to help member
States use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The
IAEA technical cooperation programme, including the
provision of guidance to member States in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, is of critical importance. In that
regard, the development of nuclear power projects and
the promotion of the application of nuclear technology
to the service of human health, medical service, food
and agriculture and environmental protection are worth
mentioning.
We also believe that national measures and
international cooperation are equally essential for
13-54995

06/11/2013

nuclear and radiation safety. We would like to underline
that the Agency has a key role to play in ensuring that
safeguards to address nuclear accidents are strictly
implemented, and that the global nuclear safety culture
is promoted in a comprehensive and sustainable manner.
That is because we believe that the Agency’s safeguards
are fundamental to creating an environment conducive
to international nuclear energy cooperation in reducing
the possibilities of dangerous radioactive leaks through
human error or for technical reasons.
I would like to reaffirm the commitment of
Ethiopia, as one of the Agency’s founding members,
to practising the peaceful use of nuclear technologies
by respecting global and regional security monitoring
and safeguarding mechanisms. In that regard, the
Government of Ethiopia is committed to strengthening
the national radiation and nuclear safety infrastructure
to ensure the safe operation of equipment that uses
radiation sources and other nuclear materials by
adhering to the promotion of peaceful use of nuclear
applications.
The Agency’s responsibilities for ensuring nuclear
disarmament under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) are universal, and States
parties to treaties related to nuclear disarmament
and weapons of mass destruction also have equal
responsibility for halting the spread of nuclear weapons.
In particular, the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1887 (2009) is essential to
nuclear disarmament and to addressing nuclear-related
threats, including those posed by non-State actors who
seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
The Agency’s continued technical assistance to
our Government’s efforts to develop capabilities in
the control of tsetse flies, cancer treatment, diagnostic
nuclear medicine services, isotope hydrological
analysis, non-destructive quality testing, and national
nuclear science and technology infrastructure has been
useful in many ways. Indeed, we have improved our
capacity in several areas, in particular in manpower
training, equipment acquisition and expert missions.
Ethiopia appreciates the Agency’s consistent
and continued advocacy for peaceful use of nuclear
technology. It believes that the provision of sufficient
and predictable resources to the Agency’s programmes
and, more importantly, a balanced distribution of
resources among its safeguards, nuclear safety and
technical cooperation activities need to be ensured. The
technical cooperation programme is in fact playing a

A/68/PV.45

crucial role as a means to transfer nuclear technology
to developing countries.
Ethiopia has benefited from the joint activities of
the IAEA and the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization in the application of nuclear techniques in
the fields of crop and livestock production, sustainable
control of major insect pests, soil degradation, and food
quality and safety. Ethiopia views that as an important
contribution to helping developing countries to meet the
Millennium Development Goals, including, inter alia,
through the improvement of agricultural productivity
and childhood nutrition, poverty reduction, ensuring
environmental sustainability and the development of
global partnerships for development.
In closing, I wish to express my Government’s
sincere gratitude to the IAEA, particularly its
governing body and its leadership, for the vital
technical support and continued cooperation that the
Agency renders to my country. I would also to reiterate
Ethiopia’s commitment — in addition to abiding by its
international obligations as a State party to the NPT
and other disarmament conventions — to continuing to
do its level best to further enhance the positive spirit of
cooperation with the Agency.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): I would like
first to thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his briefing on the Agency’s work and his report to the
General Assembly (see A/68/PV.43).
I take this opportunity to reiterate the commitment
of my Government to two aspects of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, an essential element to development.
As recalled by His Serene Highness Prince Albert II at
the opening of the Scientific Forum in September,
“[t]here is no peace without development and, more
specifically, without sustainable development. That
is the premise on which the IAEA was established
as an organization of Atoms for Peace”.
Monaco has been a member of the Agency since
its inception in 1957 and has hosted the headquarters
of its Marine Environment Laboratories since 1961. In
2010, the activities of the Laboratories were expanded
to the terrestrial environment, thereby becoming the
IAEA Environment Laboratories. As stated by the
Director General, Monaco is also the host of the Ocean
Acidification International Coordination Centre,
created in 2012 in the context of the IAEA Peaceful Uses
Initiative, launched by the United States of America.

13-549957/13

A/68/PV.45

The work of this international coordination platform
serves the Agency’s member States with the aim of
enhancing research and cooperation in countering
the consequences of climate change, which acidifies
the oceans and poses a serious threat to many marine
organisms, especially shellfish and corals.
The acidification of the oceans has been the subject
of efforts by the Scientific Centre of Monaco for a
number of years. I should note that representatives of the
IAEA’s Ocean Acidification International Coordination
Centre and the Scientific Centre of Monaco presented
their work on the subject to the Member States at
the June meeting of the United Nations Open-ended
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea.
Nuclear applications in the area of health are
also essential. In September 2011, on the occasion
of the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Environmental Laboratories and on the margins of
Director General Amano’s visit to the Principality, a
framework agreement was signed aimed at strengthening
cooperation in the use of nuclear technologies in the
area of health. As a result, Monaco has committed to
working with the IAEA in support of the Programme
of Action for Cancer Therapy, designed to respond
to a crisis of a global scale. Through the partnership,
Monaco intends to make a major contribution to
the prevention, detection and treatment of cancer in
low- and middle-income countries, where more than
100 million people could die of the disease by 2020 .
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Principality of Monaco’s support for the IAEA and
its Director General, and to congratulate him on his
leadership. I would also like to thank the Agency’s
representative to the United Nations, Mr. Geoffrey
Shaw, in whom we always find a reliable and effective
partner. It is in testimony to that support for continued
cooperation that Monaco has co-sponsored draft
resolution A/68/L.10.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Although the international community
unanimously agrees that the sole real nuclear danger in
the Middle East resides in Israel’s possession of nuclear
arms and the means of delivering them to distant
destinations — Israel’s nuclear weapons can reach
5,000 miles, as far as the borders of China — some of
those who turn a blind eye to that crystal-clear reality
are nonetheless quite happy to open illusory fronts on
dubious motives.

8/13

06/11/2013

It is evident that such a partial and non-objective
approach exposes the falsity of their allegations and
of their declared interest in creating a region free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East. Although they have supplied Israel
for decades with the nuclear technology and material
that have enabled it to possess nuclear weapons and
their means of delivery, including advanced submarines
capable of carrying and launching nuclear weapons, they
tried their best, though vainly, to remove those Israeli
nuclear weapons from the main discussion during the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
failed 2012 Helsinki conference. They did so in order
to distract attention from Israel’s continuing possession
of nuclear weapons to the detriment of the safety
and security of the other peoples of the region. That
unequivocally demonstrates their double standards.
In his statement yesterday (see A/68/PV.43), the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) stated that the Agency recently came
to the conclusion that
“it was very likely that a building destroyed at the
Dair Alzour site [in Syria] was a nuclear reactor
that should have been declared to the Agency”.
In this context, I would like to make the following
comments on that statement.
First, the Director General knows that Syria made
the issue of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) a national priority in letter
and spirit. In 1968, Syria became an early adherent
to the NPT, and in 1992 it signed a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement with the Agency. Moreover,
on 27 December 2003 Syria submitted, on behalf
of the Arab Group, a draft resolution that is still in
blue, circulating as an unofficial draft in the Security
Council, aimed at creating a zone in the Middle East
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. The credibility of our national commitment
to non-proliferation cannot be questioned, particularly
since the text of the aforementioned draft resolution
conforms to the provisions and goals of the IAEA. At the
time, as is well known, it was rejected by an influential
nuclear-weapon State member of the Security Council
that threatened to use its privilege — not its right — of
veto.
Secondly, the Security Council and the IAEA have
not condemned Israel’s flagrant military aggression

13-54995

06/11/2013

against Syria at the time, probably because they are used
to Israel’s violating their international and legitimate
resolutions relating to our region with impunity. Israel
has refused to cooperate with the Agency and to allow
its inspectors to verify the possible contamination
emanating from Israeli rockets, as well as the material
used to destroy the site at Dair Alzour.
Israel’s lack of cooperation with the Agency’s
demands, its ongoing development of its militarynuclear capacity without international supervision,
and its disregard of every call for the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East undermine the
credibility of the NPT system, threaten the security and
stability of the peoples and States of the Middle East,
and weaken the NPT’s universality. All these serious
issues are documented and well known to the IAEA.
We expected the Director General to raise these facts
instead of using such indecisive phrases as “it was very
likely”, as he said yesterday.
Thirdly, it will be very helpful to read to the
Assembly a paragraph from pages 228 and 229 of a
book by the previous Director General of the IAEA,
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, The Age of Deception:
Nuclear Diplomacy in Treacherous Times.
(spoke in English)
“One of the strangest and most striking
examples of nuclear hypocrisy, multilateral and
multifaceted, must surely be Israel’s bombing of
the Dair Alzour installation in Syria in September
2007, and the aftermath of that attack. Speculation
began almost immediately that the site had housed a
nuclear facility. Syria denied the accusations. Israel
and the United States remained officially silent,
although American officials talked anonymously
on the subject to the media. I spoke out strongly,
noting that any country with information indicating
that the bombed facility was nuclear was under a
legal obligation to report it to the IAEA, but no one
came forward with such a report. For the six weeks
following the bombing — the most crucial period
in terms of seeing inside the facility — we were
unable to obtain any high-resolution imagery from
commercial satellites.”
Elbaradei goes on for pages and pages on this issue,
denying that the site of Dair Alzour in Syria was hosting
a nuclear facility. He was Mr. Amano’s predecessor.
(spoke in Arabic)

A/68/PV.45

Fourthly, under the Statute of the Agency the United
States of America was required to inform the IAEA
of the information in its possession before destroying
the installation, and not after eight months. The same
applies to Israel, which did not supply the Agency
with any information, accurate or otherwise. Rather, it
perpetrated a condemnable military aggression against
our sovereign territory, infiltrating our air space from
a neighbouring State, Turkey. The Agency did not
address this violation pursuant to its mandate it or take
any of the necessary measures, in accordance with its
competencies and responsibility, with regard to Israel’s
breach of its international obligations.
Most of the contents of the report of the Agency
on the Dair Alzour site, drawn up by the current
Director General, relied on the imagery and analyses
submitted eight months later by the United States
Central Intelligence Agency. This raises many
questions regarding the information received by the
Agency, including on the nature of the authenticating
documents, given the fact that such information was
submitted by a State with a political agenda inimical
to the interests of my country, Syria, and taking into
consideration the precedent set in this regard, namely,
the Iraqi dossier, of which everyone is aware.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for introducing
the IAEA’s annual report (see A/68/PV.43). Let me also
congratulate Mr. Amano on his re-election as Director
General. I would like to assure him that the full support
of my Government will be extended to him.
The Government of Japan also welcomes Brunei
Darussalam and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas as
new members of the IAEA.
The Government of Japan would like to express
gratitude once again for the great support and assistance
that has been provided by the international community
for more than two and a half years since the earthquake
of 2011, its resulting tsunami and the accident at the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station of the Tokyo
Electric Power Company (TEPCO). I would like to take
this opportunity to briefly explain our current efforts to
address that accident.
Taking countermeasures against the leakage of
contaminated water is the most urgent task for us. As
Prime Minister Abe has stated, the entire Government
will continue to work in an integrated manner to put

13-549959/13

A/68/PV.45

06/11/2013

its full weight behind resolving the contaminated
water issue, while also enhancing the dissemination of
accurate information to the international community.

that Japan will actively cooperate with the IAEA to
formulate the Agency’s comprehensive report on the
Fukushima Daiichi accident.

With regard to the impact of the contaminated
water, increased radioactivity was observed within the
port of TEPCO’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
station in an area smaller than 0.3 square kilometres.
No significant increase in radioactive levels has been
detected outside the port at present, and the radioactive
level outside the port and in the open sea remains below
the limit of the World Health Organization guideline
for drinking water quality.

In July, the IAEA successfully organized the
International Conference on Nuclear Security, the
first-ever ministerial-level conference on this issue
at the IAEA. Japan would once again like to express
its great appreciation for the efforts made by Director
General Amano and his staff. Japan continues to play a
responsible role in strengthening nuclear security as a
country utilizing nuclear energy.

The nuclear reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear power station were cooled down and stabilized
by the end of 2011. A significant decrease in radioactive
releases has also been achieved. The Government of
Japan and TEPCO are steadily taking measures to
decommission the reactors. The decommissioning
of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station
and resolution of the contaminated water issue are
unprecedented tasks in which we are facing a series of
difficulties. A structure to bring together technologies,
expertise and wisdom from Japan and the international
community, including the IAEA, is needed.
In this context, the second IAEA decommissioning
mission to address the contaminated water issue will
be in Japan towards the end of November, following
the mission that took place in April. Currently, two
IAEA experts on marine monitoring are visiting Japan
in preparation for the decommissioning mission.
Japan will deal with the contaminated water issue
and the decommissioning work in an internationally
open manner and will welcome recommendations
and cooperation from the IAEA and the international
community.
Japan is determined to further contribute to the
strengthening of nuclear safety worldwide by sharing
its experiences and lessons learned from the Fukushima
Daiichi accident with the international community.
To this end, Japan hosted the Fukushima Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Safety in December last year, in
cooperation with the IAEA. One hundred and seventeen
States and 13 international organizations participated
in the Conference and reaffirmed the importance of
strengthening nuclear safety. Japan expresses gratitude
to the Malaysian Government for co-chairing the
Conference, member States for their participation, and
the IAEA secretariat for its invaluable contribution to
the success of the Conference. It goes without saying
10/13

In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, it is essential that we strengthen safeguards
while ensuring nuclear safety and security. Japan
therefore advocates the universalization of the additional
protocol in the context of strengthening safeguards. In
that regard, Japan welcomes the fact that five States
concluded additional protocols in 2012 and is grateful
for the work of the IAEA secretariat in this regard.
Japan, in cooperation with the IAEA and other member
States, will continue to work on the universalization of
the additional protocol.
The nuclear and missile development programmes
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including its work on uranium enrichment, are serious
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
A nuclear test by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is totally unacceptable, as it represents a grave
challenge to the international non-proliferation regime
centred on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, and seriously undermines the peace
and security of North-East Asia and the international
community as a whole.
Furthermore, Japan is gravely concerned about the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s announcement
in April revealing its intention to readjust and restart its
Yongbyon nuclear facilities. Japan strongly urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply fully
with all its international obligations and commitments
under Security Council resolutions and the 2005 Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks, and to completely
abandon all its nuclear weapons and missile development
programmes in a verifiable and irreversible manner.
Japan supports the critical role that the IAEA continues
to play in resolving the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea nuclear issue.
The Iranian nuclear issue is also a serious concern
for the whole international community. While taking

13-54995

06/11/2013

note of the recent positive atmosphere brought about
by the new Iranian Government, Japan urges Iran to
comply with the demands of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the IAEA Board of
Governors. We also call on Iran to take substantive
action to resolve the issue peacefully. Japan notes that
at the most recent meeting between the IAEA and Iran,
on 28 and 29 October, there were positive developments
that could be conducive to substantive progress towards
resolving Iran’s nuclear issue. Japan continues to
support the IAEA’s efforts in that regard. We expect
to see meaningful negotiations between Iran, the E3+3
and the IAEA, hoping that the negotiations will soon
lead to concrete results.
Mr. Wensley (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to congratulate Mr. Yukiya Amano on his re-election
as Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), and to thank him for introducing the
2012 annual report on the work of the Agency (see
A/68/PV.43).
Over several decades, the work of the IAEA has
advanced the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The
IAEA’s interventions in an array of important sectors
such as human health, water and agriculture have
sought to contribute to food security and poverty
reduction. The Agency’s interventions in those areas
are unique, due to its specific nature, and South Africa
greatly values the development and application of
technologies that have the potential to profoundly
influence socioeconomic development, especially in
countries on the African continent. It can be expected
that the Agency will continue to do more in those areas,
given the growing number of its member States in the
developing world. The Agency is also to be lauded for
the partnerships it has established in that regard with
other relevant agencies of the broader United Nations
family.
The Agency’s key goal is to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world. Member States of the
IAEA should therefore continue to work together to
enhance the capacity of the Agency to provide more
technical cooperation.
Events over the past few years have focused much
attention on nuclear power generation. A number of
States are engaged in processes to increase nuclear
power’s share of their energy mix, a move necessitated
by the imperatives of economic growth and security of
supply, on the one hand, and by the need to reduce carbon

A/68/PV.45

footprints and preserve dwindling natural resources,
on the other. The Agency has provided important
support to newcomer countries as well as those that are
expanding their nuclear power generation.
Another important pillar of the Agency is its work
in verification. The IAEA has unquestionably proved to
be an independent and impartial organization that fulfils
the task of safeguards implementation in accordance
with established agreements with individual member
States. South Africa supports the Agency’s efforts to
strengthen the safeguards system in all States with
safeguards agreements in force and within its legal
mandate.
In response to the Fukushima nuclear power plant
accident two years ago, the IAEA took decisive steps
to strengthen the global nuclear safety framework. The
adoption of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety was a
milestone and an important display of the secretariat’s
and member States’ commitments to taking
responsibility for nuclear safety. While nuclear security
remains the responsibility of each member State, South
Africa welcomes the progress made to strengthen
nuclear security at the international level through the
important work of the IAEA, which included its hosting
of the first ministerial-level conference on nuclear
security earlier this year.
In conclusion, South Africa remains firm in
its commitment to nuclear disarmament, nuclear
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. We support the IAEA as the only internationally
recognized competent authority responsible for verifying
and ensuring compliance with safeguards agreements
of States parties, concluded in compliance with their
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. South Africa stands ready to work
with all member States to strengthen the work of the
Agency across all pillars of the IAEA’s work.
The Acting President: We have now heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 88.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.10. Before giving the floor to the speaker
in explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has before it draft resolution

13-5499511/13

A/68/PV.45

A/68/L.10, on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. Regarding the draft resolution, the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea once again considers one part of the report to
be completely biased, one-sided and without any
impartiality. My delegation would therefore like to
point to two factors that are critical to understanding
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
First, the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (see A/68/324) has once again ignored the fact
that the United States is the creator, progenitor and
originator of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
It was the United States that brought nuclear weapons
to South Korea in 1957, not the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Again, it was the United States that
increased the number of weapons deployed to more than
1,000 in the 1970s; it was not the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Secondly, the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency has once again ignored the fact that the
United States is the perpetrator of nuclear blackmail
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
its people. Again, it was the United States conducting
blackmail, as early as the 1950s, during the time of the
Korean War. Accounts of that time claimed that, by
order of Mr. Truman, who was President at the time,
the United States would turn the Korean peninsula into
a radioactive corridor. By 1957, they were bringing in
more and more nuclear weapons. In 2002, the United
States officially declared the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea part of the axis of evil, which meant
that it was to be eliminated, and listed my country as a
target for pre-emptive nuclear strike.
Earlier this year, the United States, jointly with
South Korea, listed the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea as a target for nuclear deterrence. Under
this policy, the United States continues to carry out
successive military excercises with South Korea. Every
time they come, they bring whatever they have got,
including a triad of nuclear weapons launchable by air,
sea and land, B-52 bombers, the USS George Washington
aircraft carrier, and nuclear-powered submarines. All
these vectors carry live nuclear weapons to threaten and
blackmail the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and its people, sovereignty, dignity, security and safety.
All of this reveal the true creator and perpetrator of
nuclear blackmail. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is simply and purely a victim of such hostilities.

12/13

06/11/2013

Unfortunately, the report does not reflect any
of those facts. Therefore, if the IAEA is supposed to
intervene to settle the nuclear dispute in the Korean
peninsula peacefully, it should consider our country and
the Korean peninsula with neutrality and impartiality.
As to a statement made yesterday, referring once again
to nuclear tests and Security Council resolutions, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has made
it clear time and time again that those nuclear tests
were conducted in response to the rampant and violent
infringement of our sovereignty and to the insult to
the dignity and national pride of our people, who had
successfully launched a peaceful satellite in December
2012.
Once again, we would like to make it clear that that
was a legitimate exercise of our sovereign power and
right under the Charter of the United Nations. It cannot
be considered a violation of the Security Council
resolutions, which purely reflect the manipulations of
the United States and its abuse of power. If our use of
ballistic missiles to launch satellites is to be singled
out for questioning, the United States is the country
that should be brought before and sanctioned by the
Security Council. Of all the space-faring countries, it
is the number-one launcher and champion of satellites
in outer space.
As for the position of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea concerning the settlement of the
nuclear issue, in view of all the aforementioned factors
we would like to make it clear once again that, under
the principle of action for action, the United States — as
the creator and producer of nuclear weapon and the
perpetrator of nuclea blackmail and hostility against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — should
make the first move. If the United States moves, we
can move, but so long as it does not move we are in
no position to move. As long as the nuclear blackmail
and hostility continue, we have no other option but to
continue strengthening our war deterrent — that is, our
nuclear weapon capability. We disassociate ourselves
from the adoption of draft resolution A/68/L.10.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/68/L.10, entitled
“Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to

13-54995

06/11/2013

announce that, in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/68/L.10 or previously mentioned during
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt, Estonia, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.10?
Draft resolution A/68/L.10 was adopted (resolution
68/10).
The Acting President: One representatives has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I remind
him that statements in the exercise of the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
to five minutes for the second intervention, and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): I am sorry to ask for the floor again. Regarding
the statement made by the representative of Japan, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would like to
clarify its position.
The representative of Japan made reference to
many issues concerning our country’s so-called nuclear
activities. I believe that, as usual, he made reference to
five major factors.
First, he referred again to the nuclear test, which
raises a question. Why is Japan clamouring against
nuclear testing when it joined the United States
in manipulating the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2087 (2013) against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s peaceful satellite launch? The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launch was
followed by a Japanese launch. The United States and
the Security Council kept silent. Why are we still talking

A/68/PV.45

about nuclear tests launched by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea? There is no moral justification
for Japan to raise the issue of anybody else’s nuclear
activity. It is Japan that should be questioned first.
Secondly, the representative of Japan made
reference to obligations pursuant to that Security
Council resolution. Once again, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to make it clear
that it totally rejects that resolution, which was adopted
illegally and manipulated by one so-called permanent
member of the Security Council.
Thirdly, he made the reference to the peace and
security of North-East Asia. He gave the strong
impression that Japan is a peace-loving country, but it
is the opposite. It is becoming a nuclear Power under
the nuclear umbrella of the United States. It has aligned
its entire territory as a launch pad for attack against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Under the
bilateral agreement, Japan is supposed to open all its
facilities for the military activities of the United States.
Therefore, who is the perpetrator and offender of peace
and security in the region? It is clearly Japan.
Fourthly, he again made reference to the SixParty Talks. In the process of the Six-Party Talks, the
Japanese delegation raised the abduction issue, which
has nothing to do with the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula. It invited the criticism of all the other five
participants, but it has never honoured its commitments
under the Six-Party Talks. Every one of the six parties
has the commitment and obligation to fully honour it,
but Japan was the only country that has never, ever
honoured its commitment. Therefore, again, Japan has
no moral or legal authority or justification.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

13-5499513/13
