98

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

important step in the progress of Papua New Guinea
towards independence,
Mindful that the House of Assembly has affirmed
its right as the duly elected parliament of the people
of Papua New Guinea to decide when independence is
to come and that the administering Power accepts that
the House of Assembly represents the wishes of the
people on the question of independence,
Recognizing that the administering Power has progressively transferred governmental powers to the Government of Papua New Guinea and that it has announced that, pending the final decision of the House
of Assembly to declare independence for Papua New
Guinea, the Government of Australia is conducting its
relations with the Government of Papua New Guinea
as a Government of an independent nation to which
Australia has certain special and inescapable obligations,
Noting that, on 9 July 1974, the Papua New Guinea
House of Assembly resolved "that Papua New Guinea
do move to independent nation status as soon as practicable after a constitution has been enacted by this
House and that any proposed d'ate of independence be
endorsed by this House",
Noting also the continued willingness.of the administering Power and of the Government of Papua New
Guinea to receive, at an appropriate time, a visiting
mission to be composed as recommended in General
Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 23 June 1973 to
23 October 1974, 2
1. Resolves, in agreement with the administering
Power, that on the date on which Papua New Guinea
shall become independent the Trusteeship Agreement
for the Territory of New Guinea, approved by the
General Assembly on 13 December 1946, shall cease
to be in force;
2. Requests the administering Power to notify the
Secretary-General of the date on which Papua New
Guinea will accede to independence and on which the
Trusteeship Agreement shall cease to be in force.

2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3285 (XXIX). Question of Niue

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 3
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the Government of Niue,•
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence Colonial Countries and Peoples,
2 Official Records of the General A.rsembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/9604).
3 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. I), chap. XXII.
• Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2119th

meeting.

Recalling also its resolution 3155 (XXVIII) of
14 December 1973, by which it, inter alia, noted with
approval that the Government and people of Niue were
resolved to achieve self-government in 1974, welcomed
the invitation extended to the United Nations by the
Government of New Zealand to observe the act of
self-determination in Niue and requested the Special
Committee, in consultation with the administering
Power and the Government of Niue, to appoint a special mission to Niue in 1974 for the purpose of observing the proceedings relating to the act of selfdetermination by the people of Niue,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
special mission dispatched to Niue in August 1974
pursuant to resolution 3155 (XXVIII), 5 and having
heard the statement of the Chairman of the Special
Mission,•
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Niue;
2. Notes with satisfaction the findings and conclusions of the special mission, 6 in particular its conclusion
that the arrangements for the conduct of the referendum
in Niue were such as to ensure that the people exercised
their right to self-determination freely, in circumstances
which guaranteed the secrecy of the ballot, and with
full information regarding the issues involved;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
New Zealand, as the administering Power, and the
Government of Niue for the co-operation and assistance
extended to the special mission;
4. Takes note that the people of Niue voted, by a
substantial majority, for self-government in free association with New Zealand on the basis of the Constitution and the Niue Constitution Act, 1974;
5. Considers that, in so doing, the people of Niue
have freely expressed their wishes and have exercised
their right to self-determination in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Further considers that, in view of the entry into
force of the Niue Constitution Act, 197 4, and the
attainment by the Territory of self-government in free
association with New Zealand, the transmission of
information in respect of Niue under Article 73 e of
the Charter is no longer necessary;
7. Notes with appreciation the commitment entered
into by the Government of New Zealand to continue
to furnish economic and administrative assistance to
Niue after the attainment of self-government;
8. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies and
other institutions associated with the United Nations
will likewise endeavour to contribute in every way
possible to the development and strengthening of the
economy of Niue.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
5 Ibid., 1 wcnty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I), chap. XXII, annex I.
~ /h/J., et, ... ;,. XXT!, a:rneY f. ;:,arr 14~-147.
