United Nations

A/RES/63/157

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 56

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/425)]

63/157. Future operation of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the situation of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, in particular
resolution 60/229 of 23 December 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 62/208 of 19 December 2007 on the triennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system,
Acknowledging its resolution 62/277 of 15 September 2008, in particular its
gender-specific provisions, and in this context encouraging the ongoing work on
gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2007/37 of 27 July 2007, in
which the Council reaffirmed the specific mandate of the Institute to conduct
research and training for gender equality and the empowerment of women as a
central focal point for research and training on gender issues within the United
Nations system,
Taking into account Commission on the Status of Women resolution 52/3 of
7 March 2008 entitled “Strengthening of the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women”, 1
0F

Welcoming the contributions of the Institute to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 2 and the implementation
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 3 and the outcome document of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, 4
1F

2F

3F

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27), chap. I,
sect. D.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
3
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
4
Resolution S-23/3, annex.

08-48021

A/RES/63/157

Taking note with appreciation of the progress report on the Institute by its
Director with respect to the implementation of the programme of work for the
period from 15 May to 30 September 2008, 5 which measures progress through the
utilization of indicators of achievement as established in the revised workplan for
2008, 6
4F

5F

Welcoming the approval by the Executive Board of the Institute of the revised
workplan for 2008 and its endorsement of the operational budget for 2008, 7
6F

Acknowledging the contributions of the Institute in promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of women in the areas of security, international migration, in
particular remittances and development, and governance and political participation,
Recognizing the contribution of the Institute to the ongoing efforts in gender
mainstreaming through its research and training outputs involving national gender
machineries, academic institutes, regional intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
Reaffirming the importance of seeking medium-term sustainable financial
resources for the Institute,
Welcoming the activities undertaken by the Director of the Institute to actively
promote a fund-raising strategy for the Institute,
Expressing its satisfaction with the progress of the Institute in the area of
resource mobilization, which has enabled the Institute to fully reimburse the amount
committed by the Secretary-General on an exceptional basis from the United
Nations regular budget, and recognizing the improved financial standing of the
Institute,
Recognizing that the implementation of the programme of work and strategic
plan of the Institute will contribute to a comprehensive discussion on international
migration and development from a gender perspective,
Requests the International Research and Training Institute for the
1.
Advancement of Women, in accordance with its mandate, to coordinate further its
activities and to develop its programme of work in collaboration with other relevant
United Nations entities, such as the United Nations Development Fund for Women,
the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the
Division for the Advancement of Women of the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Women’s
Human Rights and Gender Unit in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, and calls upon those entities to continue their
collaborative efforts;
Also requests the Institute, in accordance with its mandate, to collaborate
2.
with the United Nations system, national machinery, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector in promoting international cooperation to foster
the empowerment of women and gender equality, including through the promotion
of better access to education for women and girls and the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in all policies and programmes;
_______________
5

INSTRAW/EB/2008/R.13.
INSTRAW/EB/2007/R.4/Rev.1.
7
See INSTRAW/EB/2007/R.14, sect. III, para. 6, decision II.
6

2

A/RES/63/157

3.
Further requests the Institute, in accordance with its mandate and in
close coordination with the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and other relevant United Nations programmes and funds, to
actively participate in and contribute to discussions on issues related to international
migration and development;
Invites the Institute to continue, in close cooperation with other relevant
4.
United Nations bodies, to promote and undertake research and training programmes
on gender mainstreaming, in the context of the Millennium Development Goals, the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women2 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action,3 as well as the commitments made at the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly;4
5.
Requests the Institute, within its mandate, to continue to assist countries
in promoting and supporting the political participation and economic and social
advancement of women through training programmes;
Stresses the critical importance of voluntary financial contributions by
6.
Member States to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women to enable it to carry out its
mandate, and invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund;
Calls for the diversification of funding resources, and in this regard
7.
invites Member States to continue to provide assistance and support to the Institute
through voluntary contributions and substantive involvement in its projects and
activities;
Looks forward to the enhanced implementation of the strategic plan of
8.
the Institute under the leadership of the new Director, to be appointed shortly by the
Secretary-General;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide, within existing
9.
resources, appropriate administrative assistance and support to the Institute, in
accordance with the provisions of the statute of the Institute, 8 including by
enhancing coordination among the Institute and the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs and the Department of Management of the Secretariat, in order to
ensure that the objectives of the strategic plan, including resource mobilization
efforts, are effectively and efficiently carried out;
7F

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to include information on the
implementation of the present resolution in his report to be submitted to the
Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2009 through the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-third session, and to submit his
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

_______________
8

Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/57, annex.

3
