S/2014/665

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 29 May
to 3 September 2014

I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended by
subsequent resolutions, most recently through resolution 2163 (2014).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
At the time of writing, the situation in the UNDOF area of operation is
evolving rapidly and remains volatile, with heavy fighting continuing between the
Syrian armed forces and the armed members of the opposition and other armed
groups in the area of separation. Several UNDOF peacekeepers serving with the
Fijian battalion were detained by armed elements. At the present time, no ad ditional
information on their status or location has been established. *
3.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic generally was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment
attributable to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and despite a
number of significant violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement by
Israeli and Syrian forces, signed in 1974, set out below. Several incidents of firing
across the ceasefire line occurred, resulting in casualties. Of particular note, on
22 June, fire from the Bravo side killed a civilian and injured others on the Alpha
side and, in retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) fired into the area of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side, resulting in the death and injury of
Syrian armed forces personnel. The Syrian armed forces significantly increased the
number of personnel and equipment deployed inside the area of separation and
carried out military activities and security operations against armed members of the
opposition, at times in response to offensives carried out by the armed members of
the opposition. Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces
and military equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military
* As the present report was going to press, the 45 UNDOF peacekeepers were released unharmed
on 11 September. They were brought to position 80, from where they crossed to the Alpha side.
Subsequently, the peacekeepers returned to the Bravo side and Camp Faouar.

14-60580 (E)

120914

*1460580*

S/2014/665

equipment, is in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As
underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2163 (2014), there should be
no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
4.
On the morning of 27 August, approximately 100 armed members of several
armed groups, including Jabhat al-Nusra, launched an attack on Syrian armed forces
positions at the Bravo gate and in the area of Quneitra in the area of separation.
UNDOF evacuated its personnel from the Charlie gate to Camp Ziouani. Later that
day, UNDOF observed armed elements removing three United Nations vehicles left
behind at the position, as well as looting equipment and personal effects at the
position. Simultaneous to the attack on Quneitra and the Bravo gate, armed groups
also engaged Syrian armed forces positions in the area of Tal al -Kurum and Jaba.
There were several incidents when fire, including mortar rounds, landed close to
United Nations positions, as a result of which United Nations personnel in positions
affected by the fighting, as well as those in Camp Ziouani, entered shelters.
Following several hours of heavy fighting, the armed elements gained control of the
Bravo gate and most parts of Quneitra.
5.
On the afternoon of 27 August, eight armed fighters forcibly entered position
27 while UNDOF personnel were in the shelter. The armed elements demanded that
the United Nations personnel vacate the position in order to avoid injury in the
ongoing fighting. The UNDOF personnel refused and remained in the shelter while
fighting in Quneitra continued. The Force Commander spoke to the leader of the
armed fighters and requested that the armed elements vacate the position and not
harm the United Nations peacekeepers. The armed fighters remained inside the
United Nations premises, however, and continued their attack on the Syrian armed
forces through the night, including from within position 27. A small group of armed
elements ransacked the position and took United Nations and personal items from it.
They also put on United Nations uniforms and blue berets taken from the
accommodations of the personnel.
6.
As a result of fire landing inside position 60, two buildings caught fire. Owing
to the continuing fighting in the area, United Nations personnel had to remain in the
shelter and could not extinguish the fire. The fire completely destroyed both
buildings.
7.
In the course of the fighting on 27 August, one IDF soldier and one Israeli
civilian were injured on the Alpha side by fire that landed across the ceasefire line.
IDF subsequently responded by firing on a Syrian armed forces position,
approximately 3 km from Camp Faouar on the Bravo side. The Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate informed UNDOF that one artillery weapon was destroyed.
8.
On the morning of 28 August, the armed fighters, who had remained at
position 27 overnight, demanded that the UNDOF personnel leave the position,
leaving behind their vehicles. They said that UNDOF personnel would be moved in
vehicles of the armed fighters towards the Alpha gate. Approximately 300 armed
elements were seen outside the perimeter of the position. UNDOF readied the Force
Reserve for possible relocation of the United Nations personnel; however, the
position personnel were given a 10-minute deadline by the armed elements to move
out. The Force Commander therefore gave orders for the United Nations personnel
to vacate the position. The armed fighters took the weapons of the UNDOF
personnel and then transported the UNDOF personnel to the area of the Bravo gate
on the understanding that they would be allowed to cross to the Alpha side.

2/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

However, a representative of the armed elements near the Alpha gate on the Bravo
side, who said that he was waiting for the arrival of the detained peacekeepers,
subsequently informed UNDOF that they had been taken elsewhere. UNDOF then
observed vehicles resembling those of the armed elements that had been present at
position 27 moving in the direction of position 60, but lost sight of t hem.
9.
Armed elements subsequently moved to United Nations positions 68 in
Ruihinah and 69 in Braika, with at least two Fijian peacekeepers, and demanded that
United Nations personnel at the two positions give up their weapons in order for the
45 detained UNDOF peacekeepers to be released. When the United Nations
personnel did not hand over their weapons, the armed members placed command detonated explosive devices around the two positions to prevent the United Nations
personnel from leaving, and threatened to attack the positions. As a precautionary
measure, to prevent more United Nations positions and personnel from coming
under siege, UNDOF evacuated its personnel from positions 80 to 85 and
subsequently to the Alpha side. On the evening of 28 August, ar med elements
attempted to force their way through the gate of position 69. United Nations
personnel fired warning shots and the armed elements withdrew.
10. Heavy fighting between the Syrian armed forces and armed elements
continued on 29 August in the central part of the area of separation. Following some
rounds falling close to position 60, UNDOF evacuated the position. In the early
morning of 30 August, armed elements detonated at least one explosive they had
placed outside the gate of position 68 and began attacking the position. United
Nations personnel at the position fired in return. The exchange of fire lasted for
several hours, at which point UNDOF managed to establish an agreement with the
armed elements on a ceasefire lasting until the next day. N o injuries were incurred
among the United Nations personnel during the exchange of fire. The situation at
position 69 was relatively quiet that morning and UNDOF was able to evacuate the
personnel to the Alpha side. At midday, after firing took place in th e vicinity of
observation post 52, the Observer Group Golan military observers, and UNDOF
personnel who had been placed at the observation post to provide additional
security, also were evacuated.
11. On the evening of 30 August, UNDOF observed between 100 and 120 armed
elements arrive in the vicinity of Ruihinah from areas farther south. As a
precautionary measure, the UNDOF evacuated its personnel from observation post
56. During the night, United Nations personnel from position 68 left the position on
foot and moved across the technical fence to the Alpha side. UNDOF maintains a
reinforced presence at United Nations position 80 near al -Rafid.
12. Since the fierce fighting that commenced on 27 August, which led to the
detention of the UNDOF peacekeepers from the Fijian contingent and the siege of
two UNDOF positions, the UNDOF Force Commander has been in regular close
contact with the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate and IDF. Both parties provided full
support to UNDOF in ensuring the safe evacuation of its peac ekeepers from
positions that had to be vacated as a result of the ongoing fighting. The UNDOF
Force Commander as well as Secretariat staff have been in ongoing contact with
Member States that may have influence over the armed groups in order to effect the
immediate, unconditional and safe release of the members of the Fijian contingent.
13. In the context of the clashes between the Syrian armed forces and armed
members of the opposition and other armed groups, there were multiple incidents of

14-60580

3/15

S/2014/665

firing from the Bravo side across the ceasefire line and several incidents of fire from
the Alpha side to the Bravo side. On the morning of 2 June, four rockets were fired
from the vicinity of Camp Faouar in a north-northwestern direction. Two vehicles
with mounted multiple-launch rocket systems were seen speeding away from the
firing location. Shortly thereafter, IDF informed UNDOF that they had detected a
threat near Camp Faouar and that IDF would retaliate. UNDOF personnel
immediately took shelter. The first artillery round fired by IDF landed within a
distance of 100 m of Camp Faouar as the shelter alarm was sounded and United
Nations personnel were still rushing to the shelters. Another three rounds landed
within 1 km of the camp. IDF subsequently informed UNDOF that one rocket had
impacted west of the ceasefire line, in proximity to one of its positions. A significant
amount of shrapnel and debris fell into Camp Faouar. There was no injury to United
Nations personnel, but slight damage to United Nations property. The UNDOF
leadership was in immediate contact with both parties to prevent an escalation of the
situation. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate informed UNDOF that the Syrian armed
forces were not involved in the incident and stated that armed elements might have
infiltrated the area overnight to fire against the pro -Government village of Hadar
and instil fear among the population ahead of the presidential elections scheduled
for 3 June. IDF informed UNDOF that it had retaliated because it had assessed that
Israel was being targeted. UNDOF carried out an investigation into the incident,
which showed that the rockets that landed in the area of Hadar and the one that
landed on the Alpha side were of the same calibre and type, and most likely
originated from the same weapon. UNDOF protested to both parties the firing of
rockets across the ceasefire line in violation of the Disengagement Agreement.
UNDOF also expressed grave concern to IDF about the firing close to Camp Faouar,
which placed United Nations personnel in serious danger.
14. On 22 June, United Nations personnel observed an explosion in the vicinity of
observation post 52 that hit a vehicle on the IDF patrol path west of the technical
fence. One Israeli teenager was killed and four other people were wounded. I DF
retaliated with several tank rounds onto Syrian armed forces positions in Quneitra,
in the area of separation, in close proximity to United Nations position 27. IDF
informed UNDOF of the retaliation after the fact and suggested that United Nations
personnel deployed between Ufaniyah in the north and Bir Ajam in the south go into
shelters. United Nations personnel remained in shelters until IDF notified UNDOF
that no further firing would take place that day, but cautioned UNDOF to minimize
movement in the area of separation. Shortly after midnight on 23 June, IDF
conducted an airstrike on nine locations on the Bravo side, dropping several bombs
in the general area of Camp Faouar. United Nations personnel in the camp went into
shelter. The UNDOF investigation into the 22 June firing indicated that a missile
had been fired from the general area east of Ruihinah across the ceasefire line. The
Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that four Syrian armed forces personnel were
killed and nine more were wounded by IDF retaliatory fire. The Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate maintained that the missile that killed the teenager on 22 June was not
fired by the Syrian armed forces. The UNDOF investigation further showed that the
IDF response fire on 23 June came closest to Camp Faouar when it targeted two
Syrian armed forces positions, located approximately 2 km from the camp.
15. On 5 June, IDF informed UNDOF that three mortars were fired on the Bravo
side and landed on the Alpha side following the announcement of the results of the
presidential election. On 15 June, IDF informed UNDOF that a rocket had landed on

4/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

the Alpha side, in the vicinity of Majdal Shams. The UNDOF investigation
confirmed that a rocket had been fired to the Alpha side from the Bravo side. On
7 July, UNDOF heard three explosions in the vicinity of Masada on the Alpha side.
IDF responded with five rounds of fire in the vicinity of Bayt Jinn in the area of
limitation on the Bravo side. On 13 July, unidentified elements fired one rocket
from a position north of Camp Faouar, which landed across the ceasefire line in a
mine field in the vicinity of United Nations outpost 37B. IDF retaliated with five
missiles into the area of limitation on the Bravo side, hitting one Syrian armed
forces position located 3 km south of Camp Faouar. According to the Syrian
authorities, one Syrian armed forces soldier was killed and two others were
wounded. Shortly after the launch of the rocket from the Bravo side, the Senior
Syrian Arab Delegate had informed UNDOF of a rocket having b een fired by armed
elements from north of UNDOF headquarters in the direction of Hadar village. On
14 July, unidentified elements fired two rockets from the same location north of
Camp Faouar, which impacted on the outskirts of El Rom village on the Alpha side.
IDF fired two artillery rounds at a location 2 km east of Camp Faouar in the area of
limitation. IDF had informed UNDOF prior to the retaliatory fire and UNDOF
personnel at Camp Faouar went into shelters. On 20 July, the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate informed UNDOF that a shell had been fired by armed elements towards
the Alpha side. IDF subsequently confirmed that a round had landed approximately
3 km west of Majdal Shams. United Nations personnel on the ground did not
observe the firing. IDF did not retaliate. On 23 July, a tank round landed on the
Alpha side close to United Nations observation post 51, causing damage to the
perimeter fence of the post. On 24 August, unidentified elements fired four rockets
from approximately 4 km north of Camp Faouar in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side, which landed in Ayn Ziwan on the Alpha side and injured one civilian.
On 27 August, one mortar round fired from the Bravo side injured one IDF soldier
2 km from the Alpha line. IDF responded with fire on a Syrian armed forces
position approximately 3 km south of Camp Faouar. In addition, there were
numerous occasions when small arms and anti-aircraft fire exchanged between the
Syrian armed forces and the armed members of the opposition and other armed
groups in the area of Quneitra and Al-Qahtaniyah landed on the Alpha side.
16. During the night of 29 July and early on 30 July, United Nations personnel at
observation post 51 heard rounds passing close by their post and explosions nearby.
UNDOF informed the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate of the firing in the area of
observation post 51 and urged him to relay to Syrian armed forces on the ground to
stop the firing, as fire had landed on the Alpha side and close to the United Nations
observation post. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate confirmed to UNDOF that the
Syrian armed forces had fired artillery as part of ongoing clashes with armed
elements and that all rounds fired by the Syrian armed forces had landed on the
Bravo side. The following morning, one unexploded artillery round was found in
proximity to the ceasefire line and the perimeter of United Nations observation post
51. The unexploded ordnance had penetrated the tarmac of the road leading to the
observation post, where it remained. The round was a 122 mm dual purpose
(anti-armour and anti-personnel) improved conventional ammunition artillery round
of a type usually containing around 30 sub-munitions. The UNDOF investigation
found that, on the basis of the direction and angle of impact of the projectile in the
tarmac, the round was fired from an area that is bounded by Khan Arnabeh in the
south-west, Jaba in the south and Camp Faouar in the north.

14-60580

5/15

S/2014/665

17. Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, was observed
on an almost daily basis by United Nations personnel on the ground. On 29 May and
29 July, IDF fired warning shots towards shepherds who had crossed the ceasefire
line. Throughout the reporting period, UNDOF frequently observed armed members
of the opposition interacting with IDF across the ceasefire line in the vicinity of
United Nations position 85. UNDOF observed armed members of the opposition
transferring 47 wounded persons from the Bravo side across the ceasefire line to
IDF, and IDF on the Alpha side handing over 43 treated individuals to the armed
members of the opposition on the Bravo side.
18. UNDOF protested all firings across the ceasefire line to the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate and IDF. All incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the
ceasefire line, as well as the crossing by individuals of the ceasefire line, are
violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
19. In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed by the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. The Force Commander
maintained regular and close contact with IDF and the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate.
During periods of heightened tensions, as well as during and in the immediate
aftermath of firing incidents across the ceasefire line, the Force Commander was in
ongoing close contact with both parties to the Disengagement Agreement to prevent
an escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. He also engaged closely with
both sides to find mechanisms, including the exchange of information about civilian
activities close to the ceasefire line, that could contribute to preventing future
incidents.
20. Throughout the reporting period, the heavy firing and intermittent armed
clashes between the Syrian armed forces and armed members of the opposition and
other armed groups continued in the UNDOF area of operation. In the northern area
of limitation, shelling and explosions were observed in the areas of Mazra ’at Bayt
Jinn and Bayt Jinn, Mughur al-Mir and Baytima, the intensity of which increased
significantly at the end of August. The local truce arrangement in the areas of
Jabbata, Ufaniyah, Trunje and Khan Arnabah, in the northern and central parts of the
area of separation, generally held despite sporadic firing from Syrian armed forces
positions in the areas surrounding the villages. Fighting remained most intense in
the central and southern parts of the area of separation and in the area of limitation
just east of it. The presence and use of heavy weapons and equipment by the Syrian
armed forces and, to a somewhat lesser degree, by the armed members of the
opposition and other armed groups, continued. The Syrian armed forces carried out
airstrikes, mostly in the southern part of the area of limi tation around the towns of
Nawa and Jaseem, as well as in some areas close to the area of separation, and on
one occasion, on 27 July, in the area of separation in the vicinity of al -Rafid village.
On 25 August, UNDOF personnel observed Syrian armed forces firing at an
unmanned aerial vehicle flying in the vicinity of Jaba in the area of limitation.
21. Early on 31 May, Syrian armed forces launched a counter-attack on
Al-Qahtaniyah village in the area of separation, with heavy tank fire and artillery
shelling from several of their positions. The village had come under the control of
the armed members of the opposition and other armed groups at the beginning of
May. Approximately 100 Syrian armed forces soldiers moved in on the village and
heavy clashes ensued between the soldiers and other armed groups. The first attack

6/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

was combined with a second on the neighbouring village of Al -Samdaniyah. The
armed groups repelled the attacks on both villages. Until the 27 August attack by
armed groups on the Bravo gate and Quneitra, the two sides continued to exchange
fire in the area of Al-Qahtaniyah and Quneitra on a daily basis without significant
changes to the military situation on the ground. On 15 July, Syrian armed forces
again initiated activities in the area of separation when they deployed on and around
Tal al-Kurum and took control of Al-Samdaniyah from the armed members of the
opposition.
22. On 9 and 10 July, armed groups carried out a ground offensive against Syrian
armed forces positions located at Zbedah al-Sharkia, Nab’ as-Sakhr, Kammuniyah
and Majdotiyah, in the area of limitation. Armed groups took control of eight Syrian
armed forces positions. In the period since the initial attack, the Syrian armed forces
have regained control of two of the positions they initially lost, and continue to shell
areas that remain in the hands of the armed opposition and other armed groups. At
the time of the present report, the two sides remain in a standoff of forces. The
armed members of the opposition have enlarged their area of control up to 5 km east
of the Bravo line.
23. Concomitantly with these developments, the incidents of firing close to United
Nations positions increased. On numerous occasions during periods of fighting
between the Syrian armed forces and armed members of the opposition and other
armed groups, rounds landed inside or in close proximity to United Nations
positions, at times forcing United Nations personnel to take shelter. On 15 July, the
Syrian armed forces deployed soldiers with tanks and anti-aircraft weapons on Tal
al-Kurum, a hill in the area of separation in the immediate vicinity of United
Nations observation post 56, in violation of the Disengagement Agreement. The
deployment exposed United Nations personnel at observation post 56 to furthe r risk
of being caught in the crossfire and resulted in frequent incidents of firing close to
and into the observation post. On 22 July, owing to the evolving security situation,
UNDOF soldiers temporarily relieved the unarmed military observers of the
Observer Group Golan at observation post 56. After their deployment on and around
Tal al-Kurum, Syrian armed forces and armed members of the opposition and other
armed groups frequently exchanged fire. Multiple incidents of rounds landing close
to the observation post occurred, and forced UNDOF personnel to take shelter. On
8 August, more than 70 mortar rounds landed on Tal al-Kurum, two of which landed
inside the premises of the United Nations observation post and others immediately
adjacent to the perimeter fence. The rounds damaged a United Nations vehicle and
the windows of the observation post, as well as the gate and the two water tanks;
water pipes were damaged as a result of firing close to the observation post on
17 July.
24. The UNDOF Force Commander repeatedly protested to the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate, urging the Syrian authorities to remove the Syrian armed forces personnel
and their weapons. The Syrian armed forces increased and fortified their presence
on and around Tal al-Kurum with more than 100 troops, earth mounds and
pre-fabricated shelters to house the troops, and deployed two tanks, two anti -aircraft
weapons and three heavy machine guns mounted on vehicles at a distance of 200 to
300 m from the observation post towards the bottom of the hill. UNDOF received
several demands from representatives of the armed groups that Syrian armed forces
leave the position around the observation post; if they failed to do so, the groups
threatened to launch attacks against Syrian armed forces as well as UN DOF at

14-60580

7/15

S/2014/665

position 68 and observation post 56. The armed groups subsequently withdrew their
threat against UNDOF. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate informed the Force
Commander on 19 July that a senior-level Government committee had decided that
the Syrian armed forces would be withdrawn from Tal al-Kurum after some time.
The Syrian authorities informed the Force Commander that the Syrian armed forces
deployment was occasioned by the threat of an attack by armed groups on the towns
of Khan Arnabeh and al-Baath in the central part of the UNDOF area of operation.
At the time of reporting, approximately 150 Syrian armed forces personnel were in
the position at Tal al-Kurum, the majority of them in the immediate vicinity of the
observation post towards the bottom of the hill, while a small number continued to
come close to the top of the hill and the post to observe opposition -held areas.
25. On several occasions, tank and artillery rounds, small arms and machine gun
fire landed close to and inside United Nations positions. On 18 and 25 June, tank
rounds landed close to United Nations position 69, and on 12 July an artillery round
impacted close to the position. On 13 June, a stray bullet hit observation post 52. On
25 June, small arms fire landed inside position 68, causing damage to the water
tank, and on 29 July a stray bullet landed near the position. In the context of the
ongoing fighting between the Syrian armed forces and armed members of the
opposition and other armed groups in the area of Al-Qahtaniyah, United Nations
personnel at observation post 51 frequently observed multiple rounds of machine
gun fire and occasionally anti-aircraft fire landing west of the ceasefire line and on
numerous occasions in close proximity to the observation post. On 31 May,
gunshots hit the observation post, causing slight damage to the building and an
armoured vehicle. On 4 July, two tank rounds landed close to the observation post.
On a few occasions, small arms fire coming from Al-Qahtaniyah was directed at the
observation post, seemingly to deter United Nations personnel from observing the
area. Mortar rounds landed in the vicinity of and one inside position 27 on 31 May.
On 4 June, two stray bullets were discovered in Camp Ziouani, one of which had
penetrated an UNDOF vehicle, causing damage to the windshield and the rear seats.
On several occasions, UNDOF personnel at position 60 observed firing in close
proximity to the position.
26. There were also incidents involving UNDOF patrols. On 5 July, a routine
UNDOF two-vehicle patrol moving from position 80 to position 69 came under fire
shortly before reaching position 69, where it had stopped in order to check one
vehicle. One motorcycle and one pick-up truck approached from the opposite
direction and were about to pass the United Nations patrol when one tank round
landed close to the truck, with shrapnel injuring two UNDOF personnel and
damaging a United Nations truck. The wounded UNDOF personnel immediately
were medically evacuated to the Alpha side and were released from hospital the
following day. UNDOF assessed that the tank round was fired from the area of
Kammuniyah, an area generally dominated by the Syrian armed forces, in the area
of limitation. Owing to the security situation in the vicinity of the incident, UNDOF
could not recover the damaged vehicle. UNDOF observed that the vehicle was
looted following the incident on 5 July, and was taken away by unidentified
individuals during the night of 9-10 July. On 7 July, in the vicinity of Ruihinah
village, in proximity to United Nations position 68, a seven-vehicle UNDOF convoy
was fired upon with anti-aircraft rounds. There were no injuries to United Nations
personnel. One of the United Nations vehicles sustained damage. The convoy was
able to return to position 68. UNDOF assessed the fire to have originated from the

8/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

area of limitation at Zbedah al-Sharkia, an area generally dominated by the Syrian
armed forces. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate denied any Syrian armed forces
involvement in either of the two incidents. In the northern part of the area of
limitation, owing to the presence of armed opposition groups in Bayt Jinn and
Mazra’at Bayt Jinn and increased fighting between Syrian armed forces and armed
members of the opposition, UNDOF continued to re-route its movements to Mount
Hermon positions, doubling the travel time in each direction.
27. Throughout the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained a larger
number of soldiers and increased their heavy equipment inside the area of
separation. They significantly increased their presence, in particular south of the
main road between Quneitra in the west and Kahn Arnabeh in the east, and
continued to maintain checkpoints inside the area of separation, mainly along the
main road. In addition, in some areas Syrian armed forces personnel maintained
checkpoints at the eastern entrances to the area of separation, straddling the Bravo
line, to control and restrict traffic. Armed opposition groups and other armed groups
remained dominant in significant parts of the southern are a of separation,
maintaining checkpoints and restricting movement in some areas. For most of the
reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained up to six tanks in the area of
separation. UNDOF observed one tank controlled by armed groups moving betwe en
the areas of separation and the limitation in the vicinity of Ruihinah, Bir Ajam and
Braika. Shortly before fighting broke out in the Quneitra area at the end of August,
UNDOF observed some 10 tanks under the control of the Syrian armed forces that
were deployed either in the area of separation or in areas immediately adjacent to it.
At the same time, UNDOF observed four tanks in the area between Zbedah
al-Gharbia and Braika under the control of armed opposition elements. Checkpoints
often interfered with the freedom of movement of UNDOF and Observer Group
Golan. Restrictions on the movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan in the
areas of separation and limitation have increased as a result of continuing clashes
between the Syrian armed forces and armed members of the opposition and other
armed groups, disrupting the supply lines to UNDOF positions in the southern part
of the area of separation. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate advised UNDOF that, for
security reasons, all United Nations personnel should avoid areas where clashes
were ongoing and that UNDOF should not carry out movements at night.
28. The restrictions of movement and risk to United Nations personnel, owing to
the placement of improvised explosive devices alongside roads in the area of
separation by armed members of the opposition, remained high. Until the evacuation
of the positions at the end of August, UNDOF continued to observe the presence of
improvised explosive devices and roadblocks in the vicinity of or on access roads to
United Nations positions 27, 60 and 68 and United Nations observation posts 51 and
56 and outpost 32A.
29. UNDOF protested the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in the
area of separation, the firing into and inside the area of separation and the firing
towards United Nations personnel and facilities. The Force Commander reiterated to
the Syrian authorities the obligation of the armed forces to halt military operations
in the area of separation and to cease firing from the area of limitation, stressing the
importance of abiding by the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground. Senior
United Nations officials have conveyed similar messages to the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.

14-60580

9/15

S/2014/665

30. Within this challenging operational environment, and with a view to ensuring
its ability to implement its mandate safely and securely, UNDOF supervised the area
of separation by manning static positions, conducting around-the-clock observation
and conducting patrols along most of the ceasefire line to ensure no breaches of the
ceasefire line occurred. In the northern part of the area of separation, UNDOF
conducted vehicle patrols, as well as foot patrols on routes that are inaccessible to
vehicles. In the southern part of the area of separation, until the events of late
August, UNDOF conducted daily patrols to United Nations outposts 85A and 86B,
with a view to observing developments in areas from which UNDO F temporarily
withdrew its personnel in early 2013. The UNDOF operations continued to be
supported by the Observer Group Golan military observers, whose focus of
activities was shifted from patrolling and inspection to round -the-clock static
observation, investigations and situation analysis. UNDOF, through Observer Group
Golan, continues to establish temporary observation posts in several locations along
the ceasefire line on the Alpha side several times a week, so as to increase the
Force’s situational awareness of the area of separation, in particular in the south,
where United Nations positions and observation posts have been vacated
temporarily owing to the security situation. Through the Observer Group Golan,
UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of equipment and force levels
in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. On several occasions, Observer Group
Golan observed several 155 mm artillery weapons deployed in the 10 km zone.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied Observer Group Golan inspection
teams. Inspections and mobile operations in the area of limitation on the Bravo side
remained suspended because of the security situation. As in the past, the Force faced
restrictions on freedom of movement and its inspection teams were denied access to
some positions on the Alpha side. Observer Group Golan members continued to
experience regular restrictions of movement on the Alpha side when entering and
exiting United Nations observation posts 52 and 73, located to the east of the Israeli
technical fence. IDF further reduced the number of technical fence crossings for the
two observation posts from two to one per day, further limiting the ability of United
Nations personnel to carry out vehicle patrols as well as access by contracto rs to
perform enhancement works at the observation posts.
31. As detailed in paragraph 4, as a result of the fighting that erupted on
27 August, which led to the detention of United Nations personnel and the
confinement of others in two United Nations positions, UNDOF was forced to leave
position 27 and evacuated personnel from positions 60, 68, 69 and 85 as well as
observation posts 52 and 56. UNDOF personnel deployed at the Charlie gate at the
official crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides evacuated their position in the
early morning of 27 August, when fighting had erupted and was coming close to the
area of the gates. Except for observation post 56, around which Syrian armed forces
remain deployed, members of armed groups have been seen entering all vacated
United Nations positions and looting United Nations equipment and personal items.
They also took control of numerous United Nations armoured vehicles. The main
effort continued to focus on static activities, combined with an emphasis enhanced
situational analysis, reporting and liaising with the parties to prevent situations from
escalating. Both parties maintained defensive positions in the respective areas of
limitation. Israeli customs officials continued to operate periodically at the IDF post
at the UNDOF crossing gate between the Israeli-occupied Golan and the Syrian
Arab Republic.

10/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

32. In the vicinity of the ceasefire line in the area of separation, mines continued
to pose a threat to UNDOF personnel and local inhabitants. Owing to the long -term
presence of the mines and the deterioration of their detonation systems, the threat
increases as each year passes. On 16 and 30 July, UNDOF observed an explosion at
a location where a Syrian armed forces bulldozer was carrying out construction
works in the vicinity of observation post 56. On each occasion, the driver was
evacuated.
33. The limitations imposed by the security situation on the Bravo side
notwithstanding, UNDOF continued its efforts to liaise with local authorities and
engage with the local population to explain the mandate and activities of the Force.
This remained important in the light of the security situation in the UNDOF area of
operation and as part of the effort to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground.
34. On 8 July and 14 August, UNDOF, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, facilitated the crossing of 47 students from the Bravo
side to the Alpha side and 33 students from the Alpha side to the Bravo side.
UNDOF continued to provide emergency medical treatment to civilians on a strictly
humanitarian basis. During periods of intensive fighting between the Syrian armed
forces and armed members of the opposition and other armed groups, local
inhabitants of areas under fire fled to safer areas in the area of separation and
limitation. In late May, civilians from villages in the area of limitation that had
come under aerial and artillery attacks fled to two villages in the area of separation
in the vicinity of United Nations position 80. Their numbers increased in early June.
UNDOF observed approximately 70 small and large tents in the area housing
between 200 and 250 individuals. In addition, a total of 34 tents accommodating
170 persons have been set up since late May on the o utskirts of al-Rafid village in
the area of separation south of position 80. While the number of internally displaced
persons in the camps is currently low, UNDOF has learned from persons in the
camps that 15,000 individuals registered their names with the camps.
35. As at 2 September, UNDOF comprised 1,271 troops, including 48 women,
from Fiji (445), the Philippines (344), India (191), Ireland (134), Nepal (155) and
the Netherlands (2). In addition, 81 military observers from the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, including one woman, assisted the Force in
carrying out its tasks.
36. UNDOF continues to adopt and update mitigation measures on the basis of a
comprehensive risk assessment carried out by the Force with the support of the
Secretariat. During the reporting period, the UNDOF made further enhancements to
a number of its vulnerable premises that could be affected by the fighting in the
Syrian conflict. The enhancements included adding hardened watchtowers,
reinforcing buildings against direct and indirect fire and strengthening perimeter
walls and wire fencing. Other mitigation measures, including regular rehearsals of
medical evacuations, shelter alerts and other emergency exercises, improved
perimeter defence of the Force headquarters and all other positions, and the
provision of personal protective equipment to all military and civilian personnel and
the necessary training remain in place. The UNDOF counter-improvised explosive
device equipment was inducted into the Force and has strengt hened the capability of
UNDOF to cope with the threat of improvised explosive devices. However, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic still has not allowed, despite its promises,

14-60580

11/15

S/2014/665

the delivery of the remaining counter-improvised explosive device equipment. The
overall security situation has rendered it necessary for UNDOF to continue to use,
with the cooperation of the relevant authorities, alternative ports of entry and
departure for Force personnel.
37. All regular movements of UNDOF personnel on the Bravo side are controlled
and continue to be carried out in formed convoys using armoured vehicles. Logistics
movements are provided with armed escorts. UNDOF maintains regular armoured
convoy movements between Damascus and Camp Faouar to allow all UNDOF
national staff whose positions are based at UNDOF headquarters to report to work
regularly. A number of national staff whose functions do not necessarily require
their presence in Camp Faouar continue to work from the UNDOF office in
Damascus, leaving only essential international staff to work in Camp Faouar. The
offices of non-essential staff have been relocated to Camp Ziouani, which also
serves as an alternate headquarters of the Force. Between 2 and 4 June, in
accordance with advisories issued by the United Nations Department of Safety and
Security in Damascus, UNDOF froze all movement between Camp Faouar and
Damascus as a precautionary measure to prevent incidents in the context of the
presidential elections. UNDOF also decided to suspend movement during the same
period between the Alpha and Bravo sides. On 3 June, election day, UNDOF placed
its reserves on standby in potentially sensitive locations and suspended all
movements in the area of operations. Since 27 August, owing to the heavy fighting
in the central part of the area of separation, during which control of the Bravo gate
fell into the hands of armed groups, UNDOF has suspended movements on the main
road between Camp Faouar on the Bravo side and Camp Ziouani on the Alpha side.
Further adjustments to the Force’s working arrangements will need to be considered
if safe movement across the Alpha and Bravo gates cannot be re -established.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
38. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2131 (2013) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2014,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution
338 (1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/69/341), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 68/16 on Jerusalem and 68/17 on the Syrian Golan.
39. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

12/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

IV. Observations
40. I note with deep concern the serious violations of the Disengagement
Agreement that have taken place, which resulted, in one instance, in the tragic
deaths of an Israeli teenager and Syrian armed forces soldiers, as well as injuries to
persons on both sides. This is the result of a significant deterioration of the security
situation in the UNDOF area of operation. The firing by Syrian forces across th e
ceasefire line as well as the Israeli responses with artillery fire and airstrikes
jeopardize the maintenance of the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic. It remains critical that both sides work through UNDOF to contain any
incidents that occur along or across the ceasefire line. The mandate of UNDOF
remains an important element in ensuring the stability of the region.
41. I strongly condemn the forced removal of United Nations personnel from their
position and their detention by armed elements, and call for their immediate,
unconditional and safe release. I also condemn the confinement of United Nations
personnel within their premises under threat of physical violence. Any hostile act
against United Nations personnel on the ground, including threatening their physical
safety and restricting their movement, the direct and indirect firing at United
Nations personnel and facilities and the use of United Nations premises, including
those vacated temporarily, by anyone other than United Nations personnel, is
unacceptable.
42. The activities of several armed elements, including the al-Nusra Front, in the
UNDOF area of operation since late August, and the direct confrontations with
United Nations personnel, forced UNDOF to vacate all but one of i ts positions in
the southern area of separation, thereby significantly impacting its ability to carry
out its mandate as agreed between the Governments of Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974.
43. Armed opposition groups and other armed groups have gained control of a
large part of the area of separation, including a section of the main road connecting
the two UNDOF camps and the crossing between the Alpha and the Bravo sides. It
remains critical that countries with influence continue to strongly convey to the
armed groups in the UNDOF area of operation the unacceptability of threatening
and detaining United Nations peacekeepers and the need to cease any actions that
jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground,
including firing at peacekeepers, and to accord United Nations personnel the
freedom to carry out their mandate safely and securely. Threats by any person or
organization against United Nations personnel are unacceptable.
44. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I note the assistance provided by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in facilitating the provision of essential
supplies in support of the Force to ensure that it continues implementing its mandate
safely and securely. It is imperative that respect for the privileges and immunities of
UNDOF and its freedom of movement be ensured.
45. There have been numerous incidents involving United Nations personnel on
the ground. I am also gravely concerned about United Nations positions caught in
crossfire and repeatedly sustaining damage to their infrastructure. The placing of
improvised explosive devices by armed groups, especially close to and on access

14-60580

13/15

S/2014/665

routes to United Nations positions, remains of great concern. It exposes United
Nations peacekeepers on the ground to further risk. The safety and security of
UNDOF personnel and Observer Group Golan military observers must be preserved.
I remain deeply concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and
potential implications for the stability of the region. The ongoing military activities
in the area of separation and incidents across the ceasefire line have led to periods
of heightened tensions between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and increase the
risk to United Nations personnel.
46. Severe and sustained engagements between the Syrian armed forces and armed
members of the opposition and other armed groups in close proximity to United
Nations personnel and positions are very worrying. The use of heavy weapons by
both the Syrian armed forces and armed groups in the continuing Syrian conflict,
including air power by Government forces in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side, remains disturbing.
47. I am also concerned by the firing of a cluster ammunition round, which, had it
exploded and released the sub-munitions, would have indiscriminately endangered
the lives of the civilian population in the area, as well as that of United Nations
peacekeepers, well beyond the instant it was fired. The use of such ammunition is
contrary to the Convention on Cluster Munitions of 2008. There should be no
military forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. I note with
concern the presence and use of tanks by Syrian armed forces and armed groups in
the area of separation. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military
actions throughout the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation. I call on
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to stop the use of airstrikes, which
cause suffering to the civilian population. I reiterate that all military activities in the
area of separation conducted by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the
local civilian population, in addition to the United Nations personnel on the ground.
48. The presence of the Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment
in the area of separation, in addition to the firing from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line, are grave violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. All
incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line by either
party are also grave violations of the Agreement. I stress the importance of all
parties to liaise with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any escalation of the
situation. I call upon all parties to take all necessary measures to protect civilians
and ensure respect for the safety and security of United Nations personnel, in
addition to freedom of movement for UNDOF throughout its area of operation. For
its part, the United Nations will spare no effort in ensuring that the long-held
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
49. In view of the critical developments in the UNDOF area of operations, the
Force immediately took further measures to adjust temporarily its posture and
operations. In accordance with its mandate, UNDOF will continue to use its best
efforts to monitor the ceasefire between Syrian and Israeli forces and see that it is
observed, albeit in increasingly challenging and difficult circumstances. Give n the
rapidly evolving and volatile situation in the UNDOF area of operation, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in consultation with UNDOF, continues to
review the Force’s operational posture, configuration and activities.

14/15

14-60580

S/2014/665

50. The support of the parties and the Security Council is critical as UNDOF
continues to adapt to the evolving situation. It is equally critical that the Council
continue to bring its influence to bear on the parties concerned to ensure that
UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate freely and securely within its area of
operation and to carry out its important mandate. It is essential that UNDOF
continue to have at its disposal all necessary means and resources, particularly in the
light of the volatile security environment. UNDOF also needs to retain the
confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries. I am grateful to the
Governments of Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal, the Netherlands and the Philippines for
their contributions to UNDOF and for staying the course under cha llenging
circumstances. In addition, I am grateful to the Member States contributing military
observers to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization. The continued
credible presence of UNDOF remains an important element in ensuring stability on
the Golan and in the region.
51. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Iqbal Singh Singha, and to the military and
civilian personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perfo rm with
efficiency and commitment, under extremely challenging circumstances, the
important tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. I have full confidence that
UNDOF will continue to use its best efforts to carry out its mandate.

14-60580

15/15
