UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2153rd

MEETING:

22 JUNE

1979

u,/q
E/g’?
hm’.
JUN? ? 1982

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2153)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13394 and S/13397) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2153

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2153rd MEETING
Held in New York on Ftiday, 22 June 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY

vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mona’jo (Congo)
and Mr. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen) took the places reservedfor them at the side’of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian): The
first speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2153)
Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation from
French): The delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin
4.
1. Adoption

of the agenda

is happy to have been invited to participate in this important debate on the question of Western Sahara. We are
grateful to the members of the Council for the opportunity given us to contribute our point of view on this
important matter.

2. Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13394 and S/13397)

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

5. Mr. President, I should like most warmly to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Knowing you personally as a seasoned and honest diplomat, well versed in the question before the Council, I have no doubt whatsoever that there will be a
successful outcome to this debate, which you have been
conducting so objectively and with such a sense of responsibility. Your great and beautiful country, the Soviet
Union, aware of its immense responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace and security, is playing a
primary and positive role on the international scene. The
delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin appreciates
your political, diplomatic and material support for the
cause of the liberation of peoples throughout the world,
and in particular in southern Africa, that important part
of our great, rich and beautiful continent, which is occupied by white colonial racist minorities. The excellence of
the relations between the USSR and Benin is highly
appreciated by our people and the party of the people’s
revolution of Benin.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted.
Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13394 and S/13397)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings, I
invite the representative of Morocco to take a place at the
Council table and the representatives of Algeria, Benin,
Madagascar, Mauritania and Zaire to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. FiIah(Morocco) took
a place at the Council table and Mr. Bouayad-Agha(AIgeria),
Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. Taya (Mauritania) and Mr. Buketi Bukayi (Zaire) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. The question before the Council today is in essence
none other than the crucial question of the self-determination of a frustrated people, the Saharan people, who
in the face of the blind intransigence of the new Moroccan
conquerors have taken up arms and intensified their
attacks against those aggressors who have refused to
listen to reason. Any other interpretations of this objective reality, such as those some people are resorting to in
order to camouflage matters, are nothing but excuses and
a crude method of diverting the attention of the Council
in order to mislead it. They are also a clever way of
_ “...
duping public opinion, not only Moroccan pubhc opin-

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Congo and
Democratic Yemen in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to

1

ion but also international public opinion. This process
uses the same set of conjuring tricks invented by the
imperialist and colonialist Powers, that search for any
subterfuge or other underhanded methods such as the
distortion of facts and the propagation of lies and slander
in order to camouflage the truth. But truth will triumph
in the end.

people and we believe that its determination to fight and
to win, in spite of extremely difficult conditions, deserves
our total support. That is why we have made a thorough
study of the Saharan people, its organizations, its armed
struggle, the difficulties of the terrain and the conditions’
of the struggle imposed upon it precisely by those, including Morocco, that have invaded its territory and dismembered it like game captured in the hunt after the shameful
Madrid agreement of 1975. Benin has discovered in the
course of its numerous contacts with POLISARIO and its
leaders-contacts
in the Sahara itself-the difficulties
involved in the fight and the tremendous magnitude of
the tasks as well as the importance of the successeswon
by POLISARIO
in its struggle against foreign domination and military occupation by Morocco.

7. What in fact is the issue here? Since 1975, it has been
the struggle for survival of a whole people, the selfdetermination, the freedom and the political independence to which every people has a sovereign right within
the framework laid down by international law, the very
foundation of which is constituted by the Charter of the
United Nations.
8. The case presented by Morocco with regard to the
so-called aggression on the part of Algeria is a very feeble
one. The contradictions it contains and its objectives
cannot possibly be hidden from anyone. Morocco, the
new conqueror of Africa, is using the same stratagems as
the imperialist Powers and the minority racist and colonialist regimes of southern Africa. Those methods consist
in refusing to recognize the right of people to selfdetermination, in disregarding national liberation movements and in lumping them together with vulgar
everyday terrorists, the dregs of certain decadent societies. That is why those regimes have been resorting to
sophisticated military methods and have developed a
thesis known as the right of pursuit, which permits them
to commit aggression against neighbouring countries or
any country which supports national liberation movements. Morocco’s objective, in this case it is now staging,
is to find excuses to justify and legitimize an act of aggression that will shortly take place against Algeria, which,
ever since its independence, won by force of arms, has
been supporting all the national liberation movements,
including the POLISARIO
Front.

11. As the Latin proverb goes, it is human to err but it is
diabolical to persist in error. The fact that Morocco is so
obstinately opposing the national aspirations of such a
determined people and the fact that it is persisting in past
errors naturally creates tension and an explosive situation in that part of Africa. Morocco at present is alone
responsible for this situation and it must be ready to bear
the consequences.
12. What should the Council do? For our part, after
having heard those qualified to speak on this question, we
feel that the Council should know where it stands. But we
do think that the Council, which bears responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should tell Morocco that the peace and the security it is
seeking must be brought about by the cessation of the
military occupation of Western Sahara and of acts of
aggression against that people and by the creation of the
necessary conditions to permit the full development of
the Saharan people.
13. But if Morocco persists in disregarding the inalienable rights of the Saharan people, it is obvious that there
will be no tranquillity, no peace and no security for
Morocco and that the Saharans will continue to strike
staggering blows against Morocco until they have completely achieved all their national aspirations. The victory
of the Saharans is certain.

9. My country, the People’s Republic of Benin, which
from the very beginning has believed the national inalienable rights of the Saharan people to be well-founded and
which will always support that people until final victory,
has been the indirect victim of aggression at the hands of
the Kingdom of Morocco, which offered training facilities and facilities for officers at Benguerir as well as
supplying some of the arms for the mercenaries led by
Bob Denard who savagely attacked the People’s Republic of Benin on Sunday, 16 January 1977. The United
States magazine Esquire published an article by John
Bradshaw, on 27 March 1979, on the background of the
criminal career of the international
mercenary Bob
Denard, and brought out the important role played by
Morocco in that affair.

14. My delegation would like to present its condolences
to the representative of POLISARIO
to the United
Nations, who lost his brother in recent engagements.
15. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

10. The people of Benin are perfectly aware of the fact
that by that shameful crime against their national independence Morocco intended to punish Benin for its
unswerving support of POLISARIO
and the Saharan
Democratic Arab Republic. But far from being intimidated, we have ever since that time seriously intensified
and developed our militant co-operation in all areas with
the valiant Saharan people. We in Benin, jealous of our
national independence, feel closely bound to that

17. Mr. RABETAFXKA
(Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, the consistently cordial relations between our two peoples and Governments, in the
most varied fields, certainly authorize me today to tell
you how satisfied my delegation is to see you presiding
over the Security Council. We extend to you our heartfelt
congratulations. We have long been aware of your eminent qualities and .of your acute awareness that you
2

been the victim, with particular reference to the operations that have taken‘piace since 31 May 1979.

represent a State whose role in the maintenance of international peace and security as well as in thepromotion of
justice and social progress is decisive. You will therefore
understand the trust we place in you at a time when we are
discussing a question which concerns Africa as a whole
and which affects the future of the oppressed Saharan
people and of peace in a region of Africa with which we
have so many ties of affection, not to mention all our
other ties.

22. If there had in fact been aggression against Morocco’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, we would have
been the first to rise up against such acts. But the international community is fully aware of what is happening in
the region to which Morocco belongs. The information
media of all countries have been reporting in great detail
the development of the acts of war which, regrettably,
are taking place in that region; no one could challenge the
fact that there are confrontations between the POLISARIO
Front and other forces.

18. The question now before the Council has todo with
those groups of problems where the opposing interests
are so clear cut that they obviously give rise to passions
on all sides, although not to the point where things are
allowed to get out of hand or to become exacerbated. My
delegation would be the last to seek to poison the atmosphere in which the present initiative of the Moroccan
Government has been taken. In our statement we should
like, first of all, to try to place in the correct perspective
the various elements submitted to the Council for its’
examination. Indeed, we think that the comfort of silence
and abstention is not fitting when there are at stake
principles which it seems to us essential to respect in the
quest for a solution to an African problem that is so
important to us. We would be very happy if our contribution to the discussion could help the Council to decide on
its responsibilities, to take its decisions in full knowledge
of the facts and not in the dim light of partial facts.

23. The facts show that what has happened in the
Sahara and in Morocco since the occupation, including
the military operations since 31 May 1979, cannot be
peremptorily assimilated to a simple act of aggression.
We think that, on the contrary, these are “privileged
operations**, explicitly excluded by article 7 of the Definition of Aggression, contained in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). That article lays down the following:
“Nothing in this Definition, and in particular article3, could in any way prejudice the right to selfdetermination, freedom and independence, as derived
from the Charter, of peoples forcibly deprived of that
right . . . , particularly peoples under colonial and racist
regimes or other forms of alien domination; nor the
right of these peoples to struggle to that end and to seek
and receive support, in accordance with the principles
of the Charter and in conformity with the.. . Declaration [on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States].”

19. Peace and security in the north-western part of
Africa cannot be maintained or respected if we do not try
to find a comprehensive solution to the question of Western Sahara, a solution requiring the simultaneous, objective consideration of all the facts. In other words, any
partial debate, taking into account only selective-and
therefore arbitrary-aspects of the problem can lead only
to partial, unbalanced solutions. That, it must be recognized, would be intolerable in a situation where the most
promising solutions have often been rejected and where
procrastination, subterfuge and wiles of all kinds have
already done too much harm to many interests, and
particularly those of the Saharan people.

24. We maintain that instead of censuring the operations and struggle of the POLISARIO Front, States have
the duty to support them, and the contribution to that
end of several countries, including Algeria, is all the more
laudable.
25. In the light of what I have just stated, what can be
said of this idea of self-defence, which also occupies an
important place in the letter from the representative of
Morocco? To our mind, when the operations of the
POLISARIO
Front cannot be legally assimilated to an
act of aggression, and when the idea of aggression is
neither well founded nor justified, the claim of exercising
the right of self-defence cannot be defended.

20. Submitting to the Security Council a request that is
limited to a specific place and time requires, we feel, a
certain dose of cynicism, knowing full well that the Council is aware of all the ins and outs of the question of
Western Sahara, since it discussed that question three
times in 1975, on the occasion of the famous “Green
March” ordered by the Government of Morocco. It is an
approach which also seems to us unacceptable since the
Saharan people has not entirely regained its rights to
freedom and independence nor wiped from its national
territory the traces and consequences of the occupation
and dismemberment perpetrated by the successors of
Spanish colonialism.

26. If, in these circumstances, this right is still invoked
against POLISARIO,
do not those who do so become
aggressors themselves? In that respect, it seems to us
particularly timely to point out that Article 51 of the
Charter gives the Security Council the right of control
over the exercise of the right of selfdefence, which some
are perhaps tempted to invoke improperly.

21. It will surprise no one if I say at this stage that our
approach is entirely different from-in fact, it is opposed
to-the intellectual initiative expressed in the letter dated
13 June 1979 from the representative of Morocco, containedin document S/l 3394. That letter stressesso-called
acts of aggression of which Morocco complains it has

27. The same line of reasoning should be applied, we
think, to the right of pursuit, that means which other
oppressive and colonialist regimes have misused and still
misuse in order to stifle the aspirations of peoples who are
fighting for their freedom and to hamper the momentum
of solidarity.
3

28. Present international practice, which recognizes
the legitimacy of the struggle of liberation movements
and their right to use all means at their disposal to ensure
the triumph of their just cause cannot be reconciled with
the recourse to that idea. While in international instruments, which represent a universal consensus, we recommend that each member of the international community
should assist national liberation movements, how can we
tolerate and even less give the stamp of legitimacy to that
idea of the right of pursuit, which implies the denial of
that assistance and the desecration of State borders and
contains the seed of further inter&ate conflicts?

to States and to peoples in the region the security to which
they are also entitled. In proceedingto military uccupation and the annexation and dismemberment of Western
Sahara, has Morocco not flouted the security of the
Saharan people? Can they deny the fact that it is precisely
those actions and their consequences which have imgerilled peace and security in the region?
33. The trouble that was taken not to mention the
POLISARIO
Front likewise deserves comment. The
shady actions of Morocco since the “Green March” and
the annexation have compelled POLISARIO
to organize
politically and militarily at the nationai level. ‘It has
become a force which the Moroccan Government cannot
come to terms with, but there is no point in seeking to
deny their keenness in the struggle and even less the fact
that they do exist, by using derogatory terms like “armed
bands’* or “mercenaries”. Those whom Morocco describes in this way in order to deny to them any international hearing have by others been recognized either as
a legitimate government or as a national liberation movement worthy of being assisted in the best possible way. In
fact, the insinuation that these “armed bands” are only
supported by Algeria, is only an cldhocargument which is
disproved by the existence throughout the world of a
network of support for the struggle of POLISARIO.

29. When it is called upon to take a decision on the three
points mentioned by the Moroccan Government, that is
to say, the so-called acts of aggression, the exercise of
legitimate self-defence and the right of pursuit, the Security Council must, we feel, take all the necessary precautions and avoid being led into denying to the Saharan
people, what has been granted to others, that is to say,
justice, peace, freedom and independence.
30. Further comments should be made on the
Moroccan document issued under the symbol S/.13394,
in which responsibility for the military operations that the
POLISARIO
Front conducted to defend its just
cause is wrongly attributed to Algeria. The reason for
that, we suspect, is that POLISARIO
cannot be accused,
in fact or in law, of acts of aggression and the only
possible trick that can be used to give foundation to the
Moroccan allegations is to implicate Algeria.

34. Neither document S/13394 nor the statement made
by the Moroccan delegation referred to resolution
1514(XV) which contains the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The decolonization of Western Sahara is at the very heart
of our debate and it is above all within the context of that
Declaration that we must place our disctissions.

31. In the same way, they try to present the problem of
the Sahara as a bilateral matter confined to “a specific
place and time” concerning only two countries, Morocco
and Algeria. But there are other parties concerned in the
dispute, not the least of which are the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and the Group of NonAligned Countries, which still maintain that the principles elaborated in regard to decolonization should be
applied to the Saharan people. We fear that those who
have fought tooth and nail to reduce this problem to a
bilateral one simply wish to deny the existence of
POLISARIO
and the Saharan people from which that
movement sprang and that is tantamount to rejecting
all the resolutions on Western Sahara which POLISARIO
has recognized. The international community could not
commit itself to the same path which would surely lead to
the’collapse of any edifice that serves as the basis of all the
initiatives taken since 1966 and renewed in 1975 to try
to resolve the question of Western Sahara.

35. But such is the determination of the Moroccan
delegation that we are ourselves compelled to recall those
unanimously accepted principles, which are applicable to
the situation in Western Sahara and which they deliberately omitted to.mention. Those principles are the following: abstention from any military or repressive action
which would hamper the accession to independence of
colonial peoples; the non-use of force to deprive peoples
of their national identity; the unacceptability of the subjection of peoples to subjugation, domination and foreign exploitation;
the legitimacy of the struggle of
liberation movements and their right to use all means at
their disposal to achieve independence; the right of
liberation movements to seek and to receive assistance
and support in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter, the inviolability of the integrity of
colonial territories; the non-use of force to acquire territory; the duty of States to assist liberation movements
with a view to bringing about the speedy elimination of
colonialism.

32. His Excellency the Minister of State of the Kingdom
of Morocco has spoken before the Council [2ZSlst meeting’] of the concerns of his Government about the preservation of the security of his country and the safeguarding
of peace and security in the region. There is nothing more
legitimate and more understandable than that. But it is
not enough to show restraint in this difficult affair where
countries of the region are at odds. We must think about
respecting international norms and rules. It is in the light
of those rules that the Moroccan Government could
perhaps re-examine its policy as well as its concerns, since
the latter should in no way provide a pretext for denying

36. Those principles, as I have already recalled, are
enshrined in all the solemn declarations of the United
Nations that the Moroccan delegation.referred to in its
statement. They form a whole, for it-is a fact that decolonization, international security and friendly relations
between States cannot be arbitrarily dissociated the one
from the other.
4

37. In our statement we have not sought to deny that a
conflict exists. We have only striven to prove, on the basis
of well-known facts, that the respective roles of the parties to the dispute are different from those that Morocco
is trying to demonstrate. It is clear, as far as we are
concerned, which party is the aggressor and which is the
victim. We know which is abusing its rights and which is
demanding its due. We know which is fulfilling international obligations and which is violating the principles which are the subject of universal consensus concerning decolonization,
the prohibition
on occupying a
foreign territory by force and the ‘ban on infringing the
integrity of a colonial Territory.
38. We have recalled a number of principles which
should enable the Council to decide on responsibilities
here and to help the parties discharge their obligations
concerning, on the one hand, the need to ensure for the
Saharan people the exercise of their inalienable rights to
liberty and independence and, on the other, the need to
restore peace to the region.
39. At the present stage, the obligations of the Council
cannot be limited solely to Articles 34 and 35 of the
Charter, which the Moroccan Government chose as the
framework for its statement. It must go further on the
way to finally resolving the problem by requiring immediate cessation of the illegal occupation of Western
Sahara. It is in duty bound to restore the rights of the
Saharan people, to put an end to the injustice and oppression imposed on it, to state that that people has fallen
victim to an act of aggression and to condemn the authors
of that aggression.
40. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Madagascar for his kind
words about the friendly relations existing between his
country and my own.
41. The next speaker is Mr. Madjid Abdallah, to whom
the Council extended an invitation at its 2151st meeting
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
42. Mr. ABDALLAH
(interpretation from French):
First of all, Mr. President, I wouid request you to be good
enough to convey the thanks of the POLISARIO
Front
and of the Government of the Saharan Democratic Arab
Republic to the members of the Security Council for
having taken the historic and most legitimate decision
to invite me, in my capacity as representative of the
POLISARIO
Front, to address the Council.
43. The participation of a delegation from POLISARIO,
the sole and legitimate representative of the Saharan
people, demonstrates, if demonstration were needed, the
fidelity of the Security Council to’the unswerving policy
followed by the United Nations to bring to a successful
end the process, of decolonization in the Western Sahara,
in accordance with the desire of its people for independence. The participation of a delegation of my ‘Govemment in these meetings is of particular interest and
significance at this stage of our people’s struggle to

recover its total independence. The aggressors must learn
a lesson from this: that the international community
rejects and condemns any attempts at creating faits
accomplis. This decision of the Council serves to strengthen the positions so often reaffirmed by the General
Assembly, the International Court of Justice, the Committe of 24,’ the Organization of African Unity and the
non-aligned movement. In spite of the aggressors’
manoeuvres so far and its lies and attempted distortions
of the actual fundamental facts of decolonization, the
international community intends to shoulder its responsibilities. with regard to the injustices and genocidal
crimes deliberately perpetrated by the aggressors against
our people.
44. Cur people, which has great hopes of the international community’s putting an end to the crimes from
which it has been suffering, finds in the Council’s decision
not only grounds for pride but also encouragement for
peoples struggling to recover their sacred right to independence; for it is true that the struggle of the Saharan
people against the criminal aggression of Morocco and
Mauritania is objectively and historically identifiable
with the common struggles of other peoples of Africa and
throughout the world to regain their independence and to
defend their dignity.
45. The question of Western Sahara is clear; it is at a
stage which gives rise to no possible ambiguity. Morocco
and its accomplices have embarked on a colonial expedition against the Saharan people, which is waging a liberation struggle in legitimate self-defence against foreign
occupation. The question of Western Sahara is thus
exclusively one of decolonization and, as such, it comes
under resolution 1514 (XV), Article 73 of thecharter and
the provisions ‘of the Charter of the Organization of
African Unity relating to the right of peoples to selfdetermination and to respect for frontiers inherited from
the colonial period. It is on that understanding that the
United Nations has been dealing with this question,
entrusting it to the General Assembly and the Committee
of 24. It is also because of its character as a question of
decolonization that the non-aligned movement and the
Organization of African Unity have been dealing with the
grave situation.in Western Sahara. There is no need to
recall in this cotinexion that a just and genuine process of
decolonizing Western,Sahara is the major concern of the
General Assembly, one to which it has devoted resolutions with which the Council is familiar. The General
Assembly wants the issue to be taken up by the United
Nations in the proper framework. It is for this reason that
this question falls within the competence not only of the
Assembly but of the Fourth Committee and the Committee of 24. This responsibility stems from the nature of the
question as one of decolonization. But in the face of our
people’s determination to pursue its struggle until total
independence and of the inability of the criminal Moroccan army of 40,009 men, the Rabat Government has been
resorting to the classic stratagem of all colonialists
accused by struggling peoples, that of twisting the truth.
In this regard, the request it addressed to the Security
’ Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the DecIaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial
Countries
and Peoples.

Council in an attempt to remove the question of the
decolonization of Western Sahara from the United
Nations bodies entrusted with decolonizafion is equalled
only by the cowardly and ill-founded accusations made
against certain countries in the region.

.’

46. The decision of the criminal Rabat regime to put the
matter before the Security Council is doubly grave and
inadmissible, because the King of Morocco, having failed
to impose a fait accompli in the field through military
violence, is now seeking the santion ofthe Council for his
intransigence and for his genocidal action committed
against a small African people, as well as for his refusal to
permit any just and lasting political solution to the
problem.
47. Is there any need to recall the dynamic peace process begun hardly a year ago between two parties to the
conflict following the cease-fire decreed by the POLISARIO
Front in Mauritania? Instead of participating in and
encouraging the thaw in the situation engendered by that
peace process, Morocco has chosen a policy of intransigence in its criminal course of occupation and expansionism, whereas the POLISARIO Front has declared that on
the basis of the peace process Morocco must rejoin the
other two parties-POLISARIO
and Mauritania-in
discussing together a political solution.
48. The Moroccan aggressors today tell ‘us that the
situation is serious. Yes, it is very serious, and we must
ask ourselves who is responsible for it. Whereas the process of decolonization in Western Sahara was clearly
outlined by the international community as a whole,
Morocco and its accomplices have assumed a very heavy
responsibility by invading the Territory of Western
Sahara, occupying it, dividing it up and oppressing its
people, thus compelling the latter to take flight and go
into exile. This shows what the real aggression consists in
and who are the true aggressors. This aggression is
directed not only against the people of Western Sahara
but also against the international community, whose
principles and decisions are being flouted.

history of colonialists and expansionists, to conceal by a
policy of rushing wildly into the fray the fundamental
nature of a problem which is none other than a question
of decolonization.
52. Since 1966 the General Assembly has been constantly dealing with this distressing problem and affirming the inalienable right of the Saharan people to
self-determination
and independence. These rights,,
attained thanks to ceaseless struggling on all continents,
are part of the most precious acquisitions of the common
heritage‘ of nations. Such rights have been definitively
e1aborafe.d and find their most authentic expression in
resblution 1514 (XV), which lays down that: “All peoples
have rhe right to self-determination”.
From 1966 to 1978
* the Assembly has been adopting resolutions in which it
has steadfastly reaffirmed the right of the people of-western Sahara to selfdetermination
and independence.
Thus, in 1966, it reaffirmed the inalienable right of the
people of Western Sahara to self-determination and independence and called upon the administering Power to
guide the Territory towards independence in accordance.
with Article 73 of the Charter. This resoiution-resolution 2229 (XXI)-subsequently
served as a model for a
series of other resolutions, identical in substance and
which, up to resolution 33/31 of 13 December 1978, have
each time reiterated in ever more vigorous terms the need
for the total liberation of Western Sahara through the
exercise by our people of its right to self-determination
and independence and established that the POLISARIO
Front is the sole and legitimate representative of the
Saharan people.
53. It is within the United Nations itself that the Moroccan aggressors entered into the most solemn commitments to respect the right to selfdetermination
and
independence of the Saharan people. I would venture to
mention here some of the statements made by representatives of His Majesty the King of Morocco. Speaking on
8 November 1965 in the Fourth Committee, the representative of Morocco stated:
“‘the only course to follow is that of permitting the
people to participate freely, without any foreign domination, in the management of their own affairs”.2

49. After more than three long years of veritably murderous warfare imposed on the Saharan people by the
aggressive troops of Morocco and Mauritania, the Moroccan Government now recalls for us deeds of war and
mentions forces which it still refuses to name but which it
knows and which are the true and valiant lighters of the
POLISARIO
Front.
50. There is a reality, therefore, which in the final anaiysis the aggressors must accept, and recent events have
shown us that peace, security and stability are unattainable in the region as long as the intolerable denial of justice
of which our people is the victim continues. To refuse,
then, to look this reality in the face is to acquiesce in the
deliberate flouting by Morocco and its accomplices of
one of the most valuable principles of the United Nations,
to allow the role of the United Nations to be held Up to
ridicule and also to assume the responsibility for all those
who will die.

On 7 November 1966, he stated before the Committee of
24 that
“since June 1966, Morocco has urged that the people
of the Territory should be allowed to exercise their
right to’independence and selfdetermination”.3
On 24 November 1972, in the Fourth Committee, he
stated again:
“Morocco wants to come to the United Nations to
discuss in good faith the question of self-determination
under the control of the United Nations.“’
Those are solemn commitments made by Morocco before
the international community, and no political manceuvre
can possibly free Morocco from them.
a Oflciat Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Fourth
Commirree. 1550th meeting, para.19.
’ Ibid., Twenty-first Session. Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23,
chap. X, para. 205.
4 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Fourth Committee, 2004th meeting.,
para. 17.

51. The situation remains explosive and serious and
Morocco, which in spite of the disproportionate strength
of the forces it can muster is incapable of overcoming our
fighters, is attempting, as has often been done in the
6

54. The truth is that the Rabat regime has chosen its
present criminal course with the aim of introducing a
precedent extremely dangerous for the credibility of the
United Nations and for the confidence and the hope
which the struggling peoples place in it.‘This precedent,
which is marked by the attempt to hinder a normal
process of decolonization in a clearly defined Territory, is
all the more serious because it is being created at a time
when other peoples in other parts of the world are facing
similar aggression and colonial manoeuvres. Indeed, if the
Organization does not shoulder its responsibilities in
order to put an end to the criminal undertaking being
perpetrated against the Saharan people in disregard of
their sacred, inalienable right, the political solutions
defined by the United Nations will seem ridiculous and,
what is even more serious, serve as a screen for such
attempts.
55. In invading the Territory of Western Sahara, the
Government of Morocco has issued the gravest possible
challenge to the international community. This invasion
was carried out first of all under the cover of the so-called
criminal “Green March”, which was in fact nothing but a
thinly disguised military invasion. On 31 October 1975,
the Royal Moroccan Army went directly into action in
the Territory of Western Sahara. By continuing its invasion, Morocco once again defied the international community and the Security Council. The Council will recall
that it considered this matter and urged the King of
Morocco to call off the invasion of the Territory of
Western Sahara.
56. The criminal and barbarous action perpetrated by
Morocco occurred at a time when the reports of the 1975
United Nations Visiting Mission and the advisory opinion6 of the International Court of Justice had revealed
the vanity of the Moroccan claims.
The Court concluded, in paragraph 162 of its advisory
opinion:
“On the other hand, the Court’s conclusion is that
the materials and information presented to it do not
establish any tie of territorial sovereignty between the
Territory of Western Sahara and the Kingdom of
Morocco or the Mauritanian entity. Thus the Court
has not found legal ties of such a nature as might affect
the application of resolution 15 14 (XV) in the decolonization of Western Sahara and, in particular, of the
principle of self-determination through the free and
genuine expression of the will of the peoples of the
Territory.”
57. The Court left no room either for ambiguity or
misinterpretations, and the arguments which Morocco in
cowardly fashion is trying to foist on public opinion are
vain and futile. Furthermore, the United Nations Visiting
Mission under the chairmanship of Ambassador Simton
AkC, now Foreign Minister of the Ivory Coast, after
having examined on the spot all the information and facts
of the situation in Western Sahara, made a clear and
circumstantial report in which it noted that the unani‘Ibid.,
Thirtieth
Session, Supplement
No. 23, vol. III, chap. XIII,
annex.
6 Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion. I.C.J. Reports 1975. p, 12.

mous will of the Saharan people was for independence
and that the POLISARIO Front was the dominant political force in Western Sahara.
58. Morocco, seeing its arguments rebuffed one by one,
thought it would at least benefit from using force, that is,
from the possibility of gaining a rapid victory and presenting the world with a fait accompli. That military
adventure in Western Sahara, like any lost cause, needed
to deck itself out with the appearance of international
legitimacy.
59. The so-called Madrid
agreement, on which
Morocco relies to legitimize its military adventure in
Western Sahara, lapsed first in the Territory because of
the very inability of the aggressive troops to occupy
Western Sahara and the determination of the Saharan
people to free their country, and then by reason of the
change of attitude of two of its signatories, Spain and
Mauritania.
60. Morocco has committed too many crimes against a
small people which aspires only to peace in freedom and
dignity. The first of those crimes-which would give rise
to others-was its attempt to erase from the face of the
earth a people and their land by dividing it up and annexing it by force. Then there was the whole procession of
horrors of foreign occupation of the most inhumane
kind: genocide, brutal repression, reprisals against the
civilian population, blind napalm bombing, mass executions, concentration camps and so on. From the testimony given by many reporters of the international press
and many international humanitarian organizations, I
shall recall here for example, that of Mr. Denis Payot,
Secretary-General of the International
Federation of
Human Rights, who said:
*‘Morocco and Mauritania, by penetrating the Territory of Spanish Sahara contrary to all the resolutions
of the United Nations, have violated one of the fundamental principles of the rights of man, that of the
self-determination of peoples.. ., the rights of man and
the rights of peoples, inasmuch as the rights of peoples
‘are only the collective expression of the rights of man.
“But there is more. That invasion was accompanied
by innumerable sufferings inflicted upon persons of all
ages and in all conditions. The Commission found
overwhelming proof regarding the situation of the Saharan people. Hundreds of photographs taken on the
spot and testimony gathered there leave no room for
doubt. From their very arrival, the soldiers of those
two occupying’ Powers slaughtered hundreds, even
thousands of Saharan citizens who refused to swear
allegiance. Some saw their own children slaughtered
before their eyes as a.:way of intimidating
them. It
would appear that there was not a single Saharan
refugee or temporarily displaced person who had not
seen or known suffering inflicted upon his own family
by one of those soldiers, not to mention the bombings
by the air force of refugee camps of totally defenceless
people at Amgala, Tifariti and Guelta.”
61. The attempt to liquidate with napalm the 2,500
inhabitants of Oum Dreiga, almost exclusively women

Republic and maintain diplomatic relations with it, while
about 100 countries recognize the POLISARIO,Front
as
the sole and legitimate representative of the Saharan
people.

and children, was an example of Morocco’s horrid determination to annihilate a whole people, since it could not
force it to its knees.
”
62. Morocco and its accomplices have used and abused
the good faith of the international community for four
years, denying not only the gravity of the war but also its
very existence. It is a story familiar to the Council, told by
the Moroccan Government and the Government of
Moktar Ould Daddah, which used to claim in intemational forums that there was no war.

68. The Saharan people’s army, reflecting the dignity of
our people and fighting with dignity strengthened by the
justice of its cause, is capable of imposing respect for our
national independence and territorial integrity. I should
also like to stress that every day it is winning from the
enemy tons of sophisticated equipment of every calibre.
In other words, Morocco is our best arms supplier.

63. But the magnitude of this war of liberation which is
growing every day and the resistance of our people show
that Morocco has embarked upon a criminal venture,
plunging a whole region into a colonial war. However, as
in all other colonial wars, the military expeditions to
Western Sahara will meet with the same fate and end by
consuming the aggressors themselves.

69: The POLISARIO
Front, aware of its responsibility
in the region, ever since the Mauritanian Government
expressed its willingness to respect the inalienable rights
of our people has decreed a temporary unilateral ceasefire in Mauritania. The situation has thus been thawed
and a momentum towards peace engendered. .Better conditions have been created to promote the bringing about
of a just and lasting political settlement of the question of
the decolonization of Western Sahara. Initiatives have
been taken in order to consolidate this momentum
towards peace. On the strength of these tactics of Chahid
El-Ouali Mustapha Sayed, the Saharan people’s liberation army is attacking in legitimate self-defence the rear
bases and strongpoints’ of the enemy without which
Morocco cannot possibly maintain its military posts in
occupied areas of the Saharan Democratic Arab
Republic:

64. Hassan II bears total responsibility for this war of
aggression against the Saharan people which is also ruining Morocco despite all its military and economic potential. All its forces are committed to the war without,
however, being able to attain the ignoble goal of colonizing the Sahara. The request of the King of Morocco for a
meeting of the Security Council is part and parcel of his
attempts to distract Moroccan public opinion from the
tragic war.
65. The annexation of Western Sahara has caused tremendous “blood-letting*’
in the Moroccan economy.
More than 40,000 soldiers are committed against the
POLISARIO
Front, as acknowledged in The New York
Times of 1 May last. It was reported in that issue that
forces from POLISARIO
were enjoying total freedom of
movement and the initiative in the field.

70. The repeated defeats suffered by the Moroccan
army at Khnefis, Assa, Tantan, Zag, Foum Lahcen, Leinseid, .Abbatih and Tifariti demonstrate the military weakness of the Moroccan expansionist and colonialist
regime in the face of the unshakable determination of our
army to continue its ‘heroic struggle in legitimate selfdefence until it brings about the total liberation of our
country.

66. While the Saharan people are consolidating their resistance and strengthening their national institutions, the
enemies are digging their own graves and getting bogged
down in this unjust war. Today our people, organized under
the sole legitimate leadership of the POLISARIO
Front,
have liberated most of their homeland over which they
exercise sovereign control. The people’s liberation army of
the Sahara has retained the initiative in the combat zone.

71. The Saharan Democratic Arab Republic is already
administering more than two thirds of the Territory. In
the course of just the first few weeks of 1979, a series of
important towns and strategic’positions, such as Tifariti,
Amgala and Jderia, were liberated by our army and many
visitors have had an opportunity to go there, including,
recently, an important delegation of Spanish members of
parliament.

67. We are sure, for our part, that the proliferation of
plots and criminal enterprises and the Moroccan Government’s recourse to the policy of escape by desperately
plunging into the fray against our people will only serve
to strengthen the latter’s national unity and its determination to win back its sovereignty and to strengthen the
international solidarity that it enjoys. This international
solidarity, which<is becoming more and more active and
is growing every day, has been reflected in the strengthening and expansion of political and diplomatic relations
between the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic and
other States and political organizations in the world. We
wish to greet here the friendly countries and organizations which, at this time of grave ordeal for our people,
have recognized the POLISARIO
Front and the Saharan
Democratic Arab Republic. We would also recall here
that 23 States recognize the Saharan Democratic Arab

I

72. ~Faced with these reneated failures. the Government
of Morocco is forced to resort to a policy aimed at hiding
from its own and international public opinion the actual
facts of its defeats in the field. I
I
73. The current Moroccan manceuvrings are aimed at
imputing to an outside country the failure of its policy of
invasion and annexation, and should not be allowed to
make us forget the facts of the question of thedecolonization of Western Sahara, concerning which process the
General Assembly is quite rightly continuing its
deliberations.
74. I should like to repeat here before members of the
Council the ‘fact that the POLISARIO
Front is
8

entirely ready to have a meeting with Morocco and Mauritania in an attempt to find a political solution; but what
is the chance of this appeal being successful in the face of
Morocco’s intransigence and obstinate determination, at
whatever cost, to plunge the region into war? Our readiness is matched only by the determination of our peple to
continue its struggle of legitimate self-defence as long as
Morocco continues to persist in its aggression and occupation. No one would expect that the Saharan people
could remain passive in the face of genocide and the
attempted occupation of their country. Morocco, in its
aggression, leaves us no choice. As long as Moroccan
troops occupy a single inch of our territory, our struggle
will go on and our people will fight the enemy wherever
he can be found.

will certainly tackle the problem of Western Sahara,
which is the-central issue-in this conflict. The Security
Council is certainly aware of the numerops resolutions
calling for the exercise of the Saharan people’s inalienable right to self-determination. To present the issueas a
conflict between Algeria and Morocco is to ignore the
most essentialelement in this regional polarization. For
how can Algeria be accountable for incidents that took
place 400 kilometres from its frontier, incidents apparently causedby the daily confrontation betweenthe Moroccan army and the POLISARIO forces?
81. My delegation, upholding the right of peoples to
self-determination in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514(XV), has consistently supported the
right of the Saharan people to self-determination. Furthermore, my Government has recognized POLISARIO
asa genuine national liberation movement, and the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic asan independent sovereign State. It is our earnest hope that the Moroccan
Government will do likewise, thus averting bloodshed
among brothers and containing this unnecessaryregional
confrontation between Arab States whose stability,
prosperity and well-being are so intertwined and whose
common heritage and fraternal bonds are unshakable by
what we hope are only passing incidents.

75. Mr. President, I should like to thank you once
again, as well as the other members of the Council, for
having permitted me to acquaint you with the views of the
POLISARIO
Front in the hope that we contributed to
enlightening you with regard to the actual state of affairs
in Western Sahara. I am available to the Council to give it
any additional information if members so wish.
76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion
from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Democratic Yemen for his
kind words with regard to the friendly relations existing
between our two countries.

77. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): Mr. President,
since you have assumedthe presidency of the Security
Council you have guided its deliberations with distinction, thanks to your vast experience and wisdom. My
delegation is happy to address the Council under your
eminent leadership, for you represent a country, the
Soviet Union, with which we maintain excellent relations
based on an unbreakable bond of friendship.

83. The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
84. Mr. TAYA
(Mauritania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, allow me first to extend to you the
sincere congratulations of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
do this with great pleasure, since the country you represent, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and mine
enjoy friendly relations of lasting co-operation basedon
mutual interest and respect.

78. It is with a certain hesitation that I make this brief
statement becausethe question under discussioninvolves
fraternal Arab parties whose co-operation at this time is
all too important to circumvent the notorious Camp
David sell-out. Even at this point, Israeli warplanes are
bombing the civilian population in Southern Lebanon,
while Zionist zealots are bulldozing Palestinian homes
and establishing new alien settlements with the full support of the Israeli Government.

85. I should also like to thank all Council membersfor
having permitted me to take part in their deliberations in
order solemnly to recall the position of my Government
on the Saharan issue. This position has been voiced
repeatedly by various leadersof my country at the highest
possible levels. The latest reaction expressed by my
Government on this issuewascontained in a communication addressedto the Secretary-General by a letter dated
23 May 1979, issued as a document of the General
Assembly.’

79. We have no doubt that certain imperialist circles are
doing their utmost to subvert the anti-Sadat, anti-Zionist
Arab solidarity forged at the Baghdad summit. Certainly,
this debate serves neither the Palestinian causenor the
well-being of our brothers in the Maghreb. That is why it
was the overwhelming view of the Arab Group that this
question should be dealt with in another context. For
somewhat similar reasons,the African Group unsuccessfully tried to prevail on the Moroccan delegation not to
insist on this debate in the Security Council.

86. In adopting this stand, the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania has clearly shown its will for peace and its
burning desire to help to bring about better understanding in the region. In taking that position, the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania has extended its hand to all peoples and countries of the region. That fraternal hand is

80. On a more substantive level, my delegation believes
that the question before the Council is essentially one of
decolonization. As such, it is now in the hands of the
AdHoc Committee established by the Organization of
African Unity, whose forthcoming summit conference

’ A/34/276.

9

extended to all countries and to all peoples of the region
in the hope that>they will.put an end to war and restore
peace in all &&es,
in all houses and in all tents. The
Islamic Republic of Mauritania, in adopting this position, has embarked upon a dynamic peace process in the
region, and we hope that that will speedily lead to a just
and lasting solution of the Saharan problem.

88. Unfortunately,
a few weeks ago the mounting tension in the north-west African region led to confrontation, with incalculable consequences. In that connexion,
in an official communique dated 12 June 1979, my country expressed its profound concern and its heartfelt
preoccupation in the face of such a situation. We now
appeal to the Security Council to use all means available
to it to spare our region chaos.

87. Quite recently the President of the French Republic
said that Mauritania was a noble country worthy of
respect. My people are faithful to their traditions, their
dignity and their worth and wish fully to play their part as
a link between all countries in the north-west African
region; but without thereby denying their commitment,
they hope to play that part in a north-west
Africa at
peace, in a region of solidarity.

89. Mauritania remains convinced that dialogue and
joint efforts are the best way of finding a peaceful solution, a just and lasting solution, to all the problems facing
the region. We make an urgent appeal to all the parties
concerned to refrain from any action that might compromise peace and security in the region.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

Price: %U.S. 1.50

79-70002-April

1982-2,250
