A /67/PV.91

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

91st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 9 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Stoyan Ganev, President of the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session
The President: It is my sad duty to inform members
of the General Assembly of the passing away, on 1 July,
of His Excellency Mr. Stoyan Ganev, President of the
General Assembly at its forty-seventh session.
Mr. Ganev was a remarkable man of peace who
served his country and the international community
as a politician, diplomat and jurist. As President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Ganev played an outstanding
role in the Organization and made a major contribution
towards the achievement of the objectives set out in
the Charter of the United Nations. On behalf of the
General Assembly, I should like to convey our deepest
condolences to the Government and people of Bulgaria
and to Mr. Ganev’s bereaved family.
Mr. Ganev’s was an illustrious career, both within
and outside the United Nations. As President, he
guided the Assembly of 179 Member States, tackling
a diverse range of issues facing the globe in the last
decade of the twentieth century. By all accounts, he
was an astute diplomat, capable of facilitating the
building of consensus on topics that included regional
disarmament, the establishment of a fund to protect the
environment, humanitarian aid to Somalia and United
Nations peacekeeping.
Stoyan Ganev was born in Pazardzhik, Bulgaria,
in 1955. He studied at Sofia University’s Faculty of

Law and went on to serve as Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs in his country’s first
democratic Government. He diligently and expertly
negotiated Bulgaria’s treaty of accession to the
European Union in 2005. Above all, Mr. Ganev was
respected by Member States as a fair and productive
President of the General Assembly, a man who will
always be remembered for his commitment to the
founding principles of the United Nations.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Stoyan Ganev, former President of the
General Assembly. May he rest in peace.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I would like to offer my
condolences to the family of His Excellency Mr. Stoyan
Ganev, President of the General Assembly at its fortyseventh session, and to all his friends and loved ones in
Bulgaria and around the world, on his untimely passing
earlier this month.
He died young, aged only 57. But he was here
at the United Nations as a young man, too — one
of the youngest ever to hold the post of President of
the General Assembly. As such, he brought welcome
energy to our work at a time of particular challenge and
hope for the Organization. The historic United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development — the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-38654 (E)

*1338654*

A/67/PV.91

Earth Summit — had just taken place, and he helped
to steer our follow-up on the original road from Rio
de Janeiro. The Balkans were in turmoil, and his
regional knowledge brought a useful perspective to that
challenge. Most of all, his tenure coincided with a period
when the United Nations, freed from the constraints of
the Cold War, was able to act and engage in new ways
to address global problems. Mr. Ganev, a skilled jurist
and politician, used his tenure to advance that work,
and today we continue to build upon his contributions.
I had the great pleasure of meeting him several
times over the years. He participated actively in the
Council of Presidents of the General Assembly. I feel a
certain kinship with his service in that capacity, given
my own experience here during the Republic of Korea’s
presidency of this body.
May all who knew Stoyan Ganev take some solace
in knowing that he is remembered here as someone who
believed in the great power and potential of the General
Assembly. May he rest in peace and eternity. Or, as they
say in Bulgarian, Bog da go prosti — God rest his soul.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Group of African States to express
our deepest and most sincere condolences to the people
and Government of the Republic of Bulgaria following
the death of His Excellency Mr. Stoyan Ganev. former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister
of Bulgaria, and President of the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session.
Mr. Ganev dedicated the greater part of his life to
enhancing the welfare of his people and the people of
his region. His role in achieving economic reforms in
Eastern Europe and implementing regional security
structures as part of overall security in Europe will not
be forgotten. He also contributed to Bulgaria’s accession
to the Council of Europe and the European Union. He
was 37 years old when he assumed the presidency of
the Assembly, the youngest-ever President at the time.
He will nevertheless be remembered as one of the
Assembly’s great Presidents.
His contribution to international peace and security
was widely recognized. In 1992, the first African
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Boutros

2

Boutros-Ghali, awarded Mr. Ganev the United Nations
Gold Medal of Peace for his contributions to preserving
peace and security on our planet.
The African Group will always remember
Mr. Ganev’s contribution to the work of the United
Nations and to making it more effective in finding
solutions to political, economic and social issues of
concern to all Member States. May God Almighty rest
his soul in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Solomon Islands, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mrs. Beck (Solomon Islands): It is an honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of AsiaPacific States. It was with great sadness that we learned
of the passing of His Excellency Mr. Stoyan Ganev,
President of the General Assembly at its forty-seventh
session. On behalf of the Asia-Pacific Group, we
offer our deepest condolences to his bereaved family
and friends and to the Government and people of the
Republic of Bulgaria, as well as his many admirers.
On this occasion, we pay tribute to the memory
of Mr. Ganev and his distinguished service to the
United Nations and humankind. We remember and
acknowledge him for the work he did to consolidate
world peace and security through his presidency of
the General Assembly by finding solutions to political,
socioeconomic and environmental problems.
The late Mr. Ganev, a highly regarded leader of his
country, had been Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria, and
held a variety of portfolios in his country’s service. He
worked tirelessly to promote democracy and economic
reform in Eastern Europe and to address security and
cooperation in Europe overall. He was instrumental in
furthering a number of peace and cooperative initiatives,
such as the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe in 1991. His service to the United Nations and
the global community will be remembered in years to
come. May he rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): On behalf of the Group of
Eastern European States, let me extend my sympathies
on the occasion of the death of Mr. Stoyan Ganev,
President of the General Assembly at its forty-seventh

13-38654

A/67/PV.91

session, and to convey my sincere condolences to his
family and to the people and Government of Bulgaria.
Mr. Stoyan Ganev will be remembered as an
extraordinary personality who was active in the
international arena. As the President of the Assembly at
its forty-seventh session, he supported the enhancement
of the role of the United Nations in consolidating world
peace and security and making it far more effective
in finding solutions to political, socioeconomic,
environmental and other problems. His death is a
great loss to the United Nations. He will always be
remembered as a strong advocate of multilateralism
and friendship among nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States to pay
tribute to the memory of Mr. Stoyan Ganev, President
of the General Assembly at its forty-seventh session.
To his family and his country, we convey our deepest
condolences for this untimely loss.
After having been Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Deputy Prime Minister of Bulgaria, Mr. Ganev
presided over the General Assembly at a critical time
when a number of countries joined the United Nations
and a number of conflicts affected international and
regional peace and security. During his presidency, the
Assembly achieved significant progress in such crucial
areas as the situation of women, climate change and the
fight against apartheid, inter alia. Those achievements
benefited millions of people, and their effects can still
be felt today.
Mr. Ganev was the President of the General
Assembly at a time when the peace processes in our
region and others enjoyed priority on the United Nations
agenda. It was under his presidency and through his
leadership that this body was able to lend its crucial
support to lasting peace and development in various
countries of my regional group. We will therefore
always be grateful to him.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Group of Western

European and other States. I would like to convey our
deepest condolences to the people and Government
of the Republic of Bulgaria on the sad passing away
of their former Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime
Minister, who was also President of the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session, His Excellency
Mr. Stoyan Ganev.
As Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Ganev made
history by serving in Bulgaria’s first non-Communist
Cabinet in 47 years, during an important and historic
period in the region. At the same time, he became
President of the General Assembly at a crucial time
for the Organization. In that capacity, Mr. Ganev’s
support for an enhanced role for the United Nations in
consolidating world peace and security and for making
the United Nations more effective in finding solutions
to political, social, economic, environmental and other
problems served us well. Our thoughts and sympathy
are with the family and friends of Mr. Ganev.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Bulgaria.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): Allow me to first convey
the profound gratitude of the Government of Bulgaria
for this tribute to the memory of the late President of
the General Assembly at its forty-seventh session and
former Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Bulgaria, Mr. Stoyan Ganev. I thank Assembly members
for all the warm words of condolence on the demise
of Mr. Ganev. On a personal note, I would like to say
that I had the privilege of working as First Deputy to
Mr. Ganev in his capacity as Foreign Minister, so for
me this tribute has even greater significance.
Today we mourn the premature loss of a toplevel and outstanding Bulgarian diplomat, and we
bow in tribute to his memory. Mr. Stoyan Ganev was
a politician who was emblematic of the democratic
change in Bulgaria. His work as a member of the
Seventh Grand National Assembly, as Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs in 1991 and
1992, and as the President of the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session left an indelible mark on our
recent history. As a Bulgarian politician, he contributed
to the building of our democracy. He carried this
commitment throughout his life. He stood for a set of
principles and a belief that individuals should be free
to determine their own destiny and live with liberty,
dignity and justice.

13-386543

A/67/PV.91

Lecturing on constitutional law at Sofia University
after his term the United Nations, and at universities
in Bridgeport, Connecticut, and New York, he was
devoted to one of the most important missions of the
United Nations — promoting the rule of law at both the
national and the international levels.
Mr. Ganev’s one year as the President of the General
Assembly corresponded to a deeply challenging time in
the world and in the life of the Organization. The world
looked very different when he took office, with the Cold
War having just come to an end. Mr. Ganev saw the
United Nations as an indispensable forum for advancing
the common goals of humankind, and believed in the
power of multilateral diplomacy. When he left office, in
1993, the world had undergone profound changes that
could hardly have been imagined 10 years before.
Mr. Ganev was deeply invested in the international
cooperation that the United Nations represents. In
1992, Mr. Ganev was awarded the Secretary-General’s
Gold Medal for Peace for his contributions to the
preservation of peace and security on the planet. He
remained committed to the cause of the United Nations
throughout his life and followed with keen interest all
major developments in the world Organization. I believe
that Mr. Ganev’s contribution will be remembered as
meaningful, and he will remain in the Organization’s
collective memory.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
Draft resolution (A/67/L.73)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held its debate on sub-item (b) of agenda item
118 at its 82nd plenary meeting, on 17 May.
It is my honour to preside over today’s meeting of
the General Assembly in which Member States will
consider two draft resolutions that I believe will greatly
advance the cause of sustainable development. The
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex) of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) mandated the General Assembly to oversee
the three important workstreams of the post-2015
agenda. During the resumed part of the sixty-seventh
session, progress has been made with regard to each of
them.

4

Last January, the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) was finally
constituted; it has since held four clusters of productive
meetings. Last month, Member States established the
30-person Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing. I will announce
the precise date of its first meeting shortly. Most likely,
it will be at the end of August. In a few moments, the
General Assembly will adopt a draft resolution that
establishes the institutional foundation for a high-level
political forum to follow up on the implementation of
sustainable development (A/67/L.72).
I take today’s opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Cesare Maria Ragaglini,
Permanent Representative of Italy, and Ambassador
Luis Alberto Figueiredo Machado, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, as well as his predecessor,
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for their
tireless efforts over several months of intensive
consultations.
The forum will conduct regular reviews on the
follow-up and implementation of the SDGs. It will also
serve, according to the draft resolution, as a dynamic
platform for regular dialogue, stocktaking and agendasetting to advance sustainable development. Beginning
with the sixty-eighth session, the forum will convene
quadrennially in the General Assembly at the level of
Heads of State and Government and will be chaired
by the President of the General Assembly. Its annual
meetings, comprising a ministerial segment as well,
will be held under the auspices of the Economic and
Social Council and chaired by the Council’s President.
Allow me to take this opportunity to remind the
Assembly that we still need to reach an agreement on
the concluding text of the special event to follow up
on efforts to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), which will be held on 25 September
during the high-level segment of the general debate
of the sixty-eighth session. I believe that its outcome
document should provide a clear road map for how to
effectuate a smooth transition from the MDGs to the
SDGs. In my view, the MDGs need to fold into the
emerging SDGs framework. By 2015, we should have a
single integrated development agenda, not two parallel
tracks. I am confident that those and other deliberations
to come will be enriched by the expected adoption of
the other draft resolution on today’s schedule, which
lays the foundation upon which coordination on global

13-38654

A/67/PV.91

economic, financial and trade issues can be built up in
the time ahead.

the President of the Economic and Social Council,
encompassing G-20 and non-G-20 priorities.

Before proceeding, allow me to thank Ambassador
Octavio Errázuriz, Permanent Representative of Chile,
together with his hard-working staff, for the leading
role they have played in achieving consensus on the text
before us. For several years, the Global Governance
Group, chaired by Singapore, has been helping to
generate momentum for just that sort of endeavour. I
am indebted to them for the support they gave to the
idea of regularizing interaction with the Group of 20
(G-20), especially during the thematic debate we held
on 15 April on the United Nations and global economic
governance.

Finally, the draft resolution envisages that the
Secretary-General shall submit a report to the General
Assembly assessing whether its provisions have been
implemented, while taking into account the post-2015
agenda. In my view, that last provision is of immense
importance; it goes beyond regularization by assigning
a role to the G-20 in the achievement of sustainable
development. That reinforces the terms of the Rio+20
outcome document, which indicates that the SDGs
should be global in nature and universally applicable
to all countries.

I believe that we are taking a very significant step
today. For the first time, an act of the Organization grants
that intergovernmental groupings such as the G-20
may take policy decisions with global implications and
recognizes the importance and benefits of continuing
flexible and regular interaction between them and the
United Nations. The draft resolution establishes a link
between the two without infringing on any established
prerogatives. The General Assembly is now understood
to be the pre-eminent venue in which the G-20 and
non-G-20 Member States communicate with each other
as sovereign equals. Henceforth, it will serve as an
inclusive consultative platform for countries to reflect
on common concerns, share information and present
their respective views on global economic, financial
and trade issues.
The draft resolution includes provisions that
welcome informal engagement between the United
Nations and the G-20 through a set of briefings
organized by the President of the General Assembly.
He or she is invited to continue the practice of enabling
representatives of the G-20 presidency to take part in
an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly
membership with a view to promoting transparency and
coherence and to strengthening mutual understanding
and cooperation in global economic governance
matters.
It also calls on the President of the General
Assembly to continue to convene informal meetings
of the plenary at which the Secretary-General would
consult with Member States before attending G-20
summits and brief them afterwards. Moreover, a clause
in the draft text invites the President of the General
Assembly to convoke thematic debates together with

As we look ahead to the many steps that still
need to be taken, we should try to remember that the
Organization was founded not simply to prevent the
slide backwards into warfare, but also to strengthen
the bonds of trust between peoples and States. That
is why I remain hopeful that the boldness and vision
needed to take the post-2015 agenda to the next stage
can be brought to the surface in the period ahead. That
would further reinforce the General Assembly’s status
as what the Charter terms a “centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations”, and thereby advance the efforts of
generations to entrench sustainable peace, security and
prosperity across the globe.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chile to
introduce draft resolution A/67/L.73.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to introduce to the General Assembly for
adoption the draft resolution entitled “The United
Nations in global economic governance” (A/67/L.73).
The draft resolution is sponsored by approximately 80
Member States, including developing and developed
States from all continents and regional groups, large
countries and small. That broad backing reflects the
cross-cutting support in the Organization for the central
role played by the United Nations system in the field of
global governance.
The draft resolution is the outcome of a broad,
three-month negotiating process. It includes proposals
and suggestions made by diverse countries and groups
that were added to an initial text drafted by my country
with the assistance of Singapore and Switzerland, as
well as of many other sponsors that worked on the first
draft.

13-386545

A/67/PV.91

The text recognizes that, in a world changed
by globalization, the agenda of all of our countries
contains global challenges in particular in the sphere
of international economic relations that cannot be
addressed appropriately unless agreed actions are
implemented by the entire international community. In
that regard, the text acknowledges
“the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent
and effective multilateral system in order to better
address the urgent global challenges of today,
recognizing the universality of the United Nations”
[and] “reaffirms the central role of the United
Nations system in ongoing efforts to find common
solutions to such challenges”.
Moreover, as was indicated by the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Chile when he spoke to the General
Assembly on 15 April,
“multilateralism must be an international
instrument for addressing global challenges in
an inclusive manner with the participation of all.
However, at times it has not been possible to resolve
global economic difficulties at the multilateral level
in inclusive mechanisms and forums, and many
key decisions have been taken in more restricted
multilateral forums”.
The draft resolution I am introducing today provides
a constructive response to the situation by serving to
strengthen mechanisms for cooperation and interaction
with the United Nations and intergovernmental
groupings, such as the Group of 20, that formulate
policy recommendations or adopt decisions with
global implications for economic governance, thereby
underlining the value of inclusive multilateralism
and seeking to conserve the central role of the United
Nations in global governance.
In that regard, we would underscore paragraphs 12,
13 and 14 of the draft resolution. The first
“[r]ecognizes the importance and benefit of
continuing interaction between the United Nations,
in particular the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, with international
and regional forums, organizations and groups
dealing with global matters of concern to the
international community, as appropriate”.
Paragraph 13

6

“welcomes the practice of informal engagement
between the United Nations and intergovernmental
groupings ... including the Group of 20, through
informal briefings organized at the initiative of
the President of the General Assembly ... in an
interactive dialogue with the membership of the
General Assembly”.
And paragraph 14
“recognizes the importance of the interaction
between the Secretary-General and the Member
States of the General Assembly regarding the
participation of the Secretary-General in summits
of intergovernmental groupings ... and invites the
President of the General Assembly to continue
organizing informal meetings for that purpose”.
In this manner, efforts have been made to affirm and
reinforce a constructive practice of the Organization.
We believe that the draft resolution provides a valuable
contribution to that end, from the perspective of the
United Nations commitment to multilateralism and the
role it plays in global economic governance.
The draft resolution also, most essentially, includes
a recognition of the importance of coordination and
complementarity among the universal mechanisms
for global economic governance and the regional
and subregional mechanisms. The text clearly refers
to the fact that regional and subregional forums
are essential to ensuring good global economic
governance. In that regard, it specifically underscores
regional, interregional and subregional initiatives and
agreements, including integration processes to promote
development and cooperation among their members,
reaffirming the need to ensure that the regional and
subregional organizations and agreements are better
integrated in the context of global economic governance.
To that end, the draft resolution recognizes the
importance of global economic governance in order to
meet the Millennium Development Goals and to ensure
the success of national development efforts. In that
regard, it underscores the importance of international
trade and of a system that is based on standards and
on the necessary political will in order to conclude the
Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
In the same vein, it reaffirms the importance
of strengthening and increasing the participation of
developing countries in the adoption of decisions and
the establishment of international norms and standards,
emphasizing that the economic and financial crisis has
13-38654

A/67/PV.91

highlighted the need for reforms and the significant
measures that have recently been taken by the Bretton
Woods institutions to ensure that those institutions
better reflect the current reality.
Finally, I wish to underscore, as a key component
of the draft resolution, the clear recognition of the
leadership role played by the United Nations in the
promotion of development and the need to continue
improving global economic governance and further
strengthening the role of the United Nations in this
regard, recognizing the functions of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
I would conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
for your interest in this issue, and all delegations that
participated in the negotiations for their generosity and
contributions to the text, as well as for their flexibility
in listening to and understanding the concerns raised
by the various negotiators in what is undoubtedly a
sensitive but fundamental area for the Organization.
We sincerely thank delegations for their
cooperation in our country’s facilitation of an exercise
that we have tried to carry out in a way that avoids
confrontation. In that regard, allow me to make the
following particular comment. I would like to thank the
Ambassador and Deputy Permanent Representative of
my country, Ambassador Eduardo Gálvez, who led this
exercise with the support of our delegation. We believe
the outcome is substantial and well-balanced when it
comes to the various perspectives. We all welcome the
understanding of the meaning and the positive spirit of
the draft resolution that is before the General Assembly
today, for which we seek adoption by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on A/67/L.73, entitled “The United Nations in global
economic governance”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/67/L.73: Andorra, Australia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Montenegro, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and United Arab Emirates.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.73?
Draft resolution A/67/L.73 was adopted (resolution
67/289).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for recognizing the work of the Global Governance
Group (3G). Allow me to make a few comments on
behalf of the 30 members of the 3G.
The 3G welcomes the adoption of resolution 67/289
by consensus and congratulates the Chilean delegation.
The 3G emphasizes that the United Nations system
must remain the cornerstone of global governance,
in recognition of the universal membership and
unquestioned legitimacy of the United Nations. The 3G
has consistently highlighted that global standard-setting
exercises must take place in formal organizations with
universal membership, such as the United Nations.
The 3G has also consistently called for the
strengthening of the engagement between the United
Nations and the Group of 20 (G-20) through such
measures as the Secretary-General’s participation in
G-20 summits and interactive dialogues between the
G-20 and the Assembly. We therefore welcome the
resolution’s elaboration on those points.
Mr. Marks (United States of America): The United
States joined the consensus on resolution 67/289. We
would like to highlight our support for the current
interaction that exists between the Group of 20 (G-20)
and United Nations States Members, as indeed this
dialogue began under the United States presidency of
the G-20.
In the resolution just adopted, Member States
took an important step in recognizing the outreach of
successive G-20 presidents with the United Nations
membership. The resolution sends the right signal
of encouragement to continue this useful dialogue,
which can help ensure that the United Nations plays
a complementary and collaborative role in other
international processes and forums.
The resolution also offers views on the governance
and operational aspects of the international financial
institutions, and the Bretton Woods institutions in

13-386547

A/67/PV.91

particular. Of course, any decisions on reform of the
international financial institutions or the manner in
which they conduct their business are the prerogative
of their shareholders and their respective boards of
governors. The United States does not interpret the
language in this document as endorsing a formal United
Nations role in decisions affecting the international
financial institutions.
At the same time, Member States must act upon
our responsibility to improve the work of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. That
requires serious scrutiny of the quality of our own debate.
As a first step, we must look to reduce duplicative and
contradictory processes across the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. In that regard,
we note that the Second Committee is charged with
considering economic and financial matters, and this
plenary resolution addresses those issues without
proper scope or context.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Following the adoption
of resolution 67/289, my delegation would like first of
all to congratulate the delegations that sponsored it, in
particular the delegation of Chile for its outstanding,
balanced and impartial conduct of the informal
consultations.
My delegation has always championed and
promoted the strengthening of the role and authority of
the General Assembly, which is the most universal and
inclusive world forum and humankind’s parliament.
Today’s resolution recognizes repeatedly the role and
authority of the General Assembly, which is, at the same
time, prepared to interact with all intergovernmental
stakeholders and groups in the international community.
Our delegation stresses that there are no
intergovernmental groups with special privileges. The
equality of sovereign States is a fundamental principle
in line with the spirit of the United Nations. No meeting
of an intergovernmental group can threaten the role of
the General Assembly.
Venezuela is particularly grateful for the General
Assembly’s stressing once again of the urgency of
responding in a united manner to the current global
financial crisis and its serious effects. A reform of the
global financial and economic architecture is urgent,
as recognized in the resolution. The importance of
regional and subregional economic and financial
cooperation systems has been recognized by the

8

Assembly once again. Venezuela believes that the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America Peoples’ Trade Agreement, the Common Market of the
South, the Union of South American Nations and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
are key expressions of that importance, and their role
and contribution continue to increase. International
solidarity and cooperation are one of the pillars of our
foreign policy.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21 and the outcomes of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development and of the
United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development
Draft resolution (A/67/L.72)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the
General Assembly allocated sub-item (a) of agenda
item 20 to the Second Committee. Members will also
recall that, at its 63rd plenary meeting, on 22 January
2013, the Assembly agreed to consider the sub-item
directly in plenary meeting, proceeded immediately to
its consideration, and adopted decision 67/555, entitled
“Open Working Group of the General Assembly
on Sustainable Development Goals”. Members will
further recall that, at its 89th plenary meeting, on
21 June 2013, the Assembly adopted decision 67/559,
entitled “Intergovernmental committee of experts on
sustainable development financing”.
The Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/67/L.72, entitled “Format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development”.
In that connection, I would like to draw the
Assembly’s attention to the statement regarding
programme budgetary implications, contained in
document A/67/927. The Fifth Committee will examine,
during the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly, the
programme budget implications arising from the draft

13-38654

A/67/PV.91

resolution and the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon.
Consequently, the financial provisions, as appropriate,
will be considered in the budget appropriations to be
adopted for the biennium 2014-2015.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.72?
Draft resolution A/67/L.72 was adopted (resolution
67/290).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I have the honour to deliver
these remarks on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM has attached great importance to the
process of determining the organization and format
of the High-level Political Forum and appreciates
the consultative approach that was taken throughout.
We congratulate you, Sir, on having appointed as
co-facilitators the Permanent Representative of
Brazil, Mr. Luis Alberto Figueiredo Machado, and his
predecessor, Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, and the
Permanent Representative of Italy, Mr. Cesare Maria
Ragaglini, whose steadfast and astute guidance of the
informal consultations led us to the finalization of
resolution 67/290.
CARICOM delegations wish to place on record our
sincere appreciation for the work of the Chair of the
Group of 77 and China, and particularly to Ms. Natalia
Novoa of Uruguay and Mr. Mohamed Khalil of Egypt,
who negotiated on behalf of the Group.
The decision taken by the Heads of State and
Government in Rio de Janeiro to create the Figh-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development to replace
the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)
was aimed at drawing greater high-level attention to
the global sustainable development agenda. Indeed,
the idea was to move away from the business-as-usual
mindset, which, it was generally agreed, had become
unacceptable.
The finalization and adoption of resolution 67/290
will not in and of itself fulfil the aspirations that the
Heads of State and Government expressed in Rio de
Janeiro. Indeed, while we have arrived at agreement

on a framework that could lead to greater attention
being paid to sustainable development, ultimately
the true measure of our success will be the level and
quality of our participation in the work of the forum. It
is imperative that the Heads of State and Government
meet at regular intervals to provide guidance in
advancing the sustainable development agenda and to
pronounce themselves on emerging issues requiring
urgent attention. It is also of the utmost importance that
we make effective use of the preparatory process.
Mr. Balé (Congo), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Throughout the process, CARICOM and the
Alliance of Small Island States have made it clear that
the small island developing States (SIDS) have a vested
interest in monitoring whether and how the High-level
Political Forum will follow up on commitments made
to small island developing States, including those in
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy. Admittedly, the provisions in the resolution fall
short of what we had anticipated at the outset, given the
inextricable linkages between the soon-to-be-defunct
CSD and the Figh-level Political Forum. However, we
are mindful of the connections between the Forum
process and the parallel process on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council pursuant to resolution
61/16, which addresses institutional matters of concern
to SIDS. We fully intend to continue our efforts
to ensure that within the context of a strengthened
Economic and Social Council there would be a robust
platform for addressing SIDS issues.
Mrs. Daniel (Nauru): Nauru has the honour to
speak on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS).
At the outset, let me note that we are pleased to be
here today to witness the adoption of resolution 67/290,
on the format and organizational aspects of the Fighlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development.
We commend the President of the General Assembly
for his leadership and for his having appointed the
representatives of Brazil and Italy, Mr. Luis Alberto
Figueiredo Machado, following his predecessor,
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, and Mr. Cesare Maria
Ragaglini, respectively, as facilitators. We appreciate
their diligent efforts in moving the process along to the
point where it is today.
I take this opportunity to recall the AOSIS
statements made throughout the process and highlight
our overall view on the draft. We recall the decisions set

13-386549

A/67/PV.91

forth in “The future we want”, the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (resolution 66/288, annex), in particular
its paragraph 85 (e), on establishing a universal,
intergovernmental high-level political forum that could
follow up and review progress in the implementation
of sustainable development commitments contained in
Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy.
Throughout the process of establishing the
High-level Political Forum, we worked to build on
the strengths, experiences, resources and inclusive
participation modalities of the Commission on
Sustainable Development (CSD). States members of
AOSIS also drew the attention of fellow States Members
of the United Nations to the fact that for the sustainable
development of small island developing States (SIDS),
the CSD had been the primary intergovernmental forum
for monitoring the implementation of the Barbados
Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy.
For that reason, we had hoped that a stronger
mechanism for the follow-up and implementation of the
commitment made to SIDS could have been explicitly
anchored in the formatting and organizational aspects
of the Figh-level Political Forum. Given what has
transpired, we wish to highlight the fact that, with
the impending dissolution of the Commission on
Sustainable Development and its replacement with the
Forum, it is our expectation that a suitable mechanism
for following up on the implementation of commitments
to SIDS issues will be created.
Allow me to stress and reiterate the link between
the high-level political forum process and the process
of strengthening the Economic and Social Council,
as mandated by resolution 61/16, which has unfolded
in parallel to the high-level political forum process
but which has not yet been completed. The provisions
for the high-level political forum are acceptable only
because we anticipate the full support of Member
States in the elaboration of an effective platform for
SIDS within the context of a strengthened Economic
and Social Council, which includes a strong platform
for the follow-up of commitments made to SIDS.
As long as the gaps remain in implementing and
reviewing the Barbados Programme of Action and
the Mauritius Strategy, alongside the emerging and
intensifying challenges, we SIDS will be unable to

10

achieve sustainable development. Let us work together
to ensure that SIDS are not left behind.
We assure the General Assembly of our full
support in continuing to work together to further
strengthen what we agreed upon in Rio — that is,
“The future we want” — and to ensure that there is
a strong mechanism to follow up on the international
community’s commitment to SIDS.
Mr. Marks (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
67/290 and welcomes the important step it represents
in our follow-up to the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20) of June 2012. We
have and will continue to strongly support the vital
work of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council on Rio+20 follow-up and in the larger
process of creating a post-2015 development agenda.
In that regard, we look forward to working with the
Secretariat to ensure that the High-level Political Forum
is as productive, efficient and effective as possible.
However, the United States is dismayed and
disappointed by the fact that, yet again at the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly, we had to
witness another instance of the last-minute provision
of budget estimates to Member States responsible
for negotiating the present and other resolutions. We
strongly believe that increased transparency regarding
budgetary figures, especially when repeatedly
requested of the Secretariat during the negotiations,
should be provided during the negotiation process.
The United States is extremely dissatisfied that the
Secretariat only last night produced an oral statement
with extensive requests for resources. We call upon the
Secretariat to identify cost savings from the phasing
out of the Commission on Sustainable Development,
to provide a clear and timely budget estimate, and to
make every effort to absorb those costs and to pursue
the most economical means of travel.
With our clarifications and expression of
dissatisfaction at the oral statement, the United States
supports resolution 67/290.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank
Ambassadors Cesare Maria Ragaglini and Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for all their efforts and crucial
contributions to the successful establishment of the
High-level Political Forum.

13-38654

A/67/PV.91

Resolution 67/290 is a milestone agreement that
will provide for a strong institutional framework for
sustainable development and the post-2015 development
agenda, including the sustainable development goals.
One of the strengths of the Forum will be its focus on
implementation, including at the national level, through
an improved and strengthened review mechanism.
We look forward to further discussing the necessary
organizational and other details within the Forum itself.
Another major improvement of the forum is
its universal intergovernmental nature. It is our
understanding that paragraph 4 ensures the equal
participation of all Member States and States members
of specialized agencies in all aspects of the Forum,
including in all matters related to decision-making.
Finally, it is our understanding that the ongoing
discussions and the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council will fully comply with the
agreements contained in resolution 67/290. In that
regard, we understand in particular that the Forum
will be convened under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Council for a continuous period of eight
working days, in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) of
paragraph 7. Furthermore, the process of strengthening
the Economic and Social Council should refrain from
altering in any way the mandate of the Forum as set out
in paragraph 7.
Mr. Imanishi (Japan): First of all, my delegation
would like to thank the Ambassadors of Brazil and
Italy as co-facilitators, as well as their team and the
Secretariat, for their hard work and tremendous
efforts, which led to the adoption of resolution 67/290
today. I would also like to express my gratitude to all
delegations for the flexibility they showed throughout
the negotiation process.
My delegation was pleased to join the consensus.
We are very happy to see the adoption of resolution
67/290, entitled “Format and organizational aspects
of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development,” thanks to which one of the main
outcomes from United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development will become operational. We
believe that the Figh-level Political Forum should, as
described in the resolution, provide political leadership,
guidance and recommendations on sustainable
development, and should also follow up and review
progress in implementing the sustainable development
commitments
through
yearly
ministerial-level

meetings, and Heads-of-State and governmental-level
meetings every four years.
However, my delegation would like to raise one point
on the budgetary issue. It is quite regrettable that the
programme budget estimate for 2014-2015, including the
contingency fund, was not issued until the last minute
prior to the adoption of the resolution. My delegation
feels that the negotiators were forced to make a decision
before being provided with complete information on
the budgetary implications of their decision. In the light
of the current state of global economic affairs, every
Government is now being required to show increased
accountability, transparency and responsibility to their
respective publics, especially in terms of budgetary
discipline. My delegation believes that cost information
should always be available to Member States during
the course of negotiations, and requests the Secretariat
to change the practice of last-minute budget estimate
explanations.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): The decision to
establish a universal intergovernmental High-level
Political Forum was one of the critical outcomes of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
The Forum will be built on the strengths, experiences,
resources and inclusive participation modalities of
the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD),
which it will replace. Our colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives of Brazil and Italy, who were
appointed by the President of the General Assembly as
co-facilitators to lead the negotiation process, convened
a series of open-ended informal consultations on the
format and organizational aspects of the forum.
All Member States were given an opportunity
to share their views on the main issues related to the
establishment of the Forum. I would like to express my
deep appreciation to Ambassador Cesare Ragaglini of
Italy; Ambassador Luis Machado, current Permanent
Representative of Brazil; and his predecessor, Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for their capable and effective
efforts, which led to the successful adoption of the
resolution on the format and organizational aspects
of the High-level Political Forum. The adoption of
resolution 67/290 today is a major landmark for the
international commmunity and the United Nations
system.
I also recall that Member States decided that
the CSD would hold a brief final procedural session
immediately prior to the convening of the first meeting

13-3865411

A/67/PV.91

of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development.
I take this opportunity, in my capacity as Chair
of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its
twentieth session, to inform members that, together
with the Secretariat, we are exploring the possibility of
holding the Commission’s twentieth session on Friday,
20 September, for half a day in the morning. In order
to make that event a commemorative occasion, we are
considering holding a high-level dialogue in which
some former Chairs of the Commission on Sustainable
Development would participate. Such a deliberation
would allow us to reflect on the achievements and
the lessons learned from the Commission since its
inception, and provide a smooth institutional transition
from the CSD to the High-level Political Forum.
After finalizing the details of the twentieth session
of the CSD, we will be pleased to further update the
Assembly on the programme and content. We look
forward to the inauguration of the High-level Political
Forum, which represents a new milestone for the
multilateral process in the post-2015 development
agenda.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We thank co-facilitators Ambassador Ragaglini,
Ambassador Figueiredo Machado and Ambassador
Ribeiro Viotti for their efforts and critical contributions
to the establishment of the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development. This is an important stage
on the path to an enhanced institutional framework for
sustainable development and the post-2015 development
programme, including the sustainable development
goals.
The Forum will host the future debate on sustainable
development and the high-level political focus on these
subjects, and will follow up and review the progress made
in this area. It combines an improved integration of the
three pillars of sustainable development — economic,
social and environmental — by taking a cross-cutting
approach.
Switzerland has always emphasized the importance
of strong follow-up mechanisms. We therefore welcome
the fact that the Forum will focus on implementing the
commitments undertaken on sustainable development,
including those adopted nationally, through better and
strengthened oversight, which, as of 2016, will be part
of the post-2015 development programme.

12

We are pleased to continue discussions in the
Forum on organizational and other details. Another
specific advantage of the Forum is its universal and
intergovernmental character. As we understand it,
paragraph 4 of resolution 67/290 ensures the equal
participation of all Member States, as well as States
members of specialized agencies, in all aspects of the
Forum, including in all decision-making matters. That
also applies to meetings held under the auspices of the
Economic and Social Council. We understand that the
ongoing discussions on strengthening the Council will
be fully in line with the agreements contained in the
resolution. Moreover, the process of strengthening the
Economic and Social Council should at all times refrain
from modifying the Forum’s mandate, as described in
paragraph 7.
Another advantage of the Forum is its oversight
function within the system — that is, its role in
promoting coherence and coordination of sustainable
development policies within the United Nations system
in general. The inclusion of the Forum’s high-level
meetings within the framework of the General Assembly
every four years is important. It provides the United
Nations system in its entirety with an opportunity to
follow up on the policy lines that issue from the Highlevel Political Forum by linking them to other existing
processes.
As a result, it is important that, after the inaugural
meeting of the Forum, at the start of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, its meeting cycle should
begin at the outset of the seventieth session — in other
words, in 2015. For Switzerland, that timetable would
meet the recognized need to find global solutions to the
challenges ahead, particularly the convergence of the
post-2015 development programme with the sustainable
development agenda. By beginning the regular cycle of
the forum at the start of a new agenda in September
2015, the forum will be effectively fulfilling its role, as
the Member States envisaged in the resolution before
us.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
express our support for resolution 67/290. The General
Assembly’s establishment of the High-level Political
Forum, in line with the mandate agreed by Heads of
State and Government at the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, is a development of great
political importance and an achievement for which we
commend all Member States. In particular, we wish

13-38654

A/67/PV.91

to thank Brazil, the host of the Conference, which as
facilitator also played a significant role in moving the
process forward. We also thank the Ambassador of
Italy for his participation, as well all others who were
able to ensure that the text reflected everyone’s views.
For Venezuela, a key element for establishing
the Forum remains its decision-making capacity at
the level of Heads of State and Government, which is
key for such a process aimed at providing guidance
as to the path to be followed in fomenting sustainable
development. We believe the pending task of adressing
the three components of sustainable development — the
economic, social and environmental — to be of the
utmost importance. We also think that it is extremely
important to ensure the convergence of the Millennium
Development Goals and the post-2015 development
goals, one of the three important areas to be addressed.
It is also important to ensure follow-up to meetings
and deliberations by the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals, where significant
contributions are being made.
The universal nature of the Forum under the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, both in terms of
participation and decision-making, is a crucial aspect.
In that regard, there should be no doubts when it comes
to the interpretation of the resolution.
The outcome could have been better in terms of
the preparatory process and when the Forum meets.
We are particularly concerned to see a reduction in
the number of working days for the session, from 15
to 7. However, we are well aware that the nature of
Assembly agreements means that they are the product
of an ardouous negotiation process.
Finally, we would like to express our readiness to
participate actively in all of these efforts.
Mr. Lazarev (Republic of Belarus) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation is grateful to the facilitators of
the process for developing the format and organizational
aspects of the High-level Political Forum. Their
leadership of that effort has resulted in today’s adoption
of resolution 67/290. In our opinion, establishing a
High-level Political Forum in line with the outcome
documents of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development is a milestone in consolidating
international efforts aimed at advancing the sustainable
development agenda.

We note the cross-cutting nature of the format of
the High-level Political Forum with the United Nations,
making it possible for Governments to intervene at
different levels, especially on sustainable development.
The Forum is to be arranged and conducted in such a
way that matters pertaining to sustainable development
become more organized, making it easier for us to
focus on them. We hope that the Forum will serve as a
platform for Member States to have an opportunity to
participate in discussions on sustainable development.
It should help step up the work of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly on sustainable
development.
It is important that the Forum and its mechanisms,
which have yet to come into effect, bring together all of
our efforts, taking into account, wherever possible, the
needs of all Member States, irrespective of their levels of
income or which group they belong to. Its main purpose
should be to help Member States optimize decisions
for attaining sustainable development, including in
the context of the post-2015 development agenda. We
believe the review mechanism of the Forum will help
foster a more constructive dialogue on development.
It will help garner a distinct approach to the process,
enabling Member States to take stock of improvements
in ensuring sustainable development, bearing in mind
both progress and opportunity. Only such an approach
will make it possible for us to work together, helping
both the United Nations and Member States reach their
full potential to implement the sustainable development
agenda successfully. For its part, Belarus will do its
utmost to ensure that the High-level Political Forum
becomes a success.
Mr. Zinsou (Republic of Benin) (spoke in French):
The least developed countries welcome the adoption
of resolution 67/290, on the format and organizational
aspects of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development. The least developed countries welcome
the spirit of consensus that prevailed during the
consultations to arrive at the provisions of the resolution.
We pay tribute to the Ambassadors of Brazil and Italy,
who demonstrated great professionalism in steering the
negotiations.
The resolution takes into account the need to further
strenghten the prerogatives of the Economic and Social
Council as the main United Nations body charged with
ensuring coherent and coordinated economic policies
for sustainable development throughout the system. The
least developed countries also welcome in particular the

13-3865413

A/67/PV.91

wording of paragraph 11, which recognizes the specific
challenges facing the most vulnerable countries,
including the least developed. That paragraph also
reiterates the need to provide enough time to consider
their challenges, with the aim of further mobilizing
resources and following-up commitments and ensuring
that pledges are commensurate with their needs.
The least developed countries especially welcome
the format identified for the participation of major
groups, and in particular the continuation of the mandate
for the Commission on Sustainable Development. Least
developed countries will actively participate in the
implementation of the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union to make a statement following the adoption of
resolution 67/290.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): The
European Union and its Member States wish to thank
the co-facilitators, Ambassador Ragaglini of Italy and
Ambassador Viotti — and most recently Ambassador
Machado — of Brazil for all their efforts and leadership
in a process that has led to the adoption of resolution
67/290 today. We are pleased with the outcome, which
we trust will help all of us work together to ensure that

14

sustainable development becomes central to debates
and actions at the international, regional and national
levels.
With regard to the statement referring to
programme budget implications, which we saw in
the fourth draft only a short while ago, we note that
although there are no such implications for 2013, for
which we are pleased, we are surprised to see estimated
costs for 2014 and 2015 with no indication of how
such costs would be absorbed to ensure that they were
consistent with the agreed budget outline. In addition
to that, the terms and conditions for using contingency
funds would be met, which to our understanding are
only estimates of an extensive interpretation of rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. We
would like to stress that estimates presented today do
not pre-empt a submission by the Secretary-General of
a proposed budget for the 2014-2015 biennium to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Fifth Committee. Overall, let us not
perceive such estimates as those endorsed by Member
States today.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

13-38654
