S/2020/255

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 March 2020
Original: English

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 September 2019 to 15 March 2020.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Securit y and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles
within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo,
in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
Following early legislative elections, held on 6 October, in which opposition
parties made strong inroads, a prolonged period of vote counting, electoral appeals
and coalition negotiations culminated in the formation of a new Assembly of Kosovo
on 26 December and a new government on 3 February. The resulting political
landscape attests to the rise of a new generation of political leaders and the success
of prominent women candidates, as embodied by the highest percentage of women
deputies and the election of the first woman President of the Assembly. The new
government has laid out priorities with a focus on reforming the judiciary, combating
organized crime and corruption and fostering economic development.
4.
The early legislative elections were conducted in all 38 municipalities of
Kosovo with a turnout of 44.56 per cent. Voter turnout in the 10 Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities was the highest to date, as a total of 48.6 per cent of eligible voters
cast ballots. Despite the orderly conduct of the ballot, the certification of election
results was delayed owing to numerous electoral appeals filed by political entities.

20-04647 (E)

030420

*2004647*

S/2020/255

Detected irregularities regarding the results and reconciliation forms prompted the
Election Complaints and Appeals Panel to order a recount of ballots cast at 88 per
cent of polling stations. Furthermore, on 13 October, the Kosovo police evacuated the
premises used for the verification of postal ballots after 26 Central Election
Commission staff reported allergic symptoms upon contact with ballots from Serbia.
The incident was investigated by the Special Prosecution Office and Kosovo police,
which had not disclosed their findings by the end of the reporting period. The Central
Election Commission processed and counted 3,782 parcels of ballots from Serbia on
23 October, but on 7 November the votes were annulled in an appeal process, on the
grounds that the postal ballots from Serbia were delivered by “unauthorized
individuals” rather than by regular mail. The invalidation of those postal ballots
reduced the overall number of valid votes and, as a consequence, the number of votes
needed to reach the 5 per cent electoral threshold. In that context, the pre -election
coalition of the Socialist Democratic Initiative of Kosovo, the New Kosovo Alliance
and the Justice Party secured six seats in the Assembly.
5.
The certified results announced by the Central Election Commission on
27 November showed that no political entity had won a majority of seats in the
120-seat Assembly. Among the Kosovo Albanian parties, the Movement for Self Determination (Vetёvendosje) obtained 26.27 per cent of the votes and 29 seats in the
Assembly, followed by the Democratic League of Kosovo with 24.54 per cent of the
votes and 28 seats. Among the remaining Kosovo Albanian political entities, the
Democratic Party of Kosovo obtained 21.23 per cent of the votes, securing 24 seats.
The pre-election coalition between the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and the
Social Democratic Party of Kosovo came fourth with 11.51 per cent and 13 seats. The
Serbian List secured all 10 seats guaranteed for the representatives of the Kosovo
Serb community, while the representatives of other non-majority communities
collectively filled the 10 seats guaranteed for them. The share of women deputies in
the legislature surpassed the 30 per cent gender quota by two percentage points,
spearheaded by women candidates from the Movement for Self-Determination, the
Democratic League of Kosovo and the Serbian List, who won Assembly seats
irrespective of the legally mandated ratio. Local and international election observers
assessed the elections as well-administered and transparent. However, the European
Union Election Observation Mission to Kosovo pointed out that the campaign
environment in Kosovo Serb-majority areas was “marred by intimidation”.
6.
The elections were followed by four months of negotiations between the
Movement for Self-Determination and the Democratic League of Kosovo over the
formation of a coalition government. A key point of contention in the process was the
nomination of the candidate for President of Kosovo in 2021. On 26 December, the
Assembly of Kosovo was constituted with the election of the Movement for Self Determination candidate, Glauk Konjufca, as President of the Assembly. Although
the deputies of the Democratic League of Kosovo supported the c onstitution of the
legislature, the final status of the President of the Assembly was resolved in a
subsequent agreement between the Movement for Self-Determination and the
Democratic League of Kosovo on 2 February. In accordance with the agreement,
Mr. Konjufca resigned his position on 3 February, permitting the election of Albin
Kurti, of the Movement for Self-Determination, as Prime Minister of Kosovo and
Vjosa Osmani, of the Democratic League of Kosovo, as the first woman President of
the Assembly, with a majority of votes. Although the Serbian List abstained from
voting for the government, it voted for Ms. Osmani as President of the Assembly. The
new coalition government consists of two Deputy Prime Ministers, 15 ministers and
35 deputy ministers, with the Movement for Self-Determination and the Democratic
League of Kosovo each holding six ministries, the Serbian List two ministries and
other non-majority communities one ministry. The new Cabinet was reorganized and

2/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

reduced from the previous 21 ministries and contains the highest percentage of
women since 2008, with 5 ministries headed by women.
7.
The new government has taken initial steps to address alleged misconduct in
public office under the previous government. In February, it dismissed the Board o f
Directors of the publicly owned Kosovo Telecom and annulled a public competition
for the appointment of new notaries, which had been criticized by Kosovo civil
society organizations and some international actors as non-transparent and not based
on merit.
8.
The European Union-facilitated dialogue remained at a standstill, although
international efforts to encourage its resumption continued. During his visit to Pristina
and Belgrade in January, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell,
affirmed the commitment of the European Union to advance the dialogue process. On
23 January, efforts undertaken by the United States of America, led by the Special
Presidential Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations, Richard Grenell,
culminated in the signing of separate letters of intent by the two sides with a German
air carrier to reopen a direct commercial air route between Belgrade and Pristina. On
14 February, representatives of Belgrade and Pristina signed additional letters on the
re-establishment of a railway connection and the construction of a highway between
the two cities.
9.
In Pristina, on 7 February, the Kosovo Force and the Government of Iceland
signed a framework agreement regarding the opening of additional commercial routes
in the lower airspace over Kosovo. Under the agreement, Iceland would provide air
navigation services in the lower airspace under the overall authority of the Kosovo
Force. UNMIK welcomed the initiatives as being in line with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Military Technical Agreement of 1999 and acceptable
to both Pristina and Belgrade, as well as other key stake holders.
10. Following the formation of the Kosovo government, international actors
stressed the need for a swift resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. On 13 and 14 February, the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, and the
United States Secretary of State, Michael Pompeo, addressed separate letters to
Mr. Kurti, calling upon the government to remove all obstacles to further
negotiations, in particular by abolishing the 100 per cent tariff on goods from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, United States and European actors
called upon Belgrade to halt the “de-recognition campaign against Kosovo”. Although
political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina reaffirmed their willingness to resume the
dialogue, they also linked such resumption to diverging conditions. Mr. Kurti insisted
upon enacting a policy of “full commercial reciprocity” and that Belgrade should
cease its campaign for the revocation of recognition of Kosovo, while Belgrade
stressed the need for a full and unconditional lifting of the tariff and the ceasing of
efforts by Pristina to gain international recognition. On 27 February, Mr. Kurti
proposed introducing a partial removal of the tariff on 15 March, followed by its full
lifting from 1 April, contingent upon the commitment of Belgrade to abolish all
non-tariff trade barriers and stop the “unfriendly campaign”. He said that if Belgrade
did not meet those conditions Pristina would gradually implement the “principle of
reciprocity” in trade, economic and political areas and reinstate the original tariff
from 15 June. However, the governing partner in the coalition, the Democratic League
of Kosovo, called for the full removal of the tariff rather than gradual measures as
proposed by Mr. Kurti. Owing to conflicting views within the ruling coalition,
Mr. Kurti announced on 15 March that the 100 per cent tariff would remain in place
until the Cabinet reached consensus on the way forward.

20-04647

3/19

S/2020/255

11. The President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, after meeting the President of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vučić, at the White House in Washington, D.C., on 2 March, emphasized
“the necessity of a peaceful resolution of Kosovo-Serbia issues” and “the possibility
of reaching a final agreement”. On 15 March, the Assembly of Kosovo approved a
resolution in which it confirmed the commitment of Pristina to engage in political
negotiations with Belgrade that would result in mutual recognition. It reaffirmed the
mandate of the Kosovo government to lead the dialogue with Belgrade in compliance
with the Constitution and the Constitutional Court ruling of June 2019 (see
S/2019/797, para. 7) and stated that the “territorial integrity and unitary character” of
Kosovo was non-negotiable.
12. With regard to the security situation in Kosovo, there were a number of incidents
in which religious sites and cemeteries were targeted. In October, thefts occurred at
two Orthodox churches in Vushtrri/Vučitrn and one in Shtërpce/Štrpce, while two
monuments were stolen from a Catholic church in Pejë/Peć in December. Vandalism
was also reported at religious sites of the Protestant community in Gjilan/Gnjilane in
September and the Islamic community in Prizren in November. Several gravestones
in Kosovo Serb cemeteries in Lipjan/Lipljan and Istog/Istok were also desecrated. My
Special Representative expressed serious concern about the desecration of
gravestones at the Orthodox cemetery in Lipjan/Lipljan, where a similar incident had
occurred in July 2019 (see S/2019/797, para. 11).
13. There was an increase in the prosecution of terrorism -related offences during
the reporting period. From 16 September to 25 February, 35 individuals (24 women
and 11 men) were indicted and 23 of them (17 women and 6 men) were sentenced on
terrorism-related charges. Of those sentenced, 16 women and 3 men were part of the
group of 110 persons (74 children, 32 women and 4 men) who had been repatriated
from the Syrian Arab Republic to Kosovo in April 2019 (see S/2019/461, para. 16).
All women pleaded guilty to “organizing and participating in a terrorist group”,
receiving suspended sentences of two to three years of imprisonment and mandatory
psychological counselling. The three men received prison sentences ranging from six
months to 5.5 years. The 74 children continued to live with relatives. The Mission
continued to monitor these cases, as well as broader reintegration processes, in
coordination with the United Nations Kosovo team and international actors. During
the reporting period, the International Organization for Migration supported the
Division of Prevention and Reintegration within the Ministry of Internal Affairs by
drafting guidelines for reintegration and joint assessments of specific cases and
reintegration needs and also provided capacity-building for local and central
authorities to facilitate the process.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. Political developments in northern Kosovo were cen tred on the early legislative
elections held on 6 October. The Serbian List won in all four northern Kosovo
municipalities, which registered the highest voter turnout to date by significant
margins, receiving between 81 and 92 per cent of the votes.
15. On 28 February, the government of Kosovo dismissed the oversight board of the
Trepça/Trepča mining company on account of alleged violations of fiduciary duties
and mismanagement of assets and recruitment processes. The government’s decision
was preceded by more than two weeks of protests in South Mitrovica by prospective
employees of the mining company, who alleged that the company’s recruitment
practices were not merit-based and were subject to undue political influence.
16. In December 2019, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an indictment
against six individuals (five men and one woman) for the murder of the Kosovo Serb
4/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

politician Oliver Ivanović in January 2018. The defendants were accused of
participating in an organized criminal group operating in northern Kosovo. Among
the accused are two police officers charged with failure to secure the crime scene and
concealing or destroying evidence. During the initial hearing, held at the Basic Court
of Pristina on 11 February, all defendants pleaded not guilty to the charges. On
2 December, the Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government
of Serbia, Marko Đurić, as well as the Serbian List, questioned the credibility and
impartiality of the judicial process and accused Pristina of not cooperating with
Serbian authorities on the investigation.

IV. Returns, reconciliation and cultural heritage and
community relations
17. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 152 voluntary returns by members
of non-majority communities who were displaced within and outside Kosovo. The
returnees included 75 women and 77 men (87 Kosovo Serbs, 33 Kosovo Roma,
28 Kosovo Egyptian and 4 Kosovo Ashkali). This brings the total number of displaced
members of non-majority communities who have found durable solutions in Kosovo
since 2000 to 28,358, including 13,919 women and 14,439 men (12,091 Kosovo
Serbs, 7,634 Kosovo Egyptians and Ashkali, 3,968 Kosovo Roma, 1,875 Kosovo
Bosniaks, 1,464 Kosovo Gorani, 1,282 Kosovo Albanians, 21 Kosovo Montenegrins,
19 Kosovo Turks and 4 Kosovo Croats). There remain 16,121 displaced persons
within Kosovo (7,442 women and 8,679 men), as well as 69,627 persons with
displacement-related needs across the Western Balkans, out of the approximately
200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo residing in the region, most of them in
Serbia.
18. On 12 February, UNMIK, in partnership with UNHCR and the Ministry for
Communities and Return of Kosovo, commenced a series of coordination meetings
with municipal officials responsible for the protection and promotion of communities’
rights and returns. The meeting was attended by representatives of 11 municipalities
in the Gjilan/Gnjilane region, as well as central authorities, civil society
representatives and the international community. The participants discussed the main
challenges affecting displaced persons and the voluntary return process, agreeing to
enhance institutional coordination and cooperation aimed at facil itating durable
solutions. The second meeting, held on 26 February, was co-organized by the Ministry
for Communities and Return and the Ministry for Local Government and
Administration and was attended by representatives of 10 municipalities in the
Pristina region, central authorities, civil society and the international community.
19. On 25 and 26 November, a technical working group composed of senior
representatives from Belgrade, Podgorica, Pristina and Skopje met in North
Macedonia under the auspices of a regional initiative supported by UNHCR and
OSCE, known as the “Skopje Process”, to support durable solutions for displaced
persons from Kosovo. The participants discussed the implementation of earlier agreed
action points and endorsed a concept note on durable solutions for displaced persons
from and within Kosovo, which provides a framework for sustainable solutions and
calls for a commitment to and the timely resolution of displacement in the region.
20. On 18 November, the Eparchy of Raška-Prizren expressed concern over a series
of cultural events and religious services held on the remains of St. Nicholas Church
in the municipality of Novo Brdo/Novobërdë that were not compliant with the Law
on Special Protective Zones. During the reporting period, re presentatives of the
Serbian Orthodox Church also voiced concerns over the non-implementation of a
20-04647

5/19

S/2020/255

Constitutional Court decision dated 19 May 2016 in which the Court ruled in favour
of the Visoki Dečani monastery’s ownership of 24 ha of land. The Implement ation
and Monitoring Council, which oversees the special protective zones surrounding
religious sites, did not meet during the reporting period owing to the prolonged
electoral and government formation process.
21. Women representatives of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities, civil
society groups and local authorities attended a focus group discussion held on
30 September and 15 October on the empowerment of women. The event, organized
by the United Nations Development Coordinator, UNHCR and the Uni ted Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women), was
focused on ways to address the lack of education and employment opportunities and
limited access to public services, which were identified as the main obstacles to the
empowerment of women among non-majority communities. UNHCR also continued
to support members of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities in obtaining
civil documentation and resolving civil status issues in order to enable them to have
access to various public services. It provided legal aid to 159 individuals (90 women
and 69 men) for civil registration procedures. In addition, 85 individuals (49 women
and 36 men) were given support to have access to and benefit from education, social
assistance, property and pension rights.
22. UNHCR also provided psychosocial support to 42 identified survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence from the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities.
23. Efforts to attract voluntary contributions for the trust fund in support of the
Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo
continued. The trust fund was established in 2017 pursuant to the recommendations
of the Human Rights Advisory Panel. No additional contributions were received
during the reporting period.

V. Rule of law and human rights
24. During the reporting period, the Kosovo judicial system filed indictments
against several high-profile individuals. In December, the Special Prosecution Office
of Kosovo indicted the former Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural
Development, Nenad Rikalo, of the Serbian List, and the former Minister of Culture,
Youth and Sport, Kujtim Gashi, a newly elected deputy of the Democratic Party of
Kosovo, for abusing their official positions or authority. In February, the Court of
Appeals issued a final judgment in which it found the former Permanent Secretary of
the Ministry of Health, along with other ministerial staff, guilty of abusing their
official positions and, in another case, confirmed an unprecedented conviction in a
money-laundering case and ordered the confiscation of almost 1 million euros worth
of assets. At the same time, all accused individuals in the so-called “Pronto case”,
which involved high-ranking officials of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, were
acquitted by a first instance judgment of the Basic Court of Pristina in January. The
prosecutor of the case received death threats on social media in which she was
accused of failing to build a strong enough case against the indicted individuals. The
suspect who made the threats was subsequently arrested and a restraining order was
issued.
25. Courts in Kosovo also filed indictments and issued a number of decisions in war
crimes cases. The Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo indicted four i ndividuals in
three cases for crimes allegedly committed against civilians in 1999 in the
municipalities of Pristina, Ferizaj/Uroševac and Lipjan/Lipljan. Initial hearings were
held in all three cases. During the reporting period, the Court of Appeals acqu itted
one defendant accused of committing war crimes against the civilian population in
6/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

the municipality of Klinë/Klina in 1999 and reduced the sentence of another
defendant from 14 to 10 years in a case involving a crime committed in the
municipality of Suharekë/Suva Reka. In two other cases involving crimes allegedly
committed in the municipalities of Prizren and Pejë/Peć, the trials are ongoing.
26. On 24 February, upon receiving notification from the Specialist Prosecutor of
his intent to initiate proceedings before the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, the
President of the Chambers assigned a pretrial judge to review indictments filed by the
Specialist Prosecutor. In accordance with the applicable rules of procedure,
indictments are filed confidentially, and the pretrial judge has up to six months from
the filing of the indictment to issue a decision to either confirm or dismiss the
indictment.
27. In February, the preparatory team for the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission held another round of public consultations with members
of civil society, academic institutions and local communities across Kosovo to discuss
the functional modalities of such a commission. The preparatory team, which had
been established at the initiative of Mr. Thaçi in February 2017, consists of
representatives of central institutions and civil society groups from majority and
non-majority communities. However, the results of a public survey conducted by a
local non-governmental organization, Integra, and presented on 4 March indicated
that, while there was overall public support for initiatives that would help to unveil
the truth related to events that occurred in 1998 and 1999, a majority of interviewees
were not familiar with the concept of the right to truth and did not necessarily
distinguish between the process of intercommunal reconciliation in Kosovo and the
political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
28. UNMIK continued to provide support to the Working Group on persons who are
unaccounted for in connection with events in Kosovo. In September, after weeks of
disagreement on procedures, the Pristina delegation, in the presence of the Belgrade
delegation, handed over human remains of five members of a Kosovo Serb family to
the Montenegrin Commission on Missing Persons. The remains of two other persons,
identified as members of another Kosovo Serb family, were handed over to authorities
in Belgrade in early September. In a welcome development, the Working Group
resumed its activities in Belgrade in February, with both delegations agreeing to
strengthening its analytical capacities and jointly conducting a number of assessments
of potential sites in the coming months. According to the International Committee of
the Red Cross, 1,646 persons out of a total of 6,064 remain missing as of February.
29. In November, UNMIK facilitated a series of capacity-building and drafting
sessions for the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo and the Kosovo Agency of
Statistics. This resulted in the signing in January of a memoran dum of understanding
between the two institutions, reflecting their commitment to apply a human rights and
gender-sensitive approach to the collection, analysis and use of data. Mainstreaming
gender and human rights into data collection will improve the monitoring and
assessment of progress on human rights and help to ensure that commitments made
by Kosovo institutions under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
implemented in a manner consistent with international human rights law.
30. The work of the outgoing Ombudsperson has resulted in significant
achievements that have contributed to promoting a culture of human rights in Kosovo.
The Ombudsperson’s well-documented reports have provided a solid foundation for
furthering human rights accountability, as reflected in the increased number of his
recommendations being implemented by Kosovo authorities. He has effectively
contributed to the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment.

20-04647

7/19

S/2020/255

VI. Women and peace and security
31. During the reporting period, the Kosovo government commission responsible
for the verification and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence received 143 applications, bringing the total number of applications received
since its establishment in 2018 to 1,226. To date, 785 applicants (758 women and
27 men) have been granted survivor status. Challenges persist in terms of assessing
and evaluating applications owing to the sensitivity and complexity of cases. On
12 November, the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo launched an investigation
into the assessment and evaluation process upon receiving complaints from two
individuals whose applications for survivor status had been rejected by the
commission. On 6 March, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo filed an
indictment against a former member of the Serbian reserve police forces for crimes
allegedly committed against the Kosovo Albanian civilian population in May 1999,
including conflict-related crimes of sexual violence. This is the first indictment filed
by a local prosecution office on conflict-related sexual violence as a war crime since
the end of the EULEX executive mandate in 2018.
32. From 25 November to 10 December, the 16 Days of Activism against Gender based Violence annual global campaign was marked in Kosovo with more than 100
activities on the theme “Orange the World: Generation Equality Stands against
Rape!”. UNMIK produced a documentary film, entitled “Not Your Property”,
featuring women survivors from different ethnic communities, which was screened in
11 of Kosovo’s 38 municipalities and provided a platform for women survivors to
share their stories and inspire others to speak up. The multi-stakeholder Security and
Gender Group chaired by UN-Women, in which UNMIK participates, called upon the
new Kosovo government to prioritize addressing sexual violence and to protect and
support survivors.
33. The United Nations in Kosovo continued to help to advance the political
participation of women. On 21 September, in partnership with UN-Women and the
Regional Women’s Lobby for Peace, Security and Justice in Southeast Europe, it
organized a regional round table in Pristina on the empowerment of women in
peacebuilding and decision-making processes. Between December and February, in
partnership with UN-Women and the European Union, it provided leadership training
to 15 women leaders from all Kosovo communities to help to enhance their ability to
influence political and peace processes. This included engaging with a netw ork of
peers and senior mentors and interacting with members of the European Parliament
and experts in Brussels.

VII. Trust-building, partnership and cooperation
34. During the reporting period, UNMIK, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team, continued the implementation of recommendations of the
United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in Ljubljana in May 2018. To
date, 150 institutions, organizations and individuals have undertaken approximately
200 initiatives in line with the recommendations of the Forum. The majority of the
efforts were led by civil society, and about a quarter of the related activities were
conducted by central and local institutions.
35. In the area of justice, UNMIK continued to support the i ntegration of the
judiciary and the administration of justice, as part of the implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum. During the
reporting period, the UNMIK-supported Legal Aid Centre of the Kosovo Law
Institute received and processed 233 requests for free legal aid, involving property
8/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

rights of women (44), labour and pensioner rights (69), the rights of minorities,
internally displaced persons, refugees and asylum seekers (35), domestic violence and
gender-based violence (27), detainees’ rights (27) and strategic litigation cases (31).
36. UNMIK continued its efforts to help to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the judicial system to better serve the population, including reducing the backlog
of pending court cases in Kosovo in collaboration with a local non-governmental
organization. In November, UNMIK and the Advocacy Centre for Democratic Culture
commenced a project aimed at supporting the Basic Court of Mitrovica in the
translation of case files and the integration of young Kosovo Serb lawyers into
Kosovo legal practice. Also in November, the United Nations Development
Programme, with programmatic funds provided by UNMIK, began to implement a
joint project to assist the Basic Courts of Pristina, F erizaj/Uroševac and
Gjilan/Gnjilane with the translation of case files and training for court interpreters.
On 19 February, my Special Representative participated in a conference organized by
the Advocacy Centre for Democratic Culture to assess the status of the judiciary and
law practice in northern Kosovo, at which he pledged continuous support for Kosovo
institutions in strengthening the judiciary. However, challenges remain owing to
insufficient budgetary resources allocated to address the use of offici al languages in
courts and the backlog of cases.
37. As part of a wider initiative to promote language rights and remove language
barriers that prevent communities from fully exercising their fundamental freedoms,
UNMIK, in partnership with the International Organization for Migration, launched
on 26 November the first standard online Albanian-Serbian and Serbian-Albanian
dictionary. At the inauguration, my Special Representative emphasized the essential
role of linguistic diversity in ensuring a healthy social environment and the
commitment of UNMIK to further advancing efforts to preserve linguistic diversity
in Kosovo. To date, the online dictionary has over 6,000 active users.
38. UNMIK continued to advance the implementation of its framework strategy o n
young people and peace and security. In January, in partnership with a local
multi-ethnic network of young peacebuilders, the “United Youth Task Force”, it
launched a capacity-building project aimed at fostering the participation of young
people from all communities in local decision-making processes by strengthening the
municipal youth councils and implementing youth-sensitive budgeting in
10 ethnically mixed municipalities. Furthermore, in implementing the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech, UNMIK, in collaboration with “United
Youth Task Force,” organized a training programme for a multi -ethnic team of
37 young bloggers and youth activists (20 women and 17 men) on digital media
literacy and means to identify, deconstruct and challenge expressions of intolerance.
During the training programme, which was held from 22 to 24 February, the
participants also met with representatives of the resource centre for missing persons
established by UNMIK and the Kosovo Documentation Centre to dis cuss the impact
of media on transitional justice and the role of youth in building sustainable peace.
From September to February, as a follow-up to the third United Nations Youth
Assembly in Kosovo, held in 2019, UNMIK and the United Nations Children’s Fun d
supported the first multi-ethnic youth-led project, on the theme “Under one sky”.
Over 630 young people (370 women and 260 men) completed a one -day course on
observational astronomy and discussed astronomy education and development in
Kosovo and the Western Balkans.
39. The implementation of a youth-focused project supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund continued. Through the project, the United Nations in Kosovo, in cooperation
with the Association of Journalists of Kosovo provided training to 61 journalists and
journalism students (38 women and 23 men) aimed at enhancing capacities to apply
a gender perspective in their reporting. Similarly, in collaboration with the University
20-04647

9/19

S/2020/255

of Pristina, the United Nations facilitated a series of lectures with internatio nal and
local academics to raise the awareness of 416 students (231 women and 185 men) on
the importance of the meaningful inclusion of women in peacebuilding. Under the
same project, building upon the success of existing youth-led initiatives supported by
the United Nations and its partners, the United Nations Children’s Fund helped 2,000
young women and men from various communities, including 723 adolescents, to
develop the skills necessary to identify community challenges and design solutions
to meet social needs. These have resulted in over 30 youth-led initiatives.
40. UNMIK continued to strengthen its engagement with human rights-focused civil
society organizations to contribute to cross-community dialogue and encourage grassroots monitoring of human rights violations and other human rights-related concerns.
From 20 to 22 October, it organized a workshop on international human rights
mechanisms and reporting for over 20 civil society representatives from across
Kosovo, aimed at increasing capacity to monitor and report on human rights and
support their engagement with United Nations human rights mechanisms.
41. The Mission continued to provide document certification services. During the
reporting period, a total of 2,213 documents were processed, inclu ding 1,211
documents related to pensions and 1,002 to civil status, such as high school and
university diplomas and birth, marriage and death certificates. UNMIK continued to
facilitate police cooperation between Kosovo authorities and the Ministry of the
Interior of Serbia, with a total of 45 requests received and processed. It facilitated the
issuance of 24 Red Notices and 15 extradition requests to Kosovo from members of
the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). It also opened 875
cases for investigation within the INTERPOL database, bringing the total number of
open cases related to the territory or people of Kosovo to 957. UNMIK also processed
6,745 items of official correspondence as part of its INTERPOL liaison function
during the reporting period.

VIII. Mission support
42. In November, UNMIK became the first peacekeeping operation to obtain the
International Organization for Standardization 9001:2015 quality management
standard for end-to-end mission support field operations. The certification, which is
valid for a period of three years, is a testimony to the Mission’s efforts to ensure that
its support operations are client-oriented, transparent and accountable, in line with
my management reform initiative to strengthen perfor mance culture, transparency
and accountability. UNMIK has continued to implement its three -year quality
assurance strategy, consolidating its position as a centre for excellence in business
intelligence. It has progressed in training its staff in business intelligence and
implemented management “dashboards” to monitor the impact of programmatic
activities and other outreach initiatives in follow-up to the United Nations Kosovo
Trust-Building Forum.

IX. Impact of COVID-19
43. On 11 March 2020, after the declaration by the World Health Organization of
the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, the government of Kosovo announced certain
containment measures, including the closure of schools and the suspension of travel
from high- and medium-risk countries. On 12 March, the government established an
inter-agency commission, chaired by the Prime Minister, tasked with preventing the
spread of the virus by ensuring the distribution of supplies to medical centres and
emergency services, as well as with preparing accommodation for affected persons.
10/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

On 13 March, upon confirmation of the first two cases of COVID -19 in Kosovo, the
government took further measures, including restricting the movement of people into
and out of two affected municipalities, closing all land crossing points and suspending
all inter-city public transportation and regular commercial air routes. On 15 March, it
declared a public health emergency as the number of confirmed cases rose to nine
(five women and four men).
44. The United Nations in Kosovo remains fully operational, despite the
implementation of risk reduction measures, such as telecommuting for non -critical
staff and a move to virtual communications platforms, though with limited ability to
implement programmatic activities and confidence-building projects. In the spirit of
the One United Nations initiative, the Mission and the United Nations Kosovo team
have been closely coordinating on issues related to medical prevention, preparedness
and response, including through the implementation of business continuity plans. An
inter-agency task force was established, chaired by UNMIK, to support and
coordinate procurement of medical supplies and equipment. United Nations
coordination with the Ministry of Health of Kosovo has been led by the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Development Coordinator from the onset of the
crisis. At the end of the reporting period, there were no confirmed cases of COVID -19
among the United Nations staff in Kosovo.

X. Observations
45. The recent elections in Kosovo contributed to a peaceful transition of power,
with a new government formed for the first time by the previous opposition. The
election outcome thus represented a major change in the political landscape in
Kosovo, reflecting a desire among a large part of the Kosovo population for political
change. The new government has set an ambitious reform agenda, in particular in the
areas of rule of law and economic development, which have been long -standing
challenges in Kosovo, and which are priorities for the United Nations worldwide. The
success of such efforts will require political will and commitment by the new
government and external support. Greater representation of women in the leadership
of the Assembly and the executive is encouraging and should inspire their increased
participation in Kosovo in decision-making processes, as well as in the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade. The government and the Assembly should engage all
segments of society, in particular those who are left behind and those who are
underrepresented, in the deliberations over the most sensitive issues facing Kosovo.
46. In addition to institutional reform, pursuing the normalization process with
Belgrade is at the forefront of international expectations. It is essential that obstacles
to the continuation of productive dialogue are removed swiftly. I am encouraged by
the personal determination expressed by Mr. Borrell to spearhead efforts to resume
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. I also welcome the tangible steps taken by
Belgrade and Pristina, with support from the United States, to promote connectivity
and regional cooperation by committing themselves to working towards direct air, rail
and road connections.
47. Acknowledging the challenges, I am nonetheless very encouraged by activities
of the joint Belgrade-Pristina working group on missing persons, which continues to
operate with the participation and support of UNMIK, as well as other agencies. In
order to bring long-awaited answers to families, it is strongly hoped that individuals
with relevant information will continue to come forward and communicate with the
joint working group.
48. I commend the Mission for advancing its trust-building agenda through a variety
of initiatives in cooperation with the government, civil society, international
20-04647

11/19

S/2020/255

organizations and diplomatic partners. UNMIK, collaborating with the United
Nations Kosovo team, has focused on areas that are critical to societal reconciliation
in Kosovo and which are in turn indispensable to dialogue, compromise and
sustainable peace. Collective United Nations efforts have centred on the
empowerment of women, young people, civil society and professional media and
support for other positive change-makers throughout Kosovo. Projects focused on
institutional capacity-building and the promotion of multilingualism have reinforced
the Mission’s support for Kosovo institutions in promoting and protecting human
rights. I hope that such work can be expanded to connect with similar initiatives
across the region.
49. I wish to reiterate the importance of the United Nations trust fund in support of
the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo.
It is our shared responsibility to ensure support and assistance for the aff ected
communities. The Fund has received only one pledge so far, and I once again appeal
to Member States and other actors and organizations to contribute to the trust fund.
50. I thank my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, and all UNMIK staff for the
energy, creativity and dedication that they put into the Mission’s work. I also reiterate
my gratitude to the long-standing partners of the United Nations in Kosovo – the
Kosovo Force, OSCE, the European Union and the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes – for their contribution and collaboration.

12/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

Annex I
Report of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo from
16 September 2019 to 15 March 2020
1.

Summary
Judicial officials addressed a number of issues identified by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) Case Monitoring Unit (in the scope of its
monitoring mandate), such as eliminating potential undue interference by
implementing an automated blind-draw allocation of judges to trial panels and by
avoiding the use of fixed panels at the Special Department of the Basic Court of
Pristina, as well as by committing to taking steps to reduce the high rate of
unproductive court hearings. These measures are aimed at strengthening access to
justice and improve the independence and impartiality of the judiciary.
The Case Monitoring Unit continued its close monitoring of former EULEX and
other high-profile cases. The Mission noted little progress in the investigation of such
cases at the police and prosecutorial levels.
In support of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, the Mission continued to
facilitate the technical implementation of the integrated border management technical
protocol and the dialogue agreements related to freedom of movement. On the latter,
the Minister of Internal Affairs extended two ministerial decisions on driving licences
and civil status documents. The Mission also continued to support the Basic Court of
Mitrovica and the Court of Appeals Division in Mitrovica in the implementation of
the justice agreement.
EULEX continued to support the Kosovo police in the field of international
police cooperation at different levels. Through the Institute of Forensic Medicine,
support was provided to local counterparts in locating and identifying missing
persons. Furthermore, the Mission maintained its rapid intervention capacities as
second security responder and continued its support for the Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.

2.
2.1.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
Monitoring
The Mission continued its close monitoring of selected cases and trials in the
justice system, both former EULEX cases and ad hoc cases.
In January 2020, the Kosovo Judicial Council adopted criteria for the allocation
of court cases through an electronic system in all Kosovo courts. It provides for a
“blind draw” for the allocation of cases, which will help to limit external
interferences. The first automatic case assignment was launched in all Basic Courts
in Kosovo on 18 February. The Council further announced that it would look into the
reasons for the high number of unproductive court hearings and take measures to
reduce it. The Head of the recently established Special Department of the Basic Court
of Pristina informed EULEX that the Special Department had decided not to use fixed
trial panels in its proceedings any longer. These three important decisions, all taken
in line with the Mission’s recommendations, are expected to contribute to an increase
in access to justice, as well as to an improved perception of the independence and
impartiality of the judiciary in Kosovo. That said, the monitoring of some high -profile
cases revealed signs of possible undue interference in court proceedings.

20-04647

13/19

S/2020/255

EULEX continued to support the Kosovo police War Crimes Investigation Unit
in establishing a new war crimes database, including through the provision of
tailor-made training measures on how to effectively search and manage the database.
Part of the EULEX assistance consists of developing a system for clustering similar
cases in order to reduce their number to a manageable size. Upon a request issued by
the Kosovo police, the Mission will continue to assist the police over the coming
months in order to ensure that the project is completed successfully. While some
positive developments on war crimes cases were visible, no progress was seen in the
investigation of high-profile cases.
EULEX observed significant improvements in certain aspects of the Kosovo
police’s handling of sexual violence cases. These included the correct referral of cases
to other institutions to ensure the preservation of biological evidence, as well as an
increasingly unbiased approach and readiness to investigate all possible aspects and
leads. However, the implementation of a victim-based approach, notably with
juveniles, remained an exception, and the Kosovo police still lacked sufficient
technological resources to properly investigate such cases. The Mission observed that
minimum sentences were often imposed in domestic violence cases, and aggravating
circumstances were not taken into consideration, despite a clear obligation to account
for them in the new Criminal Code.
The Mission’s support to the senior management of the Kosovo Correctional
Service did not progress substantially given that neither actions nor decisions on its
new structure were taken by the outgoing government, and external recruitments were
also not carried out. Likewise, there was no progress in amending the legal framework
affecting the Service.
The monitoring of high-profile prisoner transports revealed some minor issues
of concern, mainly at the technical level. With the aim of eliminating existing gaps,
the Mission provided suggestions and recommendations on a regulation on the
transport of prisoners, recently developed by the Kosovo Correctional Service.
Alongside other international actors, EULEX supported the development of a
strategy and action plan for the training of Kosovo Correctional Service staff in the
period 2020–2024. Furthermore, the Mission and a European Union twinning project
jointly supported the Service in designing a regulation that enables prisoners to work
outside correctional facilities, the implementation of which started in November as a
pilot in one facility. Upon the request of the Service, the Mission conducted a review
of the regulation and presented its findings and recommendations. In February, the
Mission forwarded to the Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service a
thematic report on the establishment of a Prisoners’ Assessment and Classification
Unit in the Service, taking stock of steps made to date, outlining the Mission’s
intensive support in that area and providing recommendations on future steps in the
process.
The Mission continued to facilitate the implementation of the integrated border
management technical protocol stemming from the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. There were no new developments regarding the planned construction of six
permanent common crossing points between Kosovo and Serbia. The Serbian
authorities remained in the temporary containers at the Merdarë/Merdare and
Mutivodë/Mutivode common crossing points, although the construction of the
permanent crossing points at those locations had been finished in mid -2019.
The Mission continued to support the technical implementation of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue agreements related to freedom of movement. As advised
by EULEX, the Minister of Internal Affairs extended two ministerial decisions
necessary for the implementation of these agreements, namely a decision enabling the
conversion of Serbian driving licences into Kosovo ones and a decision on the
14/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

acceptance of Serbian birth, marriage and death certificates for applying for any
Kosovo identification documents.
The Mission continued to support the Basic Court of Mitrovica and the Court of
Appeals Division in Mitrovica in the implementation of the European Union-facilitated
justice agreement.
2.2.

Operations
EULEX continued to support the Kosovo police in the field of international
police cooperation. It facilitated the exchange of information between the National
Central Bureaus of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and
the Kosovo police’s International Law Enforcement Coordination Unit under the
umbrella of the INTERPOL Liaison Office within the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). In its supporting role between the
European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation and the Kosovo police,
EULEX provided criminal intelligence support to States members of the European
Union and third-country investigations, and facilitated the exchange of information
between the Kosovo police and the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia. In November
2019, the Mission conducted a workshop on international police cooperation
principles in the field of environmental crimes, followed by a study visit to Italy in
December.
The Institute of Forensic Medicine continued its work on lo cating and
identifying missing persons and supporting local counterparts. In September 2019,
the Institute of Forensic Medicine, in cooperation with EULEX and the Kosovo
police, launched an awareness-raising campaign entitled “Speak up on Time” on the
importance of preserving biological evidence in cases of sexual violence. Hundreds
of students were provided with relevant information during workshops in schools
across Kosovo.
The formed police unit of EULEX maintained its rapid intervention capacities
as second security responder. In January, the unit conducted two exercises with the
Kosovo Force on medical evacuation and crowd and riot control. No joint training
measures were conducted with the Kosovo police.
EULEX continued to support the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office within its means and capabilities.

20-04647

15/19

S/2020/255

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
In February, the Specialist Prosecutor notified the President of the Specialist
Chambers of his intent to initiate proceedings in accordance with article 38 (4) of the
Law on the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, and the President
assigned a pre-trial judge accordingly.
On 13 January, a panel of the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court
found admissible a referral by a summoned individual who challenged the legality of
the Specialist Prosecutor’s interview process. Furthermore, the Judge for Staff
Appeals and the Higher Judge for Staff Appeals issued four decisions between
September and December 2019 on appeals by staff members of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland regarding their contractual status at the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
On 6 January, the Specialist Chambers took possession of its detention facility
following the conclusion of the negotiations with the prison service of The
Netherlands on detention costs in late 2019. The rules of detention comply with
international standards, in particular the European Pri son Rules and the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules).
During the reporting period, the Registry supported the working group on the
Lists of Counsel in drafting a constitution for the Independen t Representative Body
of Specialist Counsel. The working group met in The Hague at the Specialist
Chambers to finalize the constitution, which was adopted on 4 December by the Lists
of Counsel. With the adoption of its constitution, the Independent Represe ntative
Body of Specialist Counsel was formally established and can be consulted by the
Specialist Chambers on changes to its legal framework. The first consultation with it
on proposed amendments to the rules of procedure and evidence was held in January.
In late 2019, the President activated the Rules Committee for the purposes of
considering proposed amendments to the rules of procedure and evidence, in
particular those rules that were tested during the course of the investigations and
operations of the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
The President of the Specialist Chambers and the Registrar cooperated closely
with the host State and other States members of the European Union. On
10 December, the Principals – the President, the Registrar and the Specialist
Prosecutor – hosted the States members and contributing third States at their premises
for the annual briefing. At the briefing, they gave updates on the recent activities and
addressed questions from the participants. It was the fourth briefing of its kind to be
hosted by the Principals.
In December, a call for nominations of judges for appointment to the roster of
international judges was advertised, with the closing date extended until 17 March.
The Specialist Chambers Court Information Network, a network consisting of
15 representatives of non-governmental organizations in Kosovo and Serbia, met on
6 February in Pristina for an outreach workshop. The consultative workshop was
focused on providing feedback on specific outreach products of the S pecialist
Chambers. Furthermore, the network provided valuable insight into how best to
communicate Specialist Chambers messages locally and gave feedback on the
outreach activities of the Specialist Chambers so that they could be further developed.
During the reporting period, 16 meetings with civil society representatives were
held in Kosovo within the Specialist Chambers outreach programme. Towards the end
16/19

20-04647

S/2020/255

of 2019, the programme moved to its second phase. The first phase was mainly
dedicated to establishing a dialogue with civil society in Kosovo and to ensuring that
correct basic information about the Court was disseminated. The second phase is
aimed at increasing the dissemination of information about the Specialist Chambers
to the general public through traditional and social media and to create an
understanding of the pretrial and trial stages of proceedings at the Specialist
Chambers.
As a result of the activity of the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, the Defence
Office has processed three legal aid requests and assigned counsel in accordance, and
appointed 12 counsels and three co-counsels. There are currently 174 persons on the
List of Counsels eligible to appear before the Specialist Chambers, of which 88 are
eligible to represent victims. The application process remains open.
During the reporting period, the Registry increased its administrative support to
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, including in the areas of information technology
and language services, to ensure that the Specialist Pr osecutor could focus all his
available resources on investigations.
In the reporting period, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office took its investigation
further and continued interviewing suspects, victims and witnesses, as well as
collecting and reviewing other evidence. In order to fulfil its mandate, it requires the
increased engagement and support of the international community, international
organizations and individual States.

20-04647

17/19

S/2020/255

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as of 15 March 2020)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Austria

1

–

1

Germany

1

1

2

Hungary

–

2

2

Russian Federation

1

1

2

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

1

1

Total

3

6

9

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as of 15 March 2020)

18/19

Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

–

2

2

Poland

–

1

1

Republic of Moldova

–

1

1

Romania

–

1

1

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

2

2

Total

0

8

8

20-04647

S/2020/255

20-04647

19/19
