UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26695
5 November 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3306th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 November 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "Central America:
efforts towards peace", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has learned with shock and concern of the
violent deaths in recent days in El Salvador of two leaders and other
members of the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN),
as well as one member of the Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (ARENA)
party. It notes, in this respect, that the Human Rights Division of the
United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) has referred in its
last two reports (S/26416 and S/26033) to what appears to be a pattern of
politically motivated murders, a development all the more serious in light
of the upcoming electoral process. The Council insists that this violence
has to stop.
"The Security Council deems it essential that the authorities of
El Salvador take all necessary measures so that those responsible for the
killings be promptly brought to justice, with a view to preventing such
events from occurring in the future. It welcomes the technical cooperation
that Member States are extending to the competent Salvadorian authorities,
at their request, in order to assist them in the investigation of these
criminal acts.
"The Security Council notes with particular concern that the
Secretary-General, in his report on the Implementation of the
Recommendations of the Commission on the Truth (S/26581), underscored the
significance of cases of killings over the past few months that seemed to
follow patterns that could indicate a resurgence of illegal armed groups,
whose activities had diminished following the signature of the Peace
Accords in January 1992.
"In this regard, the Council takes note, with approval, of the
Secretary-General’s decision, as reported in his letter to the President of
the Council (S/26689), to direct the Human Rights Division of ONUSAL to
work with the El Salvador Human Rights Prosecutor in order to assist the
Government of El Salvador in implementing the recommendation of the
Commission on the Truth that a thorough investigation of illegal armed
groups be undertaken immediately.

93-61460 (E)

051193

/...

S/26695
English
Page 2

"The Security Council further underlines the importance of full and
timely implementation of all the provisions of the Peace Accords. It
remains concerned about delays occurring in several instances, namely, the
phasing out of the National Police and full deployment of the National
Civil Police, the implementation of the recommendations of the Commission
on the Truth and the transfer of lands and other reintegration programmes,
which are essential for the development of a solid framework and a new
climate for the respect of human rights in El Salvador.
"The Security Council also calls upon all parties to continue their
efforts to make the March 1994 elections representative and successful. It
recognizes the progress that has been made in registering thousands of
voters, but, taking into account the delays and problems reported by the
Secretary-General (S/26606), calls upon the Government and all concerned to
ensure that all qualified voters who have applied will receive the
necessary documents in time to vote. It welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General to assist in this process through the Electoral Division
of ONUSAL.
"The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached between the
Government and the FMLN on the need to speed up the implementation of the
provisions of the Peace Accords and, accordingly, urges all parties
concerned to accelerate the fulfilment of their commitments under those
Accords before the electoral campaign gets under way. It expects ONUSAL to
be allowed fully to carry out its verification mandate unimpeded. The
Council will continue to follow developments in El Salvador with close
attention."

-----
