228

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

to report to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/159.

Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978
concerning disappeared persons, and its resolution 42/142
of 7 December 1987 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Deeply concerned about the persistence, in certain cases,
of the practice of enforced or in voluntary disappearances,
and about the fact that, in certain cases, the families of
disappeared persons have been the target of intimidation
and ill-treatment,
Expressing its profound emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the families concerned, who are unsure of the fate
of their relatives,
Convinced of the need to continue implementing the
provisions ofits resolution 33/173 and ofthe other United
Nations resolutions on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances, with a view to finding solutions
for cases of disappearances and helping to eliminate such
practices,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1988/34 of 8 March 1988,2 7
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances for its
humanitarian work and to those Governments that have
co-operated with it;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human Rights to extend for two years the term of the mandate of the Working Group, as defined in Commission
resolution 20 (XXXVI) of 29 February 1980, 53 while

maintaining the principie of annual reporting by the
Working Group;
3. Also welcomes the provisions made by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 1986/55 of
13 March 198660 to enable the Working Group to fulfil its
mandate with greater efficiency;
4. Further welcomes the progress made in the preparation of the draft declaration on enforced or involuntary
disappearances;
5. Appeals to the Governments concerned, particularly
those which have not yet replied to the communications
addressed to them by the Working Group, to co-operate
fully with the Working Group so as to enable it, with respect for its working methods based on discretion, to perform its strictly humanitarian role, and in particular to
reply more quickly to the requests for information addressed to them by the Working Group;
6. Encourages the Governments concerned to consider
the wish of the Working Group, when such a wish is expressed, to visit their countries, thus enabling the Working
Group to fulfil its mandate even more effectively;
7. Extends its warm thanks to the Governments that
have invited the Working Group;
8. Appeals to the Governments concerned to take steps
to protect the families of disappeared persons against any
intimidation or any ill-treatment ofwhich they may be thc
target;
9. Ca/Is upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority and
to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
the task of the Working Group when it considers the report to be submitted by the Working Group to the Commission at its forty-fifth session;
1O. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with ali necessary
facilities.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
