V.

33/20.

United Nations lnstitute for Training and
Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New Intemational Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 32/51 of 8 December 1977 on the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, which set in motion measures that farm
the basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
Acknowledging the value of the research and "futures studies" undertaken by the United Nations lnstitute far Training and Research,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in assisting, through training
and other services within its mandate, members of
permanent missions to the United Nations and other
national o:fficials concerned with the work of the
United Nations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute
far Training and Research; 2
2. W elcomes the emphasis and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphere of economic and social training and research
and the inclusion of specific projects on the problems
in the areas identified by the General Assembly at its
sixth and seventh special sessions and in the relevant
decisions of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Calls upon Member States and organizations to
provide greater and wider financia! support to the
United Nations lnstitute far Training and Research.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/21.

79

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas
of Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia, 3
prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution
32/55 of 8 December 1977, with regard to the progress
made in the implementation of all the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator4 outlining the substantial
grain-import requirements far the year 1978/79 and
2 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/33/14).
s A/33/195.
4 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Second Committee, 34th meeting, paras. 1-16.

the urgent need far transport vehicles and associated
equipment far the distribution of relief grain,
Noting the statement of the Deputy Assistant Administrator far Africa of the United Nations Development Programme 5 on assistance being provided by the
Programme to the Government of Ethiopia in relation
to its relief and rehabilitation programmes in the
drought-stricken areas of the country,
Noting also the statement of the Commissioner far
Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia6 outlining the
measures taken by the Government of Ethiopia to deal
with relief and rehabilitation in the drought-stricken
areas of the country,
Noting further the call made in the multidonor mission's report far urgent assistance to the droughtstricken areas of Ethiopia,
Concerned at the gravity of the faod situation due
to the drought and the devastation of crops by swarms
of locusts,
Noting with appreciation in this regard the continued
efforts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations as well as the World Food Programme of the United Nations and the Food and
Agriculture Organization, in particular the assistance
given by the Food and Agriculture Organization
through its Technical Co-operation Programme, its
Office for Special Relief Operations and the emergency
faod aid provided by the World Food Programme as
approved by the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization,
Alarmed by the critica! faod shortage, especially in
the regions of Wollo, Tigre, Shoa, Hararghe, Bale and
Sidamo,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1833 (LVI) of 2 May 1974, 1876 (LVII) of 16 July
1974, 1971 (LIX) of 30 July 1975, 1986 (LX) of
6 May 1976 and 1978/2 of 2 May 1978, in which
the Council, ínter afia, called upan the SecretaryGeneral to take the necessary action to respond to
the requests of the Government of Ethiopia with
regard to the immediate, medium-term and long-term
needs of the drought-stricken areas and appealed to
the Governments of all Member States, international
organizations and voluntary agencies to continue giving
their fullest support and assistance in the Government's efforts towards relief, rehabilitation and
recovery,
Further recalling that, despite the generous assistance offered to the Government of Ethiopia by the
Govcrnments of Member States, organizations of the
United Nations system and voluntary agencies, enormous di:fficulties of rehabilitation and recovery still
persist,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-Gcneral on assistance to the drought-stricken
areas of Ethiopia;
2. Requests the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of tbe United Nations, the World Food
Programme of the United Nations and the Food
and Agriculture Organization, the United Nations
Children's Fund and other United Nations organiza6 /bid., 38th meeting, paras. 2 and
6 lbid., 39th meeting, paras. 27-32.

3.
