S/2021/337

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 8 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Mrs.
Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation in the Middle East (Syria)” convened on Tuesday, 6 April 2021.
A statement was also delivered by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dinh Quy Dang
President of the Security Council

21-04712 (E) 150421 040521

*2104712*

S/2021/337

Annex I
Briefing by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Izumi Nakamitsu
I thank you for this opportunity to once again brief the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the chemical
weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Since my previous briefing (see S/2021/226), on 4 March 2021, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs has continued to maintain regular contact with counterparts at
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities
related to this matter. As per established practice, I held a monthly call with the
OPCW Director-General on Thursday, 1 April 2021, to receive an update and
ascertain his views. I also met with the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, who reaffirmed the Syrian Government’s commitment to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and cooperation with the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
As I previously informed the Council, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic continues to impact the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability to deploy
to the Syrian Arab Republic. However, the Technical Secretariat maintains its
readiness for deployments, which are being conducted subject to the evolution of the
pandemic. Despite the travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat has continued
with its mandated activities related to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic in this regard.
Efforts to clarify the remaining outstanding issues regarding the initial
declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic to the OPCW are ongoing. During the twentyfourth round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
and the Syrian National Authority, held from 7 to 25 February 2021 in Damascus,
the DAT conducted technical meetings with representatives of the Syrian National
Authority, visited three declared sites and conducted two interviews regarding an
outstanding issue.
During that deployment, the Declaration Assessment Team also shared with
the Syrian National Authority the results of the analysis of the samples collected
in the Syrian Arab Republic during the twenty-third round of consultations,
in September 2020. The DAT received preliminary comments from the Syrian
technical experts regarding the presence of chemicals identified in those samples,
some of which were unexpected. I have been advised that, on 8 March 2021, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat received a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic
containing further explanations regarding the sample analysis results. The Technical
Secretariat is analysing those explanations and will engage with the Syrian National
Authority accordingly.
I have also been advised that, on 9 March 2021, the Syrian Arab Republic
replied through a note verbale to the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s assessment
pertaining to a former chemical weapons production facility that was declared as
never having been used to produce and/or weaponize chemical weapons. In that
note verbale, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterated that that former chemical weapons
production facility was never used for the production of chemical weapons.
As a result of the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. As
has been stressed on multiple occasions, engagement and dialogue by the Syrian
Arab Republic with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is critical to closing these
outstanding issues.
2/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

As I have previously informed the Security Council, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat conducted the seventh round of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre in November 2020.
The outcome of that round of inspections will be reported to the OPCW Executive
Council in due course.
With regard to the finding of a Schedule 2 chemical detected at the Barzah
facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre during the third round
of inspections, held in 2018, I understand that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet
to provide sufficient technical information or explanations that would enable the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to close this issue.
I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains in the process
of studying all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues its engagement with the Syrian
Government and other States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention with
regard to a “variety of incidents”. As previously reported, further FFM deployments
will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I have also been advised that the Investigation and Identification Team
continues its investigations into incidents in which the FFM has determined that
chemical weapons were used, or likely used, in the Syrian Arab Republic and will
issue further reports in due course. I take this opportunity to reiterate my full support
for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and independence of the
work of the OPCW.
With regard to the inspections mandated by paragraph 8 of Executive Council
decision EC-94/DEC.2 entitled, “Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical
Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”, I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat continues to monitor the security situation and will inform the Syrian
Arab Republic when it is prepared to deploy for that purpose. Those inspections will
also be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although almost eight years have now passed since the adoption of resolution
2118 (2013), there is still much work to be done before the resolution can be considered
fully implemented. Moreover, as long as the use of chemical weapons continues, or
the threat of their use remains, we must retain our focus on preventing those threats
and not allow ourselves to become inured to them. Unity in the Security Council
is required to re-establish the norm against chemical weapons. The vitality and
credibility of the broader disarmament and non-proliferation architecture depends
upon it. The use of these weapons must always be seen as a clear violation of a deeply
held taboo. Accordingly, the identification and accountability of those responsible
is imperative.
Before concluding, I wish to echo the Secretary-General’s remarks at the
General Assembly on the situation in Syria, delivered on 30 March 2021.
“After a decade of war, many Syrians have lost confidence that the
international community can help them forge an agreed path out of the conflict.
I am convinced that we still can. We will be relentless in our pursuit of a
negotiated political settlement in line with Security Council resolution 2254
(2015). [...] A solution that meets the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians. The
war in Syria is not only Syria’s war. Ending it and the tremendous suffering
it continues to cause is a collective responsibility. Today we must all commit
fully to achieving that goal.”

21-047123/25

S/2021/337

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China is consistently opposed to the use of chemical weapons by any country,
organization or individual under any circumstances and for any purposes. We
hope that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) will
investigate and deal with the alleged use of chemical weapons by working under
the principles of independence, objectivity and impartiality and strictly within the
framework of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
On the chemical weapons issue in Syria, a series of reports issued by the
Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) are still
subject to different views. Regarding the questions from relevant parties, the
Technical Secretariat shall provide professional, scientific and convincing responses
with a view to ensuring that investigation results stand the test of time and facts.
The working methods and procedures of the IIT shall be in full compliance with
the provisions of CWC. The chain of evidence must be complete and closed. China
objects to jumping to conclusions amid doubts. States parties and the international
community must strengthen supervision over the work of the Technical Secretariat.
China commends the Syrian Government for its active cooperation with the
Technical Secretariat and encourages both parties to continue their communication
and cooperation to resolve the pending issues. From 7 to 25 February, the Syrian
Government and the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) held the twenty-fourth
round of technical consultations. With the assistance of Syria, the DAT visited three
relevant facilities that had been declared by Syria and conducted two interviews.
On 9 March, Syria sent a note verbal to the Technical Secretariat providing further
information on the pending issues. Those interactions deserve recognition. The
Technical Secretariat must handle Syria’s initial declaration on chemical weapons
in an objective and impartial manner, enhance coordination with Syria and refrain
from the practice of double standards and politicization.
At present, the international community is facing sharp differences over the
investigations on the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. The OPCW and
the Syrian Government are still continuing their cooperation in an effort to resolve
issues relating to the declaration. In that context, forcing the Conference of the
States Parties to take actions in haste will only make the States parties even more
divided and the work of the OPCW more politicized. That will further undermine
the authority and effectiveness of the international architecture on the prohibition of
chemical weapons and harm the common interests of the international community.
China is deeply concerned. The investigation and handling of the alleged use of
chemical weapons in Syria must be brought back to the framework of the CWC.
It is our hope that the OPCW will go back to its tradition of making decisions by
consensus. This is a joint responsibility of all States parties and will serve the
common interests of all.

4/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. We greatly
appreciate your calls for Syrian cooperation and for the unity of the Security Council
to ensure accountability for the use of chemical weapons.
The monthly report (see S/2021/305) of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on the progress in
the elimination of the chemical weapons in Syria remains largely unchanged. There
is no progress. This is the ninetieth report since 2014, and the outstanding issues with
regard to the initial declaration remain in place. Worryingly, one of them pertains to
a chemical weapons production facility, which Syria still denies to have ever used for
that purposes, contrary to the facts and evidence that prove otherwise.
A decade-long conflict in Syria reflects the Al-Assad regime’s blatant disregard
for international norms and obligations. We welcome the OPCW member States’
determination to take action. The OPCW Executive Council adopted a decision
in July 2020 to respond to the findings of the first report of the Investigation and
Identification Team. That report concluded that Syrian armed forces used chemical
weapons against its own people in three instances in Ltamenah in March 2017.
Due to the Syrian non-compliance with the Executive Council decision, a draft
decision was put forward in November 2020 to the OPCW Conference of the State
Parties on behalf of 46 States, including Estonia. We hope that, once the Conference
reconvenes later this month, it will take appropriate action to show that there are
serious consequences for the use of chemical weapons.
Estonia is convinced that a robust response from the Security Council is
essential to hold those responsible to account, seek justice for the victims and prevent
such attacks from happening again. The Security Council and all its members have a
responsibility to protect the international non-proliferation regime, which underpins
our collective security. The use of a weapon of mass destruction by anyone anywhere
is not, and cannot become, acceptable.
To conclude, let me reiterate Estonia’s full confidence in the professional,
independent and impartial work of the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat. We
firmly reject attempts to discredit that body in order to hide the Al-Assad regime’s
crimes and avoid accountability. We call on the Syrian regime to cooperate with the
Technical Secretariat and its investigative mechanisms actively and fully. We also
call on the Russian Federation to urgently, fully and in a transparent manner disclose
the circumstances of the poisoning of Mr. Navalny with a chemical nerve agent of
the Novichok group and to inform the Security Council in that regard.

21-047125/25

S/2021/337

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
With the deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team on the ground in
February, there was an opportunity for the regime to clarify its initial declaration. I
am not surprised to see that no progress has been made. Clearly, the regime continues
to lie, to hide the truth and to evade its international obligations.
The initial declaration is incomplete, as we all know. Yet Syria continues to
deny the evidence. It has tried to explain that the undeclared production site was a
civilian infrastructure. No one is convinced by those explanations.
Everyone knows the responsibility of the Syrian regime and the abject acts for
which it is responsible. France will therefore pay close attention to the conclusions of
the upcoming reports of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). I say that with great firmness, we
will ensure that the regime is held to account.
The regime has not done anything that was expected of it. That is why France,
with its partners, has invoked the consequences. Last November, we submitted
a draft decision to the OPCW Technical Secretariat on behalf of 46 delegations,
essentially to suspend the voting rights of the Syrian regime and prevent it from
standing for election to the OPCW Executive Council until Syria complies with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). That draft decision
will be submitted in the second part of the twenty-fifth Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC, which will open at The Hague on 20 April. We call on all States
Parties to support the draft decision in order to reaffirm that the use of chemical
weapons is unacceptable and that repeated violations of the Convention cannot
go unanswered.
I would also like to pay tribute once again to the very professional work of the
OPCW. I regret that some States continue to make unfounded accusations against it.
They are unworthy and, above all, absolutely irresponsible.
I say this with gravity: the re-emergence of chemical weapons in the world is a
major threat to international peace and security. We cannot allow chemical weapons
to become a new reality. The use of these weapons is inhumane and must remain an
absolute taboo. That is the responsibility of the Council.
The fight against impunity and a total ban on the use of chemical weapons
remain our priorities. That is what the Minister for Foreign Affairs, together with
17 other European Foreign Ministers, reiterated very clearly last week in a joint
statement. We owe it to the victims, some of whom are now turning to national
courts to open up new avenues of access to justice.

6/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex V
Statement by
United Nations

the

Permanent

Mission

of

India

to

the

I would like to thank Under Secretary General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We have taken note of the update on the twenty-fourth round of consultations
between the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the Syrian National
Authority, which took place from 7 to 25 February 2021. The DAT conducted
technical meetings with representatives of the Syrian National Authority, visited
three declared sites — one chemical weapons production facility and two chemical
weapons storage facilities — and held two interviews on an outstanding issue. The
Technical Secretariat also received additional explanations from the Syrian Arab
Republic on results of samples collected during the twenty-third round of DAT
consultations. We take note of the cooperation displayed by the Syrian authorities in
all those developments.
India recognizes the efforts of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat in the Declaration Assessment Team and the
Fact-Finding Mission. We will await further updates on these mechanisms, including
the inspections of the facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre
that were conducted between 8 and 13 November 2020.
We hope that the ongoing engagement and cooperation between Syria and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat will progress further in the coming months towards an
early resolution of all outstanding issues. In that regard, we welcome the in-principle
agreement at the beginning of this year for a further six-month extension of the
tripartite agreement among the Government of Syria, the OPCW and the United
Nations Office of Project Services to facilitate the mandated activities in Syria. We
hope that extension agreement will be signed soon.
India has consistently underlined the need for an impartial and objective
investigation into any alleged use of chemical weapons, diligently following the
provisions and procedures laid down in the Chemical Weapons Convention. Any
concerns or disagreement should be addressed on the basis of consultations and
cooperation among all the parties concerned and the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW. There is a need for an objective analysis among Council members of what has
been achieved since the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), following the accession
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
India attaches high importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention, which
is a unique, non-discriminatory disarmament instrument and serves as a model for
the elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. India has
provided a financial contribution of $1 million to the OPCW trust fund for activities
relating to the destruction of chemical stockpiles and related facilities in Syria.
India remains concerned about the possibility of weapons of mass destruction
falling into the hands of terrorist entities and individuals. It is deeply concerning
that the involvement of external actors in Syria has given a fillip to the growth of
terrorism in Syria and in the region. We are concerned at the frequent reports of the
resurgence of groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams in the region. We
cannot afford to dilute the fight against these terrorist groups.
India has consistently called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of
the Syrian conflict through a Syrian-led dialogue, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Syria, facilitated by the United Nations in line with
21-047127/25

S/2021/337

resolution 2254 (2015). We have contributed to the return of normalcy and rebuilding
of Syria through humanitarian assistance and human resource development.
Let me conclude by reiterating our support to both the Geneva and the Astana
processes for finding an expeditious resolution to the decade-long conflict in Syria.

8/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I would like to thank Under-Secretary General and High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
Ireland unequivocally condemns any use of chemical weapons anywhere
and at any time. But clearly, that type of rhetoric does not get us anywhere. What
we need to do is to act — to act together. The first act is relatively simple: we
need to unambiguously uphold the international prohibition against the use of these
appalling weapons.
When Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and its
annex on implementation and verification, it took on clear legal obligations. The
decision of 27 September 2013 by the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) instructed the OPCW to conduct
inspections, including of sites and facilities as necessary, to ensure that Syria
was meeting these obligations. OPCW inspections have since become dedicated
mechanisms, notably the Declaration Assessment Team, the Fact-Finding Mission,
the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Investigation and Identification Team.
However, over time as well, as the OPCW conducted its mandated work, a
clear pattern has emerged of Syrian evasion. Items have gone undeclared and misdeclared. Syrian cooperation has been sporadic and limited. After seven years, the
initial declaration has only grown in length, as have the seriousness of its gaps and
inconsistencies. The OPCW Executive Council and the members of the Security
Council have repeatedly expressed their concerns, but these concerns have been
ignored by Syria.
What makes this so serious is another clear pattern: that of documented,
repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria since 2013. The OPCW has on seven
occasions to date found that the evidence warrants attribution of use to the Syrian
authorities. Further incidents are under investigation. Syria’s response is to seek to
undermine the professionalism and authority of the OPCW. We find this unacceptable.
The OPCW is fundamental to addressing the possession and use of chemical
weapons. It has the primary mandate, the technical expertise and the experience to
authoritatively advise on these issues. It is for the international community, and for
this Council in particular, to act urgently and in unity to address the issue of this
documented use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Syrian authorities, in turn, have the responsibility to fully address and
answer issues relating to Syria’s compliance with the CWC. Syria must do what it
promised to do, what it is legally obliged to do: declare and destroy all of its chemical
weapons stocks and facilities.
The OPCW Executive Council set out in July 2020 the clear actions Syria
must take to return to compliance with the CWC. Ireland deeply regrets that Syria
chose not to act on these. We again urge Syria to act immediately to comply with
this decision.
Given these circumstances, Ireland will support the proposed decision on Syria
at the Conference of States Parties later this month. Given Syria’s continued refusal
to meet its obligations and the international community’s concerns, we believe that
Conference must take all appropriate actions to address Syria’s non-compliance.

21-047129/25

S/2021/337

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing and for her regular updates, on
the ongoing activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), including the investigations on the use of chemical weapons.
We also take note of the Director-General’s ninetieth monthly report (see
S/2021/305) concerning the prohibition of chemical weapons.
Let me reaffirm Kenya’s conviction and belief that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere and by anyone constitutes a clear and unacceptable violation
of international law. Indeed, no cause can ever justify the use of a weapon of mass
destruction by any actor, under any circumstance whatsoever. Thus, any claims
of the use of such weapons must be investigated in a professional and transparent
manner, consistent with applicable international instruments and standards.
We take note of the submission by the Syrian Arab Republic to the Council of
its eighty-eighth monthly report regarding the activities in its territory relating to the
destruction of its chemical weapons and production facilities.
Kenya welcomes the deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
to Syria and takes note of the subsequent diplomatic note from the Syrian Arab
Republic, containing further explanations regarding the results of the sample
analysis. We look forward to further updates on the outcomes of the deployment,
with the anticipation that they will bear reports of progress.
Kenya also welcomes the regular briefings by the OPCW to the States
parties on the status of the mandated activities in the Syrian Arab Republic,
including the work of the DAT, the Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and
Identification Team. Such briefings are encouraged, as they constitute a critical
component for ensuring transparency in the investigative role of the OPCW and its
Technical Secretariat.
As stated in our previous statements, Kenya believes that an expeditious
conclusion and closure of these investigations will allow the Council to direct its
full attention to helping the Syrian people reach a sustainable solution to the decadeold political crisis. We therefore call for closer coordination between Syria and
the OPCW, particularly in resolving the pending identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies.
Kenya reiterates its solidarity with and support for the people of Syria as they
continue to seek a sustainable solution, through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue
aimed at a political resolution that is truly responsive to the will and needs of the
millions of the Syrian people who have endured suffering for far too long.

10/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu,
for her briefing on the investigations carried out by the various mechanisms established
by the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to clarify the events related to the use of chemical weapons in Syria. I
welcome the Permanent Representative of Syria to this meeting.
For Mexico, the objective of these reports is to communicate progress in
compliance with resolution 2118 (2013) towards reaching a solution. The Security
Council cannot continue pursuing an exercise of mutual accusations or automatic
disqualification on such a delicate matter. We should try to encourage dialogue
rather than polarization.
The Security Council could seek new avenues for cooperation. Among these,
I offer the following for the Council’s consideration.
First, we commit ourselves to strengthening the unity and leadership of the
Council in condemning the use of chemical weapons by any actor and under any
circumstance. That is to say, we must defend the norm against chemical weapons and
their inhuman effects, support the mandate of the OPCW and endorse the call on all
its parties to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
Secondly, we must facilitate a more regular informal dialogue between the
members of the Security Council and the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW in an
inclusive manner that sheds light on the decision-making process within the Council
and allows us to review and objectively analyse the pending issues. All of this must
be done without prejudice to our continuing to receive the reports mandated by
resolution 2118 (2013).
Thirdly, we call on the Secretary-General to redouble his good offices between
Syria and the interested parties and to discuss with objectivity and rigour the reports
on the use of chemical weapons in that country in order to defuse the political
polarization that they generate and to continue supporting Syria in fulfilling its
obligations as a State party to the CWC.
The delegation of Mexico is ready to discuss and specify these and other
proposals that would allow us to advance the diplomatic and political dialogue,
since that is the only way that can help us to get out of the impasse in which we
find ourselves.

21-0471211/25

S/2021/337

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I thank the Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Niger reiterates its support for the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) whose work, it should be noted, is essential to
preventing and deterring the use of these weapons, in accordance with international
standards, in particular the Convention on Chemical Weapons (CWC), and other
relevant multilateral or bilateral treaties.
We hope to see a full resumption of the deployment of OPCW missions to
Syria once the restrictive measures taken due to the coronavirus disease pandemic
are lifted. It is important that such investigations be carried out in a transparent and
inclusive manner in relation to all identified and suspected incidents.
The final resolution of the Syrian chemical weapons issue will require the
Security Council to demonstrate unity with respect to the direction and objectives
of the OPCW’s work in Syria. It also implies frank and closer cooperation between
the Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government in order to shed light on the
use of these weapons on its territory. Such ongoing frank dialogue between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government will help resolve questions
regarding Syria’s initial declaration and ultimately to make progress in the work of
the Declaration Assessment Team, in line with the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Executive Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 and resolution 2118 (2013).
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its firm rejection of all use
of chemical weapons, regardless of the circumstances, motivation or actor.

12/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Trine Heimerback
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for
her briefing. And I also thank Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for their
monthly report (see S/2021/305)on the progress towards the full elimination of the
Syrian chemical weapons programme.
Disappointingly, we regret to note again that there have been few developments
on this critical issue. Even against the backdrop of grim anniversary of Syria having
just marked 10 years of the conflict. And now tomorrow we mark three years since
the deadly Douma chemical attacks. Every anniversary and every day that passes,
we are allowing the once-strong global norm against the use of chemical weapons to
erode. We must not tolerate this impunity.
Turning to the recent report, we welcome the Director-General’s updates
from February’s technical meetings with the Syrian national authority and the visits
to three declared sites. We are pleased to see the Technical Secretariat has been
able to continue its mandated activities and engagements, despite travel difficulties
during the pandemic. However, worryingly, evidence collected from inspections
remains largely unanswered by Syrian authorities. Nineteen out of 22 issues remain
unresolved. Such a large number of outstanding issues, gaps and inconsistencies are
of sincere concern.
We are particularly troubled by the factual disagreement regarding the
presence of a chemical nerve agent in site samples taken in September 2020. As
the OPCW’s monthly report makes clear, Syria’s recent explanations “cannot be
considered accurate and complete”. The Syrian experts do not sufficiently explain or
justify the presence of chemical nerve agents found in the former chemical weapons
production facility.
We remain deeply concerned by the continuing failure of Syria to provide
information that would resolve this issue, as well as the 18 other outstanding issues.
Syria must declare all chemical warfare agents produced or weaponized at this site.
We again call on Syria to fully cooperate with the OPCW and resolve all outstanding
issues. And we reiterate that the Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its obligations in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Those responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable
through credible national or international criminal justice mechanisms. We owe it
to the victims and the survivors to ensure that those who perpetrated such heinous
attacks are held responsible.
I would like to conclude by confirming Norway’s steadfast confidence in
Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat of OPCW. We firmly reject
any efforts to discredit their important work.

21-0471213/25

S/2021/337

Annex XI
Statement by First Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, let me highlight that all delegations to the Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) are now watching what
can be called the final act of a performance directed by our Western colleagues and
staged at The Hague. In two weeks, the twenty-fifth session of the CWC Conference
will resume its work. For several months on end, the Conference has been home to
attempts to push through an unprecedented draft decision that would incapacitate
Syria at the OPCW. This draft decision was introduced to the Conference counter
to CWC norms and without prior consideration by the Executive Council. This
proposed incapacitation would deprive Syria of its right to vote at the CWC
Conference of the States Parties and in the Executive Council, be elected to the
Council or host any events related to the Conference, the Executive Council and its
subsidiary mechanisms.
I will tell you frankly: it was clear from the very beginning that this entire
idea had been premeditated. This theatrical performance had several acts. First,
in violation of the long-standing norms and practices of the OPCW — first of all
the principle of consensus — the Technical Secretariat created the illegitimate
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT). The IIT defied the principles of
investigation, including the so-called “chain of custody”, and produced a report
rich in factual and technical mistakes. The report accuses Syrians of having used
chemical weapons on two occasions. This report was well and truly discredited by
independent experts. We shared our detailed argumentation on that matter in the
General Assembly and the Security Council as early as June last year.
However, the leadership of the Technical Secretariat remains deaf to this
criticism. Apparently, it is a sign that, prior to the grand theatrical finale, the IIT
will give us yet another surprise by reporting another “pseudo investigation” and
its anti-Syrian results. We have little doubt about it. Neither do we doubt that our
Western colleagues will rush to interpret that unscrupulous product as alleged proof
of the use of chemical weapons by Damascus. Let me discourage you by saying that
it would truly prove only one thing. It would prove that your methods of besmirching
Damascus, without providing any substantiated or trustworthy evidence, have
remained pretty much the same and that you will hardly score any extra points
on that.
Anyway, in summer 2020, Western delegations referred to the aforementioned
politically biased and unconvincing IIT report to push through the OPCW Executive
Council a knowingly unrealistic ultimatum for Syria, which demanded that it declare
chemical weapons and production facilities that Syria simply did not have. It is
obvious that these demands cannot be met. What comes next is a mere technicality.
The Director-General ascertains Syria’s alleged incompliance with an Executive
Council decision. Now the Conference of the States Parties is offered to “punish”
Damascus by incapacitating Syria at the OPCW.
Nevertheless, the Syrian authorities have continued cooperating with the
OPCW all this time — despite the colossal pressure and terrible accusations coming
from Western colleagues and the blatant acts of manipulation on the part of the
Technical Secretariat, to say nothing of the emergency conditions of the pandemic.
The current report of the Secretary-General is further proof of this. I would
like to stress that its paragraphs 11 and 12 address the consultations that the
14/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Declaration Assessment Team and the relevant Syrian authorities held in February.
These contacts included visits to the facilities, meetings with Syrian experts and
surveys. The Syrian side provided explanations with regard to all the “outstanding
issues”. Unfortunately, the response was that the Syrian initial declaration was
“incomplete”, “imperfect” and so on. But still, the fact remains that the dialogue is
under way and there is progress in Syria’s interaction with the OPCW, inter alia, in
terms of the initial declaration.
Besides, as we learned from the report (see S/2021/200) of the OPCW DirectorGeneral at the March session of the Executive Council, the pandemic brought to a
standstill almost all inspection activities by the organization. For example, the visit
by the Executive Council to the United States has been rescheduled twice and is now
expected no sooner than in 2022. The OPCW made only five country visits to the
States that declared the discovery of some old stockpiles. Syria is almost the only
country with which the Technical Secretariat maintains regular dialogue. How can it
be the main “violator”, as our Western colleagues would try to assert?
I urge you to give it a thought — if Syria can no longer take part in OPCW
decision-making, what is the point for Damascus to keep cooperating with the
organization? What is the ultimate goal, after all? Is it to “crush” Syria, as was the
case with Iraq after the United States Secretary of State here at the United Nations
personally promoted a fake about Iraq possessing weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), or is it to make sure that nobody on Syrian soil has any chemical weapons?
Let me avail myself of this meeting of the Security Council, which reaches a
broad public, to call on all delegations, both here and at The Hague, to act responsibly
and stand up against the proposed draft decision, as it threatens to undermine
the authority of the OPCW and of the Security Council, which is responsible for
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Neither the OPCW nor any other
respectful venue must turn into a tool to “punish the unwanted” by hurling at them
baseless allegations of the use of weapons of mass destruction. Any country could
end up in Syria’s place, should our Western colleagues decide to use the “chemicalweapon leverage” to pressurize them. By rejecting Syria’s incapacitation at the
OPCW, you will reject double standards and protect an equitable world order, which
has no place for the dictate of force. All States must be equal in terms of upholding
international law.
I stress that Russia, as a responsible OPCW member State, in strongest terms
condemns the use of chemical weapons by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes. We are determined to have all developments clarified, and both we and
our Syrian colleagues have numerous facts at our disposal that point to the use,
or attempted use, of chemical weapons by the so-called Syrian opposition. As
the Secretariat is perfectly aware, Damascus has shared relevant findings with
the OPCW.
But in order to find out the truth, we need the OPCW Technical Secretariat
to do what it is supposed to: unbiased monitoring of States’ compliance with the
CWC. Only then will we be able to expect professional and impartial investigations
from it. The Technical Secretariat must not create inflated demands for one country
while turning a blind eye to the shortcomings of others in analogous situations,
and ignoring questions to non-State actors that inevitably pop up in this context.
Unfortunately, the Technical Secretariat still has a long way to go until it embarks
upon truly unbiased work.
Besides, the bulk of proof of direct forgeries, manipulations and internal
violations in OPCW Technical Secretariat with regard to Syria’s chemical file has
reached a critical point. It is the blatant violations during investigations of incidents
in Khan Shaykhun in April 2017 and in Douma in April 2018. It is testimonies of
21-0471215/25

S/2021/337

former OPCW employees about the Fact-Finding Mission falsifying its conclusions
under pressure from Western states. It is the practice of oppressing and intimidating
the “dissidents” who refused to take part in this forgery. I will not cite all these facts
again, because we gave a detailed account of this in our earlier statements.
In December 2020, we submitted a list of questions to the Director-General of
the OPCW, Mr. Fernando Arias, but got no answers to any of them, either during the
Security Council meeting (see S/2020/1202) or afterwards. Our Western colleagues
like to underscore the need for transparency in the work of the OPCW and to
commend the leadership of the Technical Secretariat for upholding this principle.
Do you think it is transparent to have Mrs. Nakamitsu trying to give answers to
the concrete questions that are posed by a Security Council Member State, and
which have to do with the topics discussed at The Hague platform? Is it transparent
to have Mrs. Nakamitsu trying to answer to them, rather than the head of the
specialized mechanism?
In the meantime, the number of questions is growing, and they are coming not
only from States. Let me give you a recent example. A group of prominent public
actors addressed Director-General Arias in a letter published on 8 February by a
well-known non-governmental organization — the Courage Foundation — calling
on the Technical Secretariat to investigate numerous malfunctions, including
reported falsifications in the Douma report. We call on the Technical Secretariat to
give a public response to this letter, because silence and understatement can only
foster suspicions that the Technical Secretariat might have things to conceal. The
fact that Director-General Arias hides behind Mrs. Nakamitsu’s back does not add
to the authority of the OPCW in the light of the accusations that I mentioned earlier.
I anticipate the traditional remarks from our Western colleagues blaming
Russia for attempts to shatter and undermine the authority of the OPCW. These
allegations are not backed up by anything. On the contrary, Russia struggles to revive
the good name of the organization and seeks answers to the questions that are relevant
to everyone. The Security Council cannot afford being a silent witness to how one
of the pillars on WMD proliferation is ruined by politicization. It is our shared goal
to work towards restoring trust in the OPCW and recovering its authority. We count
on support of all Council members on that matter, inter alia, in terms of a response
to the anticipated “political commissioning” of the Investigation and Identification
Team, pending a vote at The Hague, and other devastating steps that might follow to
undermine the OPCW and the non-proliferation regime on WMD.
If Syria’s opponents who at the same time oppose real eradication of chemical
weapons throughout the whole of its territory achieve their goal, we will be living
through very hard times, promising no good to the OPCW and international
cooperation in this and many other areas.

16/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex XII
Statement by the Counsellor of the Permanent Mission of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Diani
Jimesha Prince
I also thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs.
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
The weaponization of toxic chemicals remains one of the great threats to
international peace and security. The use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone
and under any circumstances constitutes a reprehensible violation of international
law and necessitates condemnation by the international community. Chemical
weapons do not discriminate between combatants and civilians, and their effects are
horrifying. Perpetrators must not be allowed to operate with impunity; they must be
held accountable.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) remains
a critical component in our quest to ensure that applied science and technology is
utilized only for the peace, progress and prosperity of all humankind. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines therefore reaffirms our support for the mandate of the OPCW. We
furthermore support all efforts aimed at strengthening the organization’s capacity
to make certain that the quality of its work remains of the highest standard. It must
always be characterized by impartiality, independence and non-politicization and be
capable of withstanding rigorous scrutiny. Anything less serves to erode trust in the
organization and thereby precludes it from being a well-functioning and effective
multilateral body.
We continue to stress the importance of resolving all the gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies contained in the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We recognize the continued engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and Syria in this regard, despite the impediments created by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We continue to encourage dialogue and constructive engagement between
the parties to make tangible progress on this particularly important matter.
As we continue our deliberations on this file, the collective goal of achieving a
world free of chemical weapons ought to remain at the forefront. As such, the Security
Council and the OPCW Technical Secretariat ought not to overlook the notifications
by the Syrian government concerning the preparations by armed groups to use and/
or fabricate incidents of the use of chemical weapons. This matter requires urgent
attention, and we have an obligation to make an objective assessment.
Undoubtedly, there are many diverging views on this file. However, we must
seek to foster and preserve cooperation to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention, thereby safeguarding the norm
against chemical warfare. In this context, we ought to consider the perspectives of the
Syrian Government, in respect for the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Furthermore, OPCW member States should prioritize the pursuit of consensus-based
decisions, to thwart polarization and divisiveness.
In conclusion, we commend the OPCW for ensuring that the twenty-fifth
session of the Conference of the States Parties continues notwithstanding the global
pandemic. We look forward to a productive part 2, which is scheduled to begin
on 20 April.

21-0471217/25

S/2021/337

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu,
for her briefing.
The use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and impermissible anywhere,
under any circumstances and regardless of the motives and justifications. It is also
a serious violation of international law and a grave threat to international peace and
security. We reiterate our condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of the use
of such weapons and emphasize that the perpetrators of these terrible crimes must
be held to account.
My country is committed to the chemical-weapon non-proliferation
regime, which comprises the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,
and its implementing body, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
The regime, which is based on rules and consensus, is an asset for the
international community in ending the possession and use of toxic chemicals for
hostile purposes and preventing the proliferation of that type of weapon of mass
destruction. We must work together to strengthen the regime and maintain its
sustainability and stability in the service of global peace, security and development.
Tunisia welcomes the resumption of the dialogue in Damascus between the
OPCW and the Government of Syria on the chemical question through the twentyfourth round of technical consultations, held in February 2021 by the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Government, and the associated field assignments
conducted by the Technical Secretariat team.
We urge the Technical Secretariat and the Government of Syria to continue
their cooperation and dialogue in a spirit of constructive engagement in order to
accelerate the resolution of outstanding issues and ensure that Syria fully complies
with its obligations under the Convention, taking into account the continuing
restrictions imposed as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Tunisia reaffirms that all allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons,
including by terrorist organizations, must be investigated in a thorough, impartial,
independent and transparent manner.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the international community, in particular the
Security Council, has a duty to take collective and concerted action on the Syrian
chemical question. In our view, that is the best way to settle the matter and help to
resolve the Syrian crisis.

18/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex XIV
Statement by the Senior Policy Adviser of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Ben Roberts
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing today. I also thank
the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
(OPCW), as always, for his latest monthly report (see S/2021/305).
The recent anniversaries of the Ltamenah and Khan Shaykhun chemicalweapon attacks and tomorrow’s anniversary of the Douma attack remind us of why
we are here. We are here because of the repeated use of chemical weapons during the
Syrian conflict. We are here because, by Syria’s own admission, its initial chemicalweapons declaration was not accurate and because of Syria’s failure, over a sevenyear period, to resolve the outstanding issues in that declaration.
As the Director-General noted in his 9 March statement to the OPCW Executive
Council, the Declaration Assessment Team process has led to the subsequent
declaration by Syria of one additional chemical-weapons production facility, four
additional research and development facilities, five previously undeclared chemical
warfare agents and several thousand large calibre chemical munitions. Syria has now
amended its declaration 17 times.
Nineteen issues with that declaration remain outstanding. As the DirectorGeneral told the Executive Council, these relate to the fate of several hundred tons
of chemical warfare agents and/or thousands of chemical munitions, indicators of
three undeclared chemical warfare agents, and unknown, potentially significant,
quantities of chemical warfare agents. While the detail on some of these issues is
undoubtedly of a technical nature, their significance is unambiguous and squarely
within the Security Council’s mandate under resolution 2118 (2013) and its duty to
maintain international peace and security.
Syria’s failure to meet its obligations led to the Executive Council to
recommend a suspension of Syria’s rights and privileges at the OPCW until it takes
steps to redress the situation. We support the proportionate, measured action that
will be considered by the Conference of the States Parties this month, as do many
other States parties.
Finally, as we said last month (see S/2021/226), we support the investigation
of any incidents of chemical weapons use by any party. This is fundamental to
upholding the prohibition on their use. We are therefore reassured by a note from the
OPCW Technical Secretariat dated 10 March indicating that the Technical Secretariat
considered and analysed all 197 notes verbales submitted by Syria. While no links
between the information provided and actual incidents under review could be found,
we welcome that the OPCW will maintain a repository of the information for future
comparison as necessary.

21-0471219/25

S/2021/337

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank you, High Representative Nakamitsu, for your briefing today.
The United States strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons anywhere,
anytime and by anyone. These are weapons of mass destruction, and their use by any
State constitutes an unacceptable threat to every State.
This week we recall two tragic chemical weapons attacks in Syria. On 4
April 2017, the Al-Assad regime deployed chemical weapons on the town of Khan
Shaykhun, in Idlib governorate, killing Syrian children, women and men. One year
later, on 7 April 2018, in the city of Douma, the Al-Assad regime again used these
horrific banned weapons on innocent people.
Unfortunately, the chemical-weapon attacks in Khan Shaykhun and Douma
were not the only ones; they represent a pattern. They represent a pattern of use
and abuse by the Al-Assad regime. The regime then tries to avoid accountability by
obstructing independent investigations and failing to cooperate with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Meanwhile, Russia continues to defend the Al-Assad regime without
reservation. It does this by spreading disinformation, attacking the integrity and
professional work of the OPCW and impeding the efforts by responsible nations to
hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for its use of chemical weapons.
Let me say again that the United States firmly supports the impartial and
independent work of the OPCW and its investigative bodies. That includes the
Investigation and Identification Team, the Fact-Finding Mission and the Declaration
Assessment Team. We applaud the OPCW’s leadership and the Technical Secretariat
for the professional manner in which it carries out its mission.
Because of Russia’s irresponsible and dangerous enablement, the Al-Assad
regime continues to flagrantly ignore our calls to fully disclose and verifiably destroy
its chemical weapons programmes, year after year. Twenty-four consultations. Nearly
eight years of engagement. Again, and again and again, independent experts have
identified significant gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in Syria’s declarations.
Recently, the Declaration Assessment Team discovered that nerve-agentweapons activity occurred at yet another facility the regime had declared as never
having produced or handled chemical weapons. To date, Syria has not declared the
exact types and quantities of agents produced at this site in line with its obligations
under the Convention, as requested by the Technical Secretariat. These failures of
accountability are not exceptions; they have become the rule.
Last month (see S/2021/226), I recounted the timeline of events that led to us,
along with 47 co-sponsors representing nearly every region of the world, submitting
a strong and serious draft decision to the OPCW Conference of the States Parties.
This month, the OPCW Conference of the States Parties convenes. We call upon
them to take the necessary and appropriate actions to send a strong message to the
Al-Assad regime that the use of chemical weapons is simply unacceptable and comes
with grave consequences.
This Conference is of the utmost importance. The credibility of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and of this very Council, is at stake. After all, it was the
Security Council in 2013 that declared that the Al-Assad regime shall not use,
develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain chemical weapons. The
Council further decided that the Al-Assad regime must cooperate fully with the
20/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

OPCW and the United Nations. So, we urge the States parties to take decisive action.
Vote in favour of the proposed decision. Suspend Syria’s rights and privileges under
the Convention until it completes the measures set forth in the July 2020 Executive
Council decision.
Sometimes, with all of these declarations and decisions and resolutions, it
abstracts away from why we feel so strongly about this. I would remind everyone
of what Dr. Amani Ballour told us last week (see S/2021/315). In her many years
in Syria, treating the most horrific wounds and staring death in the face on a daily
basis, she said the worst night of her life was when she arrived at a hospital where
children were suffocating after being exposed to sarin — hundreds of innocent
people dying before her eyes.
The women and children of Syria are waiting. They know the Security Council
has said that chemical-weapon attacks are unacceptable. They know we have the
power to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable. So, let us act. And let us show them
that we are worthy of our charge.

21-0471221/25

S/2021/337

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also
welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of Syria at this meeting.
With regard to today’s subject, allow me to emphasize the following points.
First, it has always been Viet Nam’s consistent policy to support nonproliferation and disarmament of all weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical weapons. We therefore categorically condemn uses of chemical weapons
anywhere, at any time, by anyone and under any circumstances. The use of these
weapons is a flagrant violation of international law and presents an immediate threat
to the lives and living environment of civilians. As State parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC), 193 States share the same goal of ridding the world of
chemical weapons. They bear the obligations to fully implement the Convention to
truly achieve that goal.
Secondly, as a committed advocate of multilateralism and international law,
Viet Nam supports the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), which is entrusted by the CWC. We recognize the important
role played by the OPCW in support of the implementation of the CWC. At the same
time, we would like to stress that it is also imperative that its work strictly abide by
the Convention. Investigations of alleged violations in that regard should be carried
out in a most comprehensive, objective and impartial manner, based on verified
information and without any politicization. These high standards help establish
irrefutable facts and evidences in order to ensure justice as well as to prevent the
recurrence of violations.
Thirdly, with regard to the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, we share the
concern of the international community over the alleged use of these weapons. In
finding solutions, we take note of the continued engagement between the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian National Authority, as outlined in the ninetieth
report (see S/2021/305) of the OPCW Director-General.
We note with encouragement that the Declaration Assessment Team and
the Syrian National Authority have continued their engagement through technical
meetings, field visits and exchanges of letters, both during and after the recently
held twenty-fourth round of consultations. It is our strong belief that this spirit of
cooperation is the best way forward to resolve the remaining gaps and inconsistencies.
We therefore call on the two sides to enhance their cooperation in a most earnest and
constructive manner in order to fully address the remaining issues and work towards
the full implementation of the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013).
Last but not least, in support of the ongoing efforts by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and Syria, it is crucial that the international community be united,
including at The Hague and in New York. Our delegation calls for constructive and
non-politicized engagement by all parties so as to achieve a lasting solution to this
issue, including at the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the State Parties to
the CWC, to be resumed later this month.

22/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: Arabic and English]
At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly country, Viet Nam, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We have
full confidence in your successful stewardship of the work of the Council.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
at any time and place and under any circumstances, and reiterates that it did not use
chemical weapons and that it voluntarily joined the Chemical Weapons Convention
in 2013 and worked with the organization in a diligent, credible and transparent
manner to implement its accession obligations, which resulted in the destruction of
its chemical weapon stockpiles and production facilities.
We listened to Mrs. Nakamitsu’s briefing, and I met her a few days ago and
conveyed to her our concerns about not including in her briefings the information
and updates that we provide her. Today we also heard some repeated statements from
Western countries, led by the United States, which were dominated by politicization
and unfounded accusations. Therefore, I would like to confirm and clarify some
points as follows.
First, the Syrian Arab Republic has committed itself to cooperate with the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to settle the remaining outstanding issues in its initial declaration and
to close this matter permanently and as soon as possible. In this regard, Syria
categorically rejects the persistence of some countries in casting doubt on its initial
declaration and affirms its determination to continue to cooperate with the Technical
Secretariat of the organization within the framework of organized dialogue. Syria’s
monthly report No. 88, covering the period from 16 February to 15 March, included
confirmation of the Syrian Government’s readiness to continue consultations and
work with the Technical Secretariat.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic has continued to cooperate with the FactFinding Mission, welcomed the visit of its teams during the month of March —
in addition to its upcoming planned visits — and affirms that it will provide all
facilitation for the success of its tasks. In this regard, Syria renews its serious
concerns about the modus operandi of the mission, over which many countries have
also expressed concerns.
Syria expresses its regret that the OPCW ignored the statement of the
Courage Foundation issued on 8 February and signed by a large group of experts
and prominent scientific figures, led by Mr. José Bustani, the organization’s first
Director-General, regarding the investigation into the alleged Douma incident,
especially for neglecting the fundamental and serious concerns about the manner
in which the investigation was conducted and the occurrence of serious “procedural
irregularities and scientific flaws”.
Thirdly, the Syrian Arab Republic demands that due attention be given to
the information it provides to the United Nations, the relevant Security Council
committees and the OPCW about the ongoing attempts by terrorist organizations
and their arm, the White Helmets group, in cooperation and coordination with
intelligence services of well-known countries, to stage incidents of chemical-weapons
use to accuse the Syrian Arab Army and its allies. I refer here to the statement of
the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation on 8 March 2021 regarding the
preparation and fabrication of terrorists of the Al-Nusra Front, in cooperation with
21-0471223/25

S/2021/337

the White Helmets, of incidents of using chemical weapons in the countryside of
Idlib and Latakia provinces.
Fourthly, some delegations have referred to the French-Western draft decision
submitted for the second part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the
States Parties, scheduled to be held before the end of this month, and which was
based on the inaccurate and unprofessional conclusions of the illegitimate so-called
Investigation and Identification Team.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the frantic pursuit by some Governments
to promote allegations and fabrications about the so-called “non-compliance” of Syria
with its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention. The aforementioned
draft resolution is further evidence of the continuation of these countries’ aggressive
intentions against Syria and their violation of the procedural rules for working in
the organization once again by rejecting the proposal of the Russian Federation to
include this draft decision on the agenda of the ninety-sixth session of the Executive
Council for discussion before referring it to the Conference of the States Parties.
In that regard, my country renews its call to all Member States that adhere
to the principles of international law and to reject the draft decision to protect the
OPCW from the risk of transforming it from a technical organization with noble
goals to a platform for the United States and its allies to exert pressure and target a
State party to the Convention. Such a practice will have dangerous repercussions on
the future of the OPCW’s work and cooperation with it.
Whoever claims to be keen on accountability and preventing impunity should
not turn a blind eye to the crimes of terrorist groups and the aggressive practices of
some countries against Syria. Those concerned with accountability should demand
that the United States be held accountable for its crimes in the city of Raqqa and
for its flagrant violation of the sovereignty of Syrian territories on this day in 2017
with its missile aggression against the Shayrat air base, which was targeted with
59 Tomahawk missiles under the pretext of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Khan Shaykhun, even before any investigation took place.
In order to justify this aggression, the United States later resorted to
the exploitation of the inaccurate and unprofessional conclusions of the Joint
Investigative Mission, whose work was full of grave flaws that led to the termination
of its mandate.
The advocates of ensuring accountability must not ignore the aggression of
the United States, along with France and Britain, against my country in April 2018,
under the same false pretexts surrounding another alleged incident in Douma, the
subsequent investigations of which revealed major scandals.
The pledge made by the States Member of the United Nations to “save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war”, including preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and promoting other noble values
represented by respect for international law and the principles of justice and equity,
has unfortunately today become an arena for manipulation and exploitation by the
United States and its Western allies and a tool to impose their agendas based on
dominating the political decisions of Member States, controlling their national
wealth and distorting the choices of their peoples.
In conclusion, I renew our demand that these States stop politicizing this file,
remove it from political games and stop the practices of pressure and blackmail. I
assure that Syria, despite all the grave challenges posed by acts of foreign military
aggression, terrorist organizations’ crimes, unilateral coercive measures and,
recently, the spread of the coronavirus disease, will remain committed to defending
24/25

21-04712

S/2021/337

its sovereignty and independence and the rights of its people and will continue to
implement all its international obligations.

21-0471225/25
