A /75/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

66th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 18 May 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Masuku
(Eswatini), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/863)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.82)
Ms. Kadare (Albania): At the outset, I would like
to thank the members of the core group for initiating
and bringing forward draft resolution A/75/L.82. As
a sponsor of the draft resolution, Albania strongly
supports an annual discussion in the General Assembly
on the responsibility to protect (R2P) and welcomes
the regular reporting of the Secretary-General on the
issue. In his future reports, the Secretary-General could
include an assessment of the implementation of the
recommendations contained in his previous reports, as
well as of the risk of atrocity crimes and the response
of United Nations actors. The recommendations should
provide clear, action-oriented guidelines on how to
improve the prevention of atrocity crimes.
The responsibility to protect is a core principle in the
promotion and protection of human rights and the rule
of law, as well as in the prevention of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. In
our region, the Balkans, we have witnessed first-hand

the vital importance of the international community’s
engagement in ensuring peace. It was thanks to the
NATO intervention in Kosovo 22 years ago that the
dictator Slobodan Milošević was forced to end his ethnic
cleansing campaign against the Albanian population in
Kosovo. To this day, Kosovo Albanians are grateful that
someone stood up for them before it was too late.
The international community has often reacted
too late, ignoring early warnings and choosing
indifference or inaction over upholding the norms, laws
and principles that safeguard humankind. That is why
we need a special focus on prevention, stopping mass
atrocities before they happen and protecting people
before they are forced to flee from crimes that are a
collective stain on the conscience of humankind.
Over the past year, we have witnessed how the
global pandemic has exacerbated conflicts, created
new social tensions and increased the risk of atrocity
crimes. We therefore support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to prioritize atrocity prevention
and R2P. In addition, we support the work of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect and encourage them to
share their analyses of emerging crises with the wider
United Nations membership in order to provide early
warning, as well as to share their recommendations
with the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Human Rights Council. We encourage the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
to speak loudly and boldly when it needs to, which,
after all, is what early warning and atrocity prevention
are all about. Silence only encourages and assists the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-12225 (E)

*2112225*

A/75/PV.66

perpetrators. The protection and promotion of human
rights are clearly linked to conflict prevention and early
warning. If Albania is elected to the Security Council
in June for the period from 2022 to 2023, we will work
closely with all like-minded countries to increase the
synergies between the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that at a time
when 80 million people are displaced by persecution,
conflict and atrocities, the international community
must do more to uphold its responsibility to protect.
Albania believes that sovereignty entails responsibility
and that wherever and whenever vulnerable populations
are threatened by mass atrocities, the international
community must respond not just with declarations but
with timely and decisive action. That is why Albania
believes that the adoption of the draft resolution will
help to further institutionalize R2P within the United
Nations system, avoiding procedural complications
and duplications so that we can focus on how we can
assist those who need us and protect them from atrocity
crimes. That is the promise that was made at the World
Summit 15 years ago and the promise that we need to
uphold for the sake of our human community.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I should not be speaking in
this debate, as someone from the Pacific who is used
to a very peaceful way of life in our community and on
our islands with our neighbours, where we have already
established a practice of working together as one happy
family. The Biketawa Declaration, which was adopted
back in 2000, is one of the tools we used to that end. I
was there, in my humble country of Kiribati, chairing
that meeting, which was about something similar to the
responsibility to protect (R2P).
However, the R2P that I am hearing about today
is rather more sophisticated and complicated. I can
understand that there is noise coming from all four
corners of the globe, questioning what this form of R2P
is. I am among those asking what R2P is going to do. Is it
something that we are already practicing in our Pacific
family through the Biketawa Declaration, which was
agreed on by the Pacific leaders at the Pacific Islands
Forum in 2000? The Biketawa Declaration is the R2P
of the Pacific, and I would invite Member States to
study it.
I was a part of that process and one of the people
questioning the draft. Should we work together when a
State is in trouble? When one of our neighbours needs
2/12

18/05/2021

help, should we all meet and decide what we should be
doing? Should we bring all our police and our militaries
and settle the issue on the ground? We knew that it
would not be a good idea to interfere in the sovereignty
of States. That was also one of the challenges back
then. I can hear the voices coming from all over the
world, with different people reaching out and asking
questions. It is confusing.
But I can understand why there is confusion out
there, because the history there is different. The Pacific
has never experienced the events that Europe and some
other continents have gone through. We thank our Lord
God for creating the Pacific that way. We hope that the
whole world can be like the Pacific and do things the
way we do. We respect each other. We would never dare
interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, but the
Biketawa Declaration teaches us that when a sovereign
nation is in trouble beyond its capacity, it can call on its
neighbours and its neighbours will come with whatever
they have to help settle a problem that is too large or
complex for that Government and its people to handle.
I therefore hope that there is a lesson to be learned
here. It may be a small lesson, but it is nonetheless a
fundamental and very principled one. If R2P were
produced in the same way as the Biketawa Declaration,
I am sure that the world would be a better place and we
would have a tool that works well for everyone.
Mrs. Barba Bustos (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the President for convening this plenary
meeting on a topic of such great importance, which
requires serious and exhaustive analysis in the General
Assembly. I also want to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject (A/75/863).
In 2005, Ecuador supported the adoption of
resolution 60/1, endorsing by consensus the outcome
document of the World Summit, which clearly set out
the three pillars that should underpin the concept of
the responsibility to protect. My country has remained
steadfast ever since in its defence in every area of its
constitutional principles, which are aimed at ensuring
the basic elements of coexistence and the importance
of full respect for human rights, along with States’
obligation to fight to achieve and comply with them.
It has been clearly shown that the conflicts that
have emerged around the world are linked to situations
of discrimination, marginalization and exclusion and
cannot be resolved merely through the use of force,
which is why we emphasize that preventing conflicts
21-12225

18/05/2021

by using peaceful means to settle disputes is the best
way to avoid the commission of atrocity crimes.
With regard to accountability, we want to
highlight the role of the International Criminal
Court in maintaining international peace and justice
and defending the rule of law. It is also an essential
component in the prevention of conflicts and providing
reparations to victims of the most serious crimes.
We therefore reiterate our support for the Court as a
mechanism uniquely placed to fight against impunity
and we call on all States that have not yet done so to
join the Rome Statute in order to ensure its universality.
We want to affirm our confidence in the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention. In that connection, we consider earlywarning systems crucial to avoiding deteriorating
situations in countries and to preventing crises and
outbreaks of violence that affect the civilian population,
which is generally the most vulnerable.
We reiterate that it is our belief that the three
pillars of the concept of the responsibility to protect
must be observed in accordance with good governance
and in chronological order, always prioritizing the
responsibility of each State to protect its population
and the responsibility of the international community
to assist them in doing so. We understand that the third
pillar and the possible use of force must be used only in
exceptional circumstances and as a last resort and can
be applied only through a Security Council resolution
in line with Chapters VI and VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as other relevant norms and
principles enshrined in it.
On 30 November 2018, Ecuador endorsed the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
code of conduct for guiding the response of the Security
Council in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, and on 9 December 2019 we endorsed
the Franco-Mexican initiative on limiting the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocity crimes.
For the Government of Ecuador, the responsibility
to protect is not a matter to be taken lightly. While its
concept is based on a humanitarian act, it is also true
that it must be not implemented under premises that
undermine the sovereignty of States. As we have pointed
out on other occasions, only the General Assembly has
the legal capacity and authority to advance a consensusbased definition of the responsibility to protect and, in
particular, to set out the conceptual, institutional and

A/75/PV.66

political dimensions of implementing that principle.
While the responsibility to protect is a concept that still
warrants greater analysis by Member States, Ecuador
therefore believes that its inclusion on the Assembly’s
agenda represents an opportunity to discuss it with
greater intensity and political commitment, in a
constructive and transparent manner. We must avoid
politicizing a dialogue that would hinder the protection
of civilians in any place where genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity may
be committed.
Mr. Rugeles (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/75/863) and appreciates the convening of
this valuable debate. Colombia not only supports draft
resolution A/75/L.82 but has also joined the long list of
States that have sponsored it. Our commitment to the
principle of the responsibility to protect is unwavering.
Colombia is a country that respects international
law and is a staunch defender of multilateralism and
dialogue as tools to resolve differences. We are a State
with a long and recognized democratic history in our
region and we protect and defend the rights of our
population. We have a clear separation of public powers
and our citizens can wholeheartedly trust that their
institutions will guarantee their rights. That is why we
firmly believe in the values that underlie the principle
of the responsibility to protect.
The Government of Colombia feels it is necessary to
respond to certain assertions that were made yesterday
in this Hall with regard to its actions and the situation
in the country (see A/75/PV.65). The illegitimate
regime in Venezuela irresponsibly accused my country
of tolerating the commission of crimes on its territory,
as well as alleged actions outside international law, and
I want to categorically reject those false and biased
claims. Colombia does not recognize the illegitimate
regime led by Nicolás Maduro, and the assertions made
by his representative were aimed solely at calling into
question the reality of Colombia’s situation and our
democratic spirit. They sought to distract attention
from their own internal situation, which features a
failed State, a multidimensional crisis, the breakdown
of democratic order and the suffering of a people mired
in poverty who are crying out day after day for their
freedom, human rights and protection. Venezuela’s
illegitimate regime is attempting to confuse and
mislead with its rhetoric, as well as to find a way to
voice its antagonism to the draft resolution under

21-122253/12

A/75/PV.66

consideration, thereby shirking its responsibility to
protect its population.
Colombia has always acted and will always
act within the framework of our Constitution and
international law. We consider it a priority to work
to prevent all mass atrocities. States must focus
on protecting their populations so as to prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. For all these reasons, we affirm our
unshakeable commitment to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, and to the
principle of the responsibility to protect in particular.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.82. Before giving the floor for explanations of
vote or position before the vote, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Elgharib (Egypt): Notwithstanding the
fundamental responsibility of Member States to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing, as enshrined in
numerous international human rights instruments, we
believe that the notion of the responsibility to protect
(R2P) still contains several political and legal gaps
that if ignored would do more harm than good with
regard to the principle’s universal acceptance. It is
therefore essential that we strive to achieve consensus
on the conceptual framework of the principle before
continuing to mainstream R2P across the United
Nations system. We believe that such clarifications are
an essential prerequisite before we can include R2P on
the formal agenda of the General Assembly or take any
practical steps regarding the operationalization of the
concept, including in the area of accountability. In that
regard, we would like to reaffirm Egypt’s steadfast and
unwavering commitment to preventing impunity and
ensuring accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law.
We believe that the primary responsibility to
protect populations from such crimes rests with
Member States. In that regard, the principal role of
the international community should focus on enabling
and assisting States in developing their capacities
to carry out those responsibilities, while respecting
the principle of national ownership regarding the
policies and programmes pursued. The international
4/12

18/05/2021

community should therefore focus on preventive
diplomacy and prevention. While we fully endorse the
view that prevention lies at the core of the responsibility
to protect, we believe that there should be a holistic
and comprehensive approach to R2P, one not limited
solely to military or security aspects but capable of
being interpreted more broadly so as to address the
root causes of conflicts, including foreign occupation,
poverty alleviation, food insecurity, environmental
degradation and religious and ethnic discrimination
and intolerance.
In conclusion, while we will vote against draft
resolution A/75/L.82 for the reasons mentioned earlier,
Egypt asserts its unwavering commitment to the
international norms pertaining to the protection of
populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. We will continue to
strive to reach a consensus on all outstanding aspects
of R2P in a manner that would address the concerns
of Member States, while providing more effective
protection to populations on the ground against such
crimes, as well as addressing the numerous concerns that
many delegations have expressed today and yesterday
(see A/75/PV.64 and A/75/PV.65) as to the potential
misuse, abuse and selectivity of the application of the
principle under discussion.
Mr. Proskuryakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Thanks to major diplomatic efforts, the
elements of the concept of the responsibility to protect
populations against genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity were formulated
in general terms in the 2005 World Summit outcome
document (resolution 60/1). It is well known that the
consensus reached then was difficult and fragile. The
text of the World Summit document also envisaged
further discussion of the issue. That was what was behind
the adoption of an informal interactive dialogue as the
only appropriate format acceptable to all. The reasons
for that are quite understandable, including as they do
the sensitive nature of the issues under discussion, the
polarized positions on it, States’ disagreement about a
broader interpretation and, lastly, serious disputes with
regard to the concept’s applicability.
Unfortunately, however, the lack of unanimity
on the issue did not prevent some States from
putting the concept into practice according to their
own interpretation of it. The consequences of such
humanitarian operations, which are supposedly
intended to lessen the suffering of civilian populations,
21-12225

18/05/2021

A/75/PV.66

are well known to all — illegal armed intervention,
regime change, the destruction of statehood and
economic collapse. However, rather than learning from
their mistakes and striving to reach a consensus that
takes account of the increased contradictions, they are
once again attempting to formalize the process.

the use of force to destabilize and replace legitimately
elected Governments. The delegation of Nicaragua
will vote against draft resolution A/75/L.82, on the
inclusion of this item on the annual agenda of the
General Assembly, and we hope for the understanding
and support of other delegations.

We feel compelled to remind the Assembly of an
important detail. Four years ago, the representatives of
the group of countries promoting the concept publicly
assured the General Assembly and every delegation that
the proposal before them was for debate only during the
seventy-second session. Nevertheless, they broke their
own promises by taking similar steps at the seventythird and seventy-fourth sessions. On both occasions
the item was forced onto the agenda by a vote.

Mr. Taufan (Indonesia): My delegation will vote
against draft resolution A/75/L.82 for three reasons.
First, the responsibility to protect (R2P) does not
need to be a standing annual agenda item. Since 2009,
many debates have taken place and many reports of
the Secretary-General have been discussed in this
Hall, all of them possible because they are mandated
and encouraged by the 2005 World Summit outcome
document (resolution 60/1).

The divisions of the General Assembly on the
issue continue today. We are being asked to include it
as a standing item on the agenda and request a report
from the Secretary-General. As we have already said,
such an approach not only breaks promises made to
the Assembly, but also worsens tensions and puts the
Secretary-General in a difficult position by requiring
him to deliver a report on a controversial topic on which
we do not have consensus. My delegation will therefore
vote against draft resolution A/75/L.82, and we urge
others to do the same.

Secondly, any proposal or idea that seeks to enrich
the discussion on this concept should not derail the
parameters outlined in the World Summit document.
Such efforts should not loosen, expand or create
thresholds or criteria other than those prescribed under
resolution 60/1. Discussions of R2P must not turn the
concept into something that it is not. There is no need
to reinvent the wheel. Over the years, the divergent
views expressed in this Hall and the contentious
implementation of R2P have further demonstrated that
greater caution is indeed necessary.

Mrs. Llano (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation believes that the so-called responsibility to
protect is a concept that does not enjoy consensus and
is a matter of increasingly serious concern for many
countries, especially small and developing ones. As past
experience has shown, it is the civilian population that
is the worst affected in the countries involved. Since
2013, the world has witnessed invasions, coups d’état,
military aggression and foreign campaigns aimed at
overthrowing legitimately established Governments,
all of them carried out in the name of the responsibility
to protect. Such acts of aggression have led to chaos,
death and destruction.

Thirdly, Indonesia’s vote today should not be taken
to be a vote against R2P as a concept. Indeed, in 2005,
Indonesia joined the consensus that adopted the R2P
concept pursuant to resolution 60/1. The principles and
norms that underlie R2P are not alien to Indonesia, nor
are they specific only to certain or particular groups
of States or regions. In that context, strengthening
a country’s normative prevention framework at the
national level is critical. It is a corollary to the principle
that the primary responsibility to protect populations
lies with the States concerned. In fact, as a representative
of Indonesia has stated,

Nicaragua will continue to stand firmly with
the international community and the United Nations
against the commission of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. We would
like to remind the Assembly of the continuing serious
concern that we see in the manipulation of the concept
of the responsibility to protect by powerful countries
and the actions of interventionists, however disguised,
that in various ways attempt to justify interference and

“In our view, within — and specifically
within — the framework of the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, [the so-called] three pillars are
solid enough to withstand any and every assault”
(A/63/PV.97, p.8).
Lastly, I would like to conclude by taking this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Ivan Šimonović
and his team, as well as the core group, for their frank
engagement on draft resolution A/75/L.82.

21-122255/12

A/75/PV.66

Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I am taking the floor
to explain our vote on draft resolution A/75/L.82, on
including an annual agenda item on the responsibility
to protect (R2P) and the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Singapore will abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution.
Singapore has been a member of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect since its
establishment, because we have always attached
importance to greater dialogue and discussion among
Member States on the concept of R2P, as well as the
issue of preventing atrocity crimes, genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
We believe that it is incumbent on us as members to
build trust and find common ground on such important
and difficult issues.
However, we regard this draft resolution as a mistake
and a missed opportunity. In our view, it is a mistake
to believe that by adopting it we will be able to avoid
the deep differences that have characterized previous
discussions on the issue of R2P. And it represents
a missed opportunity because it imposes an annual
agenda item on all Member States without making any
effort to build understanding on the concept of R2P.
It is also a missed opportunity to build trust with all
Member States, especially those that have a different
view of the concept of R2P.
It is clear to us that trust on this issue has been
broken. Four years ago, at the start of the seventysecond session, when the inclusion of the item on the
Assembly’s agenda was first proposed, the proponents
provided clear assurances that their request for the
inclusion of this agenda item would be a one-off, and
that it would be included only on the agenda of the
seventy-second session. We were therefore surprised
that the agenda item was then introduced subsequently
at the seventy-third, seventy-fourth and seventy-fifth
sessions. And now it has been introduced as an annual
item. What was promised as a one-time agenda item
will now become an annual item, and that is what I
mean when I say that there is a need to build trust — or,
should I say, rebuild trust — and find common ground.
There is no doubt that the concept of R2P continues
to deeply divide Member States. In that context, it is
more important to build trust and confidence through
an informal process of dialogue and discussion rather
than a formal debate in the General Assembly. I want
6/12

18/05/2021

to make it clear that my delegation is not against a
dialogue or even an annual discussion. However, it is
our view that a formal debate with a formal agenda item
often results in public statements of national positions
that are not always conducive to bridging differences
and finding common ground. The reality is that there
is a long road ahead of us in terms of building trust
and understanding among the proponents of the draft
resolution and other Member States. We can only hope
that if it becomes an annual agenda item, it will not
become an occasion for posturing and a ritual discussion
on this very difficult and important issue.
Let me conclude with the final point that any
dialogue or discussion on the concept of R2P must of
course be based on the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and be conducted
on a basis of mutual respect and understanding with
sensitivity to the deep differences between Member
States’ views.
Ms. Guardia González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba is taking the floor in explanation
of our vote on draft resolution A/75/L.82, on the
responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Ensuring a response from the international
community aimed at preventing acts of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is
a goal that Cuba shares. However, it is well known that
certain States have manipulated the so-called concept
of the responsibility to protect to impose interventionist
agendas and attempts at regime change that have had
dire consequences for the countries concerned. The
differences of opinion on the issue that persist even
today among Member States are many and were clearly
expressed during discussions in the Assembly at its
seventy-second session.
The introduction of draft resolution A/75/L.82
deepens divisions within the Assembly in its attempt to
impose an agenda item that does not enjoy consensus.
We continue to believe that including the responsibility
to protect as an annual agenda item is premature. We
encourage delegations to reflect on the danger posed
by the adoption of the draft resolution when profound
gaps remain on issues such as who decides when it
is necessary to protect; who determines that a State
is failing to protect its population; who and what
criteria determine the measures to be taken; and how
we prevent the issue from being used as a justification
for a supposed and non-existent right to intervene, in
21-12225

18/05/2021

clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
For that reason, my delegation will vote against the
draft resolution.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): My delegation has asked
for the floor to explain our vote on draft resolution
A/75/L.82, entitled “The responsibility to protect and
the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”.
For an issue that provokes such divergent views
on its nature, scope and application, we believe
that the purpose of our discussion should be a
sincere effort to bridge the substantive nature of the
differences, positions and perspectives, not about how
to determine the format for holding the discussions.
In fact, an excessive focus on institutionalizing this
debate — as has been the case during the past few
sessions of the General Assembly — will accentuate
divisions, undermine mutual trust and risk eroding
the existing global consensus on atrocity crimes, as
affirmed in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit outcome document (resolution 60/1). We should
prevent that backslide.
Recently there has been a renewed global spotlight
on the issue of protection, in particular owing to the
situation in Palestine. It is also in Palestine that the
failure of the international community to uphold those
norms has been most evident. With the killing fields
of the occupied Palestinian territories drenched in the
blood of more than 200 Palestinians, including women
and children, the Security Council has been a silent
bystander in the face of the plight of the long-suffering
Palestinian people. The inaction of the Security
Council is due not to the inadequacy of any legal norms
in preventing egregious crimes but rather a lack of
political will to action on the part of some. Against
that backdrop, calls for accountability invariably
smack of double standards and selectivity, especially
when egregious crimes, including mass killings,
deliberate and prolonged lockdowns in military sieges
of entire populations and systematic attempts to impose
new demographic realities in Palestine and other
occupied territories are committed in full view of the
international community. Such violations can easily
spiral into genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity in the absence of international
scrutiny and accountability.
What is needed is not an abdication of the collective
responsibility to prevent those crimes, but consistent

A/75/PV.66

and uniform action carried out objectively and
impartially against all transgressions, wherever they
are committed and by whomever. That is the standard
against which any initiative on the responsibility to
protect must be calibrated. In view of the persistent
lack of consensus among the wider membership, we
believe that any precipitous action would harden their
differences and make their positions drift further apart.
In view of that, my delegation will abstain in the voting
on the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.82, entitled “The responsibility to
protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity”. I give
the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.82: Andorra, Bangladesh,
Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau,
Malawi,
Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, the Niger, Paraguay, Timor-Leste
and Tuvalu.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,

21-122257/12

A/75/PV.66

Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland,
Thailand,
Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chad, Djibouti,
Ethiopia, India, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya,
Mali, Namibia, Nepal, Pakistan, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Draft resolution A/75/L.82 was adopted by 115
votes to 15, with 28 abstentions (resolution 75/277).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Zambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The exercise of the right
of reply has been requested. I would like to remind
members that statements in the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Pejić-Glymph (Serbia): The delegation of
Serbia would like to respond to some remarks by the
representative of Albania.
The region of the Balkans was indeed the stage
for a tragic conflict in the 1990s, in which there
were victims on all sides, regardless of their ethnic
or religious background. I would like to remind the
Assembly that NATO’s intervention, 22 years ago,
8/12

18/05/2021

against a sovereign State, the former Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, was done without the authorization of
the Security Council. That is one example of how the
concept of the responsibility to protect can be used as
a pretext to launch a military intervention against a
sovereign and independent State. I also want to remind
representatives that no one was held accountable for the
killing of 2,500 civilians during the NATO intervention.
On the occasion this past March marking the day
of remembrance of the NATO aggression, the President
of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, said, among other
things, that one child per day, and a little more than
that, was the most difficult, sickening and painful
number of the NATO aggression of 1999. They were
killed, ended, guilty of nothing, having committed no
sin, without the right to defence, justice or life. No one
has ever been held accountable for that crime, and that
is a crime greater than the crime itself. No one was held
accountable for the 2,500 killed — civilians, as well
as soldiers and policemen — who were guilty only of
guarding and protecting themselves and their homes.
No one has ever been held accountable for the more
than 6,000 persons injured.
Even today, 22 years later, it is not possible to
explain that there is no universal justification for this,
despite all the work that has been done to that end.
There is no reason. It makes no sense and only the
names remain — as eternal as sin itself.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela feels compelled to take the floor to exercise
its right of reply following the regrettable statement,
replete with inaccuracies and unfounded accusations,
by the representative of the Colombian Government.
It is a fact that our sister republic of Colombia
has been engaged in a war for more than 60 years. It
is also a fact that today every country neighbouring
Colombia is reeling from the spillover of its domestic
chaos. In our case, the border between Colombia
and Venezuela, which is more than 2,200 kilometres
long, is being exploited by those interested in fuelling
a regional conflict, which poses a threat to our
region’s declared status as a zone of peace. It is also a
fact — known publicly and through the media — that
because he is so anxious to assuage his guilt and ignore
his incompetence, Mr. Iván Duque Márquez blames
Venezuela and my Government, without proof, for the
serious issues that his Government is facing.
21-12225

18/05/2021

It is also true that through its deliberate actions
Mr. Duque Márquez’s Government has continued
to ruin peace agreements in an attempt to export the
consequences of its internal strife to Venezuela. It is also
true that in Colombia, social, political and indigenous
leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants
have been murdered or disappeared. There are reports
every day of massacres and discoveries of mass
graves, as revealed by reports of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
According to the Institute for Development and Peace
Studies in Colombia, 33 massacres and 80 murders of
human rights leaders and defenders have been reported
this year alone, in addition to the list of at least 11,000
persons who have gone missing between 2018 and 2021.
It is a fact that Colombia is the largest producer of
drugs in the world, as confirmed in the World Drug
Report 2020 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. Mr. Duque Márquez’s Government provides
support to terrorist groups that have planned attacks on
my country, in flagrant violation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001).
It is also a fact that the responsibility to protect is
applied selectively. We underscore that we have never
heard its proponents talk about the need to protect the
Colombian people, who are denied their right to live
in peace and today are the victims of violence on the
part of Colombian State authorities. According to the
Colombian non-governmental organization Temblores,
as a result of protests that have so far lasted 15 days,
more than 1,700 cases of police brutality have been
reported over the past two weeks. There are reports of
some 234 cases of physical violence, allegedly by the
police; 37 murders, allegedly carried out by the police;
934 arbitrary arrests of demonstrators; 341 violent
interventions by security forces; 46 victims struck
around the eye area; 98 cases of the firing of weapons
by police and 11 cases of sexual violence, including
against 21 women.
In the light of this, we want to conclude by calling
on the Colombian Government to comply with its duty
to guarantee the protection and well-being of its people.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 135?
It was so decided.

A/75/PV.66

Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/75/L.83)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Uzbekistan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.83.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Today I have the
honour to present draft resolution A/75/L.83, entitled
“Declaring the Aral Sea region a zone of ecological
innovations and technologies”. At the outset, I would
like to thank all Member States for their active and
constructive engagement and valuable input during the
negotiations on the draft resolution.
The drying up of the Aral Sea, which until the 1960s
was the fourth largest lake in the world, has become one
of the most serious environmental problems of our time.
Secretary-General António Guterres, who visited the
Aral Sea in 2017, described its desiccation as one of the
world’s largest environmental disasters. It has caused
a cascade of environmental, socioeconomic, health
and humanitarian challenges for the Governments and
communities in the region. In the past 50 years, thanks
to the fivefold reduction in water flow from the Amu
Darya and Syr Darya rivers, the volume of the Aral Sea
has shrunk by more than 14 times. Its salinity levels
are 25 times higher and now significantly exceed those
of the world’s oceans. The Aral catastrophe has also
exacerbated climate conditions in the region, increasing
dryness and heat in summer and extending the periods
of cold in winter. Today the dire ecological situation
in the Aral Sea has also created serious challenges to
human security, threatening the lives and livelihoods of
the people in the region.
The situation has prompted Uzbekistan and the
United Nations to establish a unified platform for
mitigating the consequences of the Aral Sea crisis.
In particular, at the initiative of Uzbekistan, the
Multi-Partner Human Security Trust Fund for the
Aral Sea region was established in 2018. In addition,
the President of Uzbekistan, Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
has proposed declaring the Aral Sea region a zone of
ecological innovations and technologies in order to
galvanize support for collective action for reducing
vulnerability and advancing sustainable development
in the region.
As a practical step in bringing that initiative
to fruition, the President of Uzbekistan, during his
address to the general debate of the General Assembly

21-122259/12

A/75/PV.66

18/05/2021

at its seventy-fifth session, proposed the adoption of
a draft resolution “declaring the Aral Sea a zone of
ecological innovation and technologies” (see A/75/
PV.6, annex 2). The proposed draft resolution
emphasizes the importance of strengthening regional
cooperation in the implementation of joint actions to
overcome the negative consequences of the Aral Sea
crisis and stabilize the ecological situation in the region
by preventing further desertification and promoting
socioeconomic development and adaptation to climate
change, developing ecotourism and implementing
other measures.
From Uzbekistan’s perspective, the draft resolution
should help combine joint efforts to create the
conditions for attracting foreign investment in the
development and implementation of various projects
based on environmentally sound and innovative energyand water-saving technologies. The proposed draft
resolution is also in full conformity with resolution
72/283, entitled “On strengthening regional and
international cooperation to ensure peace, stability and
sustainable development in the Central Asian region”,
which calls on Member States to support the efforts
of Central Asian countries aimed at mitigating the
environmental and socioeconomic consequences of the
drying up of the Aral Sea. We firmly believe that the
productive cooperation and active support of the global
community, along with that of the United Nations in
its coordinating role, will help to achieve effective
solutions to the environmental and other problems in
the Aral Sea region. We think that today it is high time
to look at the Aral Sea ecological tragedy as a source of
opportunities rather than problems.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
all Member States for their active participation in
the negotiation process and to express my country’s
sincere hope that our proposed draft resolution will be
adopted unanimously today. I would also like to take
this opportunity to encourage all delegations to join the
list of sponsors.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.83, entitled
“Declaring the Aral Sea region a zone of ecological
innovations and technologies”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
10/12

that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.83: Afghanistan, Algeria,
Armenia, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, the Gambia, Georgia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Malaysia, the Maldives, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, the Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Senegal, Singapore, South Sudan,
Suriname, Togo, Turkey and Uganda.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.83?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/278).

A/75/L.83

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position after adoption,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Mr. Utebaev (Kyrgyzstan): The Kyrgyz Republic
would like to explain its position on resolution 75/278,
“Declaring the Aral Sea region as a zone of ecological
innovations and technologies”.
The Kyrgyz Republic joined the consensus in
adopting the resolution. At the same time, we would
like to inform the Assembly that in 2016 the Kyrgyz
Republic decided to freeze its participation in the
activities of the International Fund for Saving the Aral
Sea and its bodies due to the Fund’s ineffectiveness and
the lack of progress in reforming it. The negotiations
held in 2010 and 2011 between experts from the States
of the region on the issue did not lead to any results.
The issue of reforming the Fund requires the joint
efforts of all its member States and should be discussed
and promoted by experts from within and outside the
bodies of the Fund, including its Board. The Kyrgyz
Republic once again expresses its readiness to engage
in an expert-led discussion regarding reform of the
Fund with the participation of representatives from all
Central Asian countries. We hope that the countries of
Central Asia will be able to achieve proper reform of
the Fund in order to increase its efficiency and that of
its bodies, taking into account the interests and urgent
needs of all Central Asian countries.
21-12225

18/05/2021

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets
Draft resolution (A/75/L.84)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.84.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of Egypt, Turkey and Spain, the main
sponsors, I am pleased to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.84, entitled “International Year of Glass, 2022”.
The draft resolution that we are presenting today
was born many years ago on the shores of Tyre and
Sidon — the cradle of Western civilization — where
transparent, hard, colourful pearls were discovered in
the remains of a night-time bonfire. Glass had emerged
from the fusion of sand with alkaline ashes. From there,
it made its way to Egypt, as a luxury possession of the
pharaohs, and then on to Rome, before travelling across
the Roman Empire. The invention of the blowpipe
was the first technological revolution that made glass
available to all. Later, in the thirteenth century, stainedglass windows brought light and colour into Gothic
churches, thereby transforming architecture.
Glass has evolved with the history of humankind.
This transparent, invisible substance explains and
sustains the breakneck speed of technological progress
and at the same time has the potential to build a fairer
and more sustainable world. When optical fibres were
invented in 1961, few could have foreseen the revolution
in telecommunications and the birth of the Internet.
The development of those transparent channels lies at
the origins of globalization, with 5G in the twenty-first
century and an unlimited future ahead of us. Glass is
an essential material in architecture and clean energy.
It is a biomaterial par excellence, with uses ranging
from replacing and filling bones and healing wounds
to forming the billions upon billions of chemically
inert and resistant containers for vaccines against the
coronavirus disease. Being infinitely recyclable, glass
is also a good example of sustainable consumption
and production.

A/75/PV.66

That brief history supports the emerging thesis
that we are entering a special moment in the history of
humankind, the age of glass. That is why we propose
the approval by the General Assembly of the year
2022 as the International Year of Glass. The project
was launched in 2018, promoted by the International
Commission on Glass and supported by the Community
of Glass Associations and the International Committee
for Museums and Collections of Glass.
The draft resolution that we are presenting today
has been made possible thanks to the support of more
than 1,500 organizations from 79 countries across
five continents. Many countries endorse it, along with
the world of glass science; universities and research
centres; technology champions and glass manufacturers
in every corner of the planet; professional societies;
and museums and libraries. Scientists, educators,
engineers, manufacturers and glass artists will be the
protagonists, along with civil society, as recipients of
and participants in thousands of activities around the
world.
The celebration of the International Year of
Glass will make a unique contribution to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. By extension,
it will contribute to the advancement of the science,
engineering and art of glass. Celebrated in keeping
with the traditions of the international years declared
by the United Nations, the International Year of Glass
will enable progress in building solidarity around the
world and creating a fairer and more sustainable future.
After a series of informal consultations, the text of
the draft resolution has been submitted under the silence
procedure. We are pleased to inform the Assembly that
the silence has not been broken. We therefore hope that
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus at
today’s plenary session.
On behalf of Egypt, Turkey and Spain, the main
sponsors, I should not conclude without thanking the
representatives of all the Member States that actively
participated in the negotiation process for their
constructive contributions. Our thanks also go to the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
for the advice and support it provided throughout the
consultation process.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.84, entitled
“International Year of Glass, 2022”.

21-1222511/12

A/75/PV.66

I give the
the Secretariat.

18/05/2021

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/75/L.84: Brazil, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Hungary, Japan, Kiribati,
Mongolia, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Slovakia
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.84?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/279).

A/75/L.84

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor in
explanation of position after adoption, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats. I give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Mr. Messenger (United States of America):
The United States joins the consensus on resolution
75/279 and we thank Egypt, Spain and Turkey for
their facilitation.
We would like to underscore that certain documents
referenced in the resolution, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, are non-binding documents that do not
create rights or obligations under international law. I
refer the Assembly to our global explanation of position
delivered on 1 September 2015 (see A/69/PV.101).
The United States does not support calls for
technology transfer that are not both voluntary and on
mutually agreed terms. With regard to the resolution’s
eleventh preambular paragraph, we urge the United
Nations to show caution when identifying and dictating
specific activities without a clear method of funding,
including educational programmes and museum
exhibitions associated with the International Year
of Glass.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after adoption. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 136.

12/12

Agenda item 169 (continued)
Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/681/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall therefore
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Committee before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. I would like
to remind members that under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee”.
I also want to remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by representatives from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the recommendation
contained in the report of the Committee, I should
like to advise representatives that we shall proceed to
take a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Committee, unless notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 75/251 B).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 169.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

21-12225
