United Nations

S/PV.6551

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6551st meeting
Thursday, 9 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Ms. Rulumeni
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2011/298)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-36878 (E)

*1136878*

S/PV.6551

Council’s impending consideration of the renewal of
the MONUSCO mandate, which expires on 30 June.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2011/298)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/298, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece (spoke in French): I have the great
honour to address the Council in the framework of the
consultations on the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/298) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In that regard, I
express my appreciation of the important discussion
that took place in the Council on 18 May (see
S/PV.6539) on developments in the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and prospects for
the future. That debate was distinguished by the
presence of Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and other eminent
guests who presented their views on the issue. My
briefing falls within the framework of the Security

2

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
all those who offered condolences and support to the
Mission in the aftermath of the terrible tragedy on
4 April, during which a United Nations aircraft
suffered a fatal accident at N’Djili Airport in Kinshasa.
I would like to note the long hours and extraordinary
work performed by many in the Mission and Congolese
in different capacities to manage the crisis and address
the needs of the victims of the accident, as well as their
families, friends and colleagues. I would also note that
the investigation of the accident is ongoing.
As was noted in the 18 May consultations and in
the Secretary-General’s last report (S/2011/20), there
has been significant progress regarding the security
situation in recent years in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo; however, there is still much to
be done. In my view, the security environment and the
related threat to the civilian population — our highest
priority concern — must be viewed on a localized basis
to obtain a full understanding of the remaining threats,
the relevant factors affecting the situation, and the
options available for action to address the problem.
In Orientale province in north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) continues to pose the primary threat to the
population. We agree with Congolese and Ugandan
assessments that the number of LRA combatants in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at this point
limited and that they tend to be poorly equipped and
supplied. Nonetheless, they continue to use very brutal
tactics, and their cross-border movements between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Southern Sudan make them particularly
difficult to deal with. Since 2010, we have stepped up
MONUSCO military operations in the affected area, in
coordination with Congolese and Ugandan forces, and
as a result we believe that we have successfully
forestalled some of the larger-scale LRA attacks. The
Dungu-based joint intelligence and operations
centre — staffed by Congolese, Ugandan and
MONUSCO military personnel — has helped to
coordinate information and operations.
The reality is, however, that the LRA continues to
pose a major threat to civilians in areas where they
operate. I believe the only strategy that will

11-36878

S/PV.6551

significantly reduce or eliminate the LRA as an
ongoing threat in the region is one that focuses on the
LRA leadership, three members of whom are under
indictment by the International Criminal Court. That
strategy, however, requires a broad effort that goes
beyond MONUSCO’s scope and mandate, but which
we are ready to support to the maximum extent
possible.
North and South Kivu provinces present a more
complex picture, with an interaction among various
armed groups. Of these, the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) retains the greatest
military capacity, albeit greatly reduced from its peak.
The weakened state of the FDLR does present
opportunities, as evidenced in the encouraging
numbers of combatants repatriated in recent months,
including a significantly increased number of FDLR
holding more senior rank. The recent arrest by
Congolese authorities of Bernard Munyagishari and his
pending transfer to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda in Arusha is a further encouraging step. We
are continuing to explore actively with Congolese
authorities opportunities to accelerate a decrease in
FDLR capacity as quickly and effectively as possible
to address this long-standing threat to the security of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region.
Another significant security issue in the Kivus is
the incomplete integration of combatants from armed
groups into the Congolese army, particularly some
military members of the Congrès national pour la
défense du people, who have retained parallel
command and control structures. It is essential that this
situation be addressed in order for security conditions
to improve to a satisfactory level in the Kivus. We are
continuing our dialogue with Congolese Government
authorities on this subject. Other armed groups,
including
the
Ugandan
Allied
Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda,
continue to prey on the civilian population in the
Kivus.
Some
Mayi-Mayi
groups
receive
encouragement and support from FDLR elements, as
well as non-integrated combatants. However, none of
these groups constitutes the same level of military and
organizational capabilities as the FDLR.
Major improvements have been seen in Ituri
district of Orientale province in recent years, although
some
residual
militia
activity
continues.
Encouragingly, some recent apparent attempts to

11-36878

recruit new militia elements or form new groups have
not been very successful, with growing signs that local
communities recognize that such activity brings only
ongoing violence. The increased cooperation of the
population with Congolese security forces and
MONUSCO to counter militia elements is a key and
encouraging sign for future long-term security in Ituri.
The joint assessment process established last year
pursuant to resolution 1925 (2010) has been a very
positive exercise for us and Congolese authorities to
enhance our dialogue, to assess security threats, and to
arrive at a common analysis of the situation on the
ground. I believe that it would be useful to continue
this process during the next phase of MONSUCO’s
mandate, and it clearly will be a key resource for
looking at any future configuration and deployment of
MONUSCO forces based on existing security
conditions.
I am obliged to note that MONUSCO’s military
operations are being negatively impacted by a shortage
of military helicopters. With the scheduled departure of
the remaining combat helicopters in early July, this
problem will become worse absent new contributions. I
am very appreciative of a recent commitment from
South Africa to provide an additional military utility
helicopter, and very much hope that ongoing
discussions with other Member States will yield timely
and positive results. Filling the gaps in MONUSCO’s
helicopter capabilities will be critical to maintaining
the Mission’s efforts in the protection of civilians and
other core mandated tasks.
There has been a great deal of international and
domestic Congolese attention to the illegal exploitation
of mineral resources in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and specifically the involvement of armed
groups in their mining and trade. I believe it important
that the efforts of various countries internationally be
coordinated to the maximum extent possible with
regional and Congolese national efforts to ensure that
desired common objectives are achieved. In helping to
tackle this issue, MONUSCO is continuing the trading
counters — or centres de négoces — programme with
the Government, establishing centres where such
minerals can be certified as originating from legitimate
mining operations. Much more needs to be done to
address this complex issue, and I hope that national,
regional, and international efforts will progress rapidly
and in harmony to produce concrete positive results.

3

S/PV.6551

For tackling illegal exploitation of mineral
resources, as with all regional security issues, the
greatly improved dialogue and ongoing contacts
between the countries of the region are of critical
importance. There are ongoing bilateral and regional
contacts on a regular basis, which could not be said
five or 10 years ago, and these are essential to
achieving continuing progress in improving security
conditions throughout the region, including eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We will continue
to support and facilitate such contacts as may be useful
and desired by the countries involved. Similarly,
increased attention from the African Union on regional
issues, and particularly on the regional threat of
activities by the Lord’s Resistance Army, is
welcome — and, hopefully, will increase the
effectiveness of efforts to address this threat to security
in the region.
As Council members are aware, preparations for
the very important next cycle of national and
provincial elections have been under way for some
time. Voter registration has been completed in two
provinces, and is currently ongoing in all other areas of
the country. Well over half of the projected total of 31
million eligible voters have already been registered. In
addition, the election timetable has been announced by
the Commission electorale nationale indépendante
(CENI) for presidential, national, legislative,
provincial and local elections, with presidential and
National
Assembly
elections
scheduled
for
28 November. I am also pleased to note the recent
passage by the National Assembly of needed new
electoral legislation. I urge the rapid adoption by the
Senate as well of this essential measure. MONUSCO
has been actively supporting the electoral process —
transporting thousands of tons of materials, providing
ongoing technical support in a variety of areas and
generally facilitating elections preparations.
The election timetable is very ambitious, as the
Election Commission sought to accommodate
constitutionally mandated requirements for the
presidential elections to be held this year while
preserving the important coupling of presidential and
national legislative elections. The timetable was
announced after extensive consultations by the CENI
president with a broad range of political parties and
civil society representatives. MONUSCO, together
with the United Nations Development Programme, is
fully committed to providing all possible support to

4

help ensure a successful electoral cycle in accordance
with the CENI timetable.
We are of course facing challenges in our tasks.
While we have thus far been able to utilize the
Mission’s financial resources for elections support, that
will not be possible for the next budgetary year without
an unacceptably negative impact on other mandated
operations. We will need supplementary financial
resources, which are currently being defined with the
relevant United Nations budget authorities. The
national elections budget established by CENI has
received good support to date, with 60 per cent of the
total committed by the Congolese Government and
much of the remainder covered by generous pledges by
international partners. Continued engagement by
international partners, however, is required to ensure
full funding of all aspects of the electoral process. It is
also critically important that an adequate number of
international and national observers are deployed. I
welcome expressions of intent from a number of
organizations in that regard, including the European
Union and the Carter Center.
Electoral security also remains a concern.
MONUSCO has been providing refresher training to
some of the Congolese National Police, who have the
primary legal responsibility for elections security. An
important initiative is also under way for the training
of 10 Police d’intervention rapide units specifically for
elections security. Two of those will be trained and
equipped by France, two others by the Congolese
Government and six by MONSUCO. The Mission is
not, however, authorized to provide equipment for
those six units. I urge all Member States to consider
funding or providing in-kind contributions to meet
their equipment needs so that they can carry out their
tasks.
I also note with concern a number of reported
incidents in the past several months of harassment,
intimidation or violence centred on electoral activities,
particularly those involving opposition parties.
Government leaders, including President Kabila, have
reiterated to me and others their commitment to
ensuring free, peaceful and fair conditions for the
elections. We will continue an active dialogue with all
involved to ensure proper and favourable conditions
for the holding of credible and transparent elections. In
that regard, last April, MONUSCO chaired with CENI
an elections colloquium involving all major parties and
civil society to discuss how to best achieve a peaceful

11-36878

S/PV.6551

and open elections process and promote dialogue
among all involved. The meeting was very successful.
In follow-up, an update to the elections code of
conduct for political parties is being prepared. Other
related activities on the national and provincial levels
have been held or are being planned. We have also
indicated our support to CENI for the establishment of
a mediation committee to address disputes, as provided
in the legislation establishing the Commission.
I would like to emphasize the critical importance
of the upcoming elections. We have no illusions
regarding the magnitude of the challenges of
organizing successful elections. There are no
guarantees of success. However, all of the risk factors
that we see today were also present during the 2006
election cycle. Many in and outside of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo predicted the failure of those
elections. They were wrong. I know of no reason at this
point why Congolese elections for the next election
cycle cannot represent the kind of democratic and
successful exercise that the Congolese nation and
people both deserve and need. I would call on all the
parties to take the necessary steps to ensure that the
upcoming elections are conducted in a peaceful,
democratic and successful manner. I strongly urge the
Council’s continued support for the process and for
MONUSCO’s essential support role.
Before concluding, I would like to note the
importance of the United Nations continuing efforts
regarding stabilization related activities that are also
essential for the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
future success. Those include continued progress in
implementing
the
International
Security
and
Stabilization Programme in support of the stabilization
and reconstruction plan for areas emerging from armed
conflict initiative in the east, for which more funding is
needed. I am pleased to note good progress towards the
formal adoption of a peace consolidation programme
encompassing stabilization and development activities
in the western parts of the country. I hope that this
initiative will spur additional resource mobilization for
urgently needed activities in those parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. International and
Regional Cooperation Minister Tshibanda spoke of the
status and importance of those programs during the
18 May discussion. I fully concur with his statements.
I must stress the particular importance of further
strengthening the capabilities and functions of the
Congolese National Police, which the Government of

11-36878

the Democratic Republic of the Congo has requested
MONUSCO to support. I welcome the encouraging
recent passage of legislation by the National Assembly
that provides for the role, responsibilities and structure
of the Congolese National Police. We are very much
committed to expanding police capacity and are
conducting a range of programmes. However, they are
limited by insufficient resources and cannot meet the
requests of the Government. While expressing full
appreciation to those partners already engaged in
funding Congolese National Police programmes, I
would like to appeal again to all potential donors to
fund additional police training and equipment
programmes. I assure the Council of our eagerness to
make effective use of the resources committed.
I also would like to stress the importance of
reinforced efforts to strengthen judicial and military
institutions. The growing number of military trials of
security personnel, including officers of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), who have been found guilty of serious
abuses, including rape and other gender-based
violence, has been very encouraging. This is critical to
ending impunity, and the work of a number of military
prosecutors and their staff is most commendable.
However, capacity overall in both the civilian and
military justice systems is still weak. We in
MONUSCO are committed, with the support of other
partners, including Canada and the United States, to
the joint prosecution support cell initiative and other
programmes that support the work of FARDC
investigators, prosecutors and judges. However, more
is needed. In that regard, I very much encourage and
welcome additional partner engagement in those areas,
as well as for the important corrections sector.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to thank the personnel of MONUSCO and United
Nations agencies for their unstinting devotion and
support to the Mission. Their work has made a crucial
contribution — and I am sure it will continue to do
so — to the peace process, the holding of elections
and, more generally, to the goal of peace and security
in the region, which the Congolese people need so
much. I should like to conclude by noting the
outstanding progress made by partner countries, and
especially by the Congolese themselves. The support of
the Council and the various international partners has
been crucial in the search for lasting peace, security

5

S/PV.6551

and economic revival in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I thank the Council for its continuing support.

normalization, which require our urgent common
attention; and, on the basis of that dual assessment,
consensus on future United Nations action in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the basis of
MONUSCO’s mandate.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Meece for his
briefing.

I will now briefly touch upon a number of
elements contained in the report under consideration
that seem to me to be essential.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I turn first to the issue of elections, the holding of
which under the best possible conditions will
undoubtedly be the primary immediate challenge for
the Government and the international community. It is
now up to the Congolese political class and the
Commission electorale nationale indépendante (CENI)
not only to accelerate the preparations for elections due
to be held in line with the established timeline and
within the constitutional deadlines, but also to
administer this process in a peaceful climate. With
regard to the expected role to be played by the United
Nations, I would like to reiterate the request of the
Government for MONUSCO’s logistical and technical
support to CENI.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I would like at the outset to say how
pleased I am to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council in the month of June. I am all the
more pleased that it is under the presidency of a noble
son of Central Africa that the Council will consider the
future of the long partnership between my country and
the United Nations, which aims to restore the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to its rightful place
in the community of nations.
I would also like to commend your predecessor,
Sir, the Permanent Representative of France, for the
knowledge and expertise that he demonstrated last
month in managing the complex issues under the
purview of the Security Council.
Lastly, I would like to recognize the essential
nature of the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2011/298, of 12 May 2011, on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
thank the Secretary-General and I express my
appreciation for the briefing just given to us by his
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ambassador Roger Meece, whose presence
among us today I welcome.

To that end, the United Nations Mission has told
us that it has drawn up a plan that will require
additional resources. This morning, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General reiterated his
appeal in that regard. We have understood that they
will be forthcoming. We trust that the United Nations
will respond favourably. I can assure the Council that,
as a Member of the United Nations and as the country
most directly involved, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will shoulder all obligations stemming from this
plan. We have no doubt that all of the States Members
of the Organization will do likewise. Some of them
have already done so, and we are grateful to them for
that.

On 18 May, the Security Council held an
important meeting that allowed us to reach the
necessary consensus on the progress achieved and on
identifying challenges on the path towards stabilization
and peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.6539). I will not revisit the fruitful
exchanges that took place during the meeting, which
allowed us to forge a three-fold consensus between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Security
Council, namely, on the progress achieved towards the
normalization of the situation in the country; on the
obstacles that continue to stand in the way of that

Secondly, with regard to the renewal of
MONUSCO’s mandate, in paragraph 83 of his report,
the Secretary-General recommends that MONUSCO’s
mandate be extended by a further period of 12 months.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo supports that recommendation and also calls for
a renewal of the pertinent provisions contained in
paragraphs 6 and 7 of resolution 1925 (2010), which,
with a view to the progressive and orderly withdrawal
of MONUSCO, mandates the joint assessment team
with helping in the taking of common decisions
regarding the configuration of the United Nations

6

11-36878

S/PV.6551

mission that will best respond to the new challenges
facing us on the ground.
I would like to reiterate here that, as a responsible
partner, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo assures the Security Council that it has no
intention of weakening the consolidation of the
security situation under way. The Government is fully
aware that it needs the manifold assistance of the
United Nations and, to that end, is willing to discuss
this matter with the Council. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to take strategic multidimensional decisions
together with the Council, including military and nonmilitary measures, with a view, inter alia, to allowing
the Congolese Government to ensure and assume
security and State authority throughout the national
territory, good governance, the consolidation of the
rule of law and the economic development of the
country.
We call on friendly countries and our partners to
be well aware of the fact that the United Nations and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are entering a
new transition in their partnership for the country’s
renewal. In this new phase, we will undoubtedly need
to have a dialogue, but above all we will need to adapt
in the light of how the situation on the ground develops
and on the basis, let me reiterate, of the principles of
ownership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
first and foremost, and of the subsidiarity of
international cooperation.
Thirdly, given that stabilization and the
consolidation of peacebuilding for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are a priority overriding all
other priorities, the time has come to move to a new
stage, that of economic recovery after several years of
war. In that area as in all others, as the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation urged so
eloquently in the Council on 18 May,
“however essential it may be, all future assistance
from the United Nations, and MONUSCO in
particular, [should] be conceived and organized in
a way that makes full use of the investments
made by the international community. In this
way, we can end the crisis of legitimacy, relaunch
the economy and rebuild a State in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — in other
words, capitalize and build on the remarkable if
still precarious results that we have achieved in
this area” (S/PV.6539, p. 6).

11-36878

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is already
benefiting from a Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan
for War-Affected Areas and from an International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, which
targets the province of North Kivu and has been
extended to the districts of Haut-Uele and Bas-Uele in
Province Orientale, the Province of Maniema, the
district of Nord-Tanganyika in the Province of
Katanga, as well as the districts of Sud-Ubangui and
Equateur, in the Province of Equateur.
It is our humble opinion that the aspects of
economic recovery and social rehabilitation and
integration of these stabilization and reconstruction
programmes, in particular the Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed
Conflict, and the programme drawn up by the United
Nations country team that aims at the consolidation
and development of the regions of the north and the
west which, although free of conflict, are facing the
consequences of instability in the north and east of the
country, must be revisited and rethought.
It also seems to us just as important to go beyond
these programmes. We call on the international
community and on friendly countries that wish to do so
to come to our country, invest massively and
participate in our development and economic recovery.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s potential and
its population’s vitality allow us to envisage win-win
cooperation. Certain countries have already understood
this fact. We call on others to join us and help us down
that path.
Fourthly, on security sector reform, with respect
to the National Police, a request has already been
submitted by the Government, but as the SecretaryGeneral freely recognizes in his report, “[p]rogress …
remains limited because of the lack of complementary
support by donors to provide the necessary basic
equipment” (S/2011/298, para. 55). Despite this, we
continue to place our trust in MONUSCO for the
reform of the National Police, with the short-term goal
of training for the police personnel required to provide
security for the elections.
Regarding the national army, the bilateral option
is preferred and the one for which agreements currently
being implemented have already been negotiated and
concluded with certain countries. Following the reopening of military bases — particularly those at
Kamina, Kananga, Kindu and Kisangani — the

7

S/PV.6551

military school at the Kitona base has been reopened
since 24 May to train junior officers in the Congolese
army, thanks to funding from the European Union
through its mission to provide advice and assistance for
security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Officers and juniors officers of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) will be trained there by France. We thank
that country for its support to security sector reform
aimed at building peace and security, which will
certainly lead to the establishment of an army that we
trust will be republican, loyal and competent.
Fifthly, on the struggle against armed groups, last
month one of the 10 Rwandan fugitives still being
sought by international justice for their presumed
involvement in the 1994 Rwandan genocide,
Mr. Bernard Munyagishari, was arrested by the
FARDC. Other arrests will follow in the framework of
the commitment undertaken by my Government to the
United Nations, at a pace that will not undermine the
restored peace.
Regarding the threat embodied by the Lord’s
Resistance Army rebel movement, it will be necessary,
with the help of the countries that have made a
leitmotif of the struggle against that movement —
which, we recall, is of Ugandan origin — to step up
measures to protect civilians from the atrocities
committed by the rebel movement of Mr. Joseph Kony
and his henchmen. We believe that all the elements are
objectively in place to concretely and significantly
reduce or even eliminate that armed group’s capacity
do to harm as it runs riot in an area stretching across
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Sudan, Uganda
and my own country. This is possible, and is necessary
if we are to make peace a reality.
Generally speaking, we reaffirm that, when it
comes to the struggle against armed groups, including
Congolese
outlaws,
significant
progress
has
undoubtedly been achieved in reducing the threat to the
security of the population and in improving the
Government’s management of the security situation.
The normalization of relations with neighbouring
States continues. Measures have been taken to remove
disruptive elements from the borders, although we
reiterate the position we have held since February
2001, which has remained unchanged, that any armed
foreigner, whoever he may be, should return to his
country of origin.

8

Sixthly and finally, on the issue of justice for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: if we want a true
peace, we need to restore truth. I can assure our
mothers, wives, sisters and daughters that we have not
forgotten the atrocities they have suffered. We have not
forgotten those mothers disemboweled at Kabinda,
Kasika or Katogota. We have not forgotten the
massacres at Makobola, Kasala, Imesse and Kamituga,
and still less the images of our sisters buried alive at
Mwenga.
We recall that, in its determination to put a
definitive end to impunity for serious crimes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and
in
implementation
of
the
relevant
recommendations of the United Nations mapping
report of October 2010, the Government has taken the
initiative to establish within the Congolese judiciary
specialized mixed chambers attached to certain
provincial appeal courts with the power to try grave
violations of human rights committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
To that end, the Government has submitted to
Parliament a bill on the creation of a specialized mixed
chamber for the suppression of these crimes. These
specialized mixed chambers will have the potential not
only to help put an end to impunity, but also to
improve victims’ access to the justice system and to
more generally enhance the capacities and willingness
of the national Congolese judiciary to effectively
prosecute the most serious international crimes.
Since the bill on the specialized mixed chambers
contains specific provisions conferring universal
competence to these chambers, we believe that the
cooperation of other States, and above all of
neighbouring States, would be an important security
cordon allowing us to prosecute the perpetrators of
grave crimes even once they have fled the crime scene
or when the authorities of their respective countries do
not wish to prosecute them.
Thus, the specialized mixed chambers, although
established by the Congolese legislature under national
law, would see their effectiveness and credibility
enhanced if they were to receive the firm support of the
Security Council. Such support would require the
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, to
decide to establish a responsibility and an obligation
for Member States to cooperate with the specialized
mixed chambers, especially in the arrest and

11-36878

S/PV.6551

extradition of suspects. This would be necessary when
the absence of cooperation and denial of justice could
pose a real threat to international peace and security.
In conclusion, I must voice my Government’s
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to all MONUSCO personnel and associated civilian
and humanitarian personnel for their tireless efforts to
achieve lasting peace and security in my country. To
all, I reiterate the full gratitude of my Government for
their total devotion to the cause of peace and to
restoring the dignity of the Congolese people.
To Mr. Ban Ki-moon, I say that His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, welcomed the
announcement early this week that the SecretaryGeneral would seek a second five-year term at the head
of our universal Organization. Our President echoes the
emerging unanimity on the subject of the SecretaryGeneral’s tireless commitment and leadership in
spheres as varied as gender equality and the
empowerment of women, the Millennium Development
Goals, climate change, international peace and security,
development, United Nations system reform and
strengthening multilateralism. Our Head of State
assures the Secretary-General of his support for his
candidature — the candidature of a man of his word
who has devoted particular attention to and interest in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to which he has
shown every consideration.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has not
forgotten that, in January 2007, just a few days after
assuming office, the Secretary-General reserved his

11-36878

very first official visit for our country, followed by
others in November 2008, February 2009 and June
2010. This undoubtedly reflects the SecretaryGeneral’s constant devotion to working for
peacebuilding in my country.
Once again, my country thanks him for his
personal investment in the quest for a lasting solution
to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for having spared no effort to enable the
universal Organization to help the young Congolese
democracy to reach its full potential and the Congolese
people to realize their political and socio-economic
aspirations. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
therefore remains convinced that, during his second
mandate, the issue of the Congo will be brought to a
close.
Before concluding, Mr. President, I would like, if
I may, to give you a little wink. I recall that on 13 June,
next Monday, the Secretary-General will be celebrating
his birthday. What better birthday present could the
Security Council offer him under your presidency than
to renew its trust in him between now and then?
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for his statement. The message is of course
directed to all members of the Security Council, not
just the President.
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

9
