S/PV.7109

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7109th meeting

Wednesday, 12 February 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė/Mrs. Kazragienė/Mr. Baublys . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Adoum
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2013/689)
Letter dated 3 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/74)

14-23296 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1423296*

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2013/689)
Letter dated 3 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/74)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay and
Mr. Daccord, who are joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Geneva.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the Council’s provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
2/87

12/02/2014

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/689, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
I also wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2014/74, which contains the text
of a letter dated 3 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note concerning the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council. I shall base my remarks on the experience
gained over the past few years by my Office and the
human rights components in peacekeeping operations.
Nine peacekeeping operations currently have an
explicit mandate to protect civilians. My Office has
worked together with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) to develop policies, guidance and
training on the protection of civilians, building on the
wealth of often innovative approaches that have been
developed in the field.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the human
rights component has dispatched multidisciplinary
protection teams to volatile areas. In Mali, human
rights mobile teams have been deployed to areas at risk,
and human rights call-centres were set up during the
elections. In Afghanistan, civilian casualty monitoring
has provided the basis for influential advocacy, such
as the 8 February report issued jointly by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR).
Human rights officers have also advised on United
Nations military preventive deployments, contingency
plans and sheltering and escorting civilians. They have
also provided a critical bridge with local communities,
human rights defenders and women’s groups for
alerts on risks of gross human rights violations. The
human rights due-diligence policy has also contributed
to preventing and addressing violations. All those
approaches are strongly grounded in human rights
functions.
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7109

Our experience confirms that timely and wellresourced human rights monitoring, advocacy and
reporting are essential for the effective implementation
of protection-of-civilians mandates. In South Sudan,
beyond the physical protection of more than 80,000
civilians in United Nations bases, it is clear that human
rights investigation, monitoring, advocacy and reporting
are key concerns now more than ever. Together with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we are
preparing a comprehensive public human rights report.
OHCHR is also providing technical support and advice
for the establishment of a commission of inquiry by the
African Union.

To that effect, my Office has worked with the DPKO
and the Department of Political Affairs to develop a
joint policy, the aim of which is to ensure that human
rights officers, military personnel and other mission
components work better together to respond to the
risk of human rights violations, including in situations
of imminent physical violence against civilians. I
urge the Council to emphasize that link when issuing
mandates, and to ensure that human rights components
are appropriately resourced. My Office is currently
seeking to strengthen our headquarters support to those
components in order to facilitate the speedy deployment
of well-trained human rights experts in crisis situations.

In the Central African Republic, while regional
peacekeeping efforts are ongoing, my Office has
been focusing on much-needed fact-finding, public
reporting and promotion of accountability through
the deployment of a rapid-response monitoring team,
increased human rights capacity within the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic and support for the Council’s
commission of inquiry. There is an urgent need to stop
the terrible violence in the Central African Republic
and to hold perpetrators accountable. I also note that
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
decided to open a preliminary investigation. I welcome
the Council’s continued attention to the situation in the
Central African Republic, in particular its efforts to
ensure accountability.

Secondly, we need greater support for human rights
access. It is indispensable for the effective protection
of human rights that we establish facts and understand
underlying causes and conflict dynamics. Sound and
compelling human rights information and analysis must
be at the core of strategies to protect civilians. Access
by human rights personnel to remote and at-risk areas
is also critical for deterrence. Our experience in Côte
d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows the value of close cooperation among human
rights, military and other peacekeeping personnel
to rapidly assess developments in remote locations,
to engage in preventive advocacy with potential
perpetrators and to protect civilians.

The Secretary-General’s action plan entitled
“Rights up front”, which places human rights at the
centre of the response to potential or emerging crises,
is also strengthening United Nations efforts with regard
both to South Sudan and the Central African Republic,
including those of my Office.
In spite of those developments, I see a number
of areas in which greater support from the Security
Council and States would be welcome.
First, we need to be clearer about what we mean
by the protection of civilians in peacekeeping. Over
the years, the Council has greatly contributed to the
protection of civilians by issuing fully fledged human
rights mandates and mandates to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence. However, the
link between those two mandates and their mutually
reinforcing nature has not always been made clear. The
protection of civilians in peacekeeping should be normsbased. Implementation should be firmly anchored in the
broader human rights protection mandate of missions.

Thirdly, we need continued support from the
Council in particularly difficult situations when
protecting civilians requires bold action and swift
decisions and when mission personnel are intimidated,
expelled or attacked because they are doing their jobs.
Fourthly, impunity allows gross human rights
violations to thrive. It undermines the fabric of societies
and prevents the development of lasting solutions. States
must do more to ensure that violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law are investigated
and that perpetrators are held accountable. In postconflict situations, where capacity is often minimal,
that requires sustained efforts. That may include mobile
courts, specialized chambers, internationally supported
tribunals, vetting, robust technical assistance to
strengthen the criminal justice system or a combination
of those elements.
I encourage the Council and States to squarely face
the magnitude and responsibility of, and the resources
needed for, that task, in the clear knowledge that
accountability is crucial to the protection of civilians. I
also call on the Council to more systematically condemn

14-232963/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

violations, to remind parties of their obligations and to
demand compliance.
Finally, let us not forget that there are armed
conflicts in which civilians suffer greatly but where no
peacekeeping operation is deployed. I am particularly
concerned about the situation in Syria, including the use
of sieges as a method of warfare and their tremendous
impact on the civilian population. At least 240,000
Syrians, including women and children, remain trapped
and struggle to survive.
Both
the
Syrian
Government
and
the
anti-Government groups are failing to fulfil their
obligations under international law. There must not be
an assumption that those who remain in Old Homs and
other besieged areas are combatants. All parties to the
conflict must urgently facilitate unimpeded access to
humanitarian relief.
I also reiterate my call to the Council to refer the
Syrian situation to the International Criminal Court
as a clear message to all parties that there will be
consequences for their actions. The lack of consensus
on Syria and the resulting inaction have been disastrous,
and civilians have paid the price. I am appalled by the
massacre on 8 February at Maan, where dozens of
civilians were killed.
Throughout my mandate, I have welcomed every
opportunity to brief the Council and States about
human rights issues in order to contribute to informed
decisions. I have seen tremendous progress in the
emphasis that peacekeeping operations have given to
human rights. I encourage the Council and Member
States to continue putting human rights at the centre of
considerations on peace and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: The Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2013/689) on the protection of civilians takes stock of
the current, very bleak state of affairs in this area of work
and also provides an update on progress in responding
to the five core challenges. It makes recommendations
for strengthening protection, addressing new weapon
technologies, explosive weapons use in populated
areas, casualty recording, non-State armed groups,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian access and
accountability.

4/87

12/02/2014

In today’s briefing, I will focus my remarks on
the general deterioration in the protection of civilians
in the past year, the impact of key developments in
peacekeeping operations on the issue and the pressing
need to strengthen the protection of civilians from the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
I regret to inform the Council that, despite the
extensive human rights and humanitarian law that
has been put in place and the widespread availability
of social media, which is now used to track atrocities
against civilians, civilians continue to be killed, injured
and maimed in conflict by targeted or indiscriminate
attacks on a regular basis. They are arbitrarily detained,
tortured, raped or forcibly recruited. They are displaced
to an uncertain fate, often with no or only limited access
to basic necessities.
The recent examples of Syria, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan bear that out, with parties
to conflict failing, sometimes deliberately, to respect
and protect civilians pursuant to their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In many respects, we seem to be going backwards as
international exhortations, including from the Council,
go unheeded.
In Syria, civilians have been subjected to brutal
violence for almost three years, and there appears to
be no end in sight. We all hope that the current talks in
Geneva will deliver a positive result. As the violence
intensifies and the situation on the ground becomes
more complicated, people are becoming even more
desperate. There are reports and allegations of the
systematic targeting of communities with specific
religious affiliations. And the use of siege as a weapon
of war is particularly heinous — the deliberate denial
of humanitarian assistance to people in desperate need.
As a world community, we had all hoped that we had
moved beyond that, and yet we are witnessing it in
Syria every day. There are 250,000 people in areas of
the country that are besieged. They cannot leave, and
we cannot get aid in.
The recent and desperately needed humanitarian
pause in Homs has enabled United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent workers to evacuate more than 1,000
civilians and to deliver some food and medicines to
people in the Old City. It was a heroic effort, as people
waiting to leave and humanitarian workers trying to get
aid in were being deliberately targeted. We will learn

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the lessons from that operation and seek to replicate it
in other parts of the country.
Atrocities continue in the Central African
Republic, including against those fleeing violence.
There are 100,000 people seeking refuge at the
airport, and thousands have fled into the bush. The
conflict is complex, and all communities are affected
by the violence. I am gravely concerned by reports of
reprisals against the minority Muslim community. In
many towns, Muslim groups are currently isolated and
threatened by anti-Balaka forces, and tens of thousands
have already left the country for Chad or Cameroon.
Many local religious leaders are doing all they can to
bring communities together, but the trust has gone.
In South Sudan, thousands of lives were saved
when the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
allowed people into its bases after violence erupted on
15 December. Nearly 75,000 people are still receiving
protection and assistance in eight United Nations bases,
crowded together in unsustainable conditions and too
fearful to return to homes and communities, which have
been razed to the ground. However, the majority of the
displaced, 85 per cent of them, are in open areas where
access is difficult and insecure. We continue to receive
reports of ongoing clashes, despite the cessation of
hostilities agreement, leading to further displacements.
People are exposed to physical and sexual violence,
the destruction of their property, separation from their
families and psychosocial trauma.
In all those situations and in many others,
humanitarian workers face significant challenges as
they seek to protect and assist those in need. That is often
done at great personal risk, as we saw four days ago in
Homs. They, too, must be protected and respected by
parties to conflict. In 2013, 120 humanitarian workers
were reported killed, 105 injured and 113 kidnapped.
Let me now turn to peacekeeping operations.
Mandating peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
remains among the most significant actions taken by the
Council to enhance protection, and it has undoubtedly
saved lives. In many countries, we are constantly asking
our peacekeepers to do more, as their numbers are not
necessarily commensurate with the task at hand. We
have seen that in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and elsewhere. But we also recognize that
the implementation of a robust protection mandate by
peacekeepers can lead to tensions for missions and

S/PV.7109

humanitarian actors. We have sought to address some
of those challenges. But there are three specific areas
where our continued engagement is essential.
First, ensuring effective coordination between
missions and humanitarian actors is essential. We all
know that there needs to be a clear distinction between
humanitarian action and a mission’s political and
military objectives, so as to maintain the centrality
of the principles underpinning humanitarian work.
It is important that the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors are, and are seen to be, neutral,
impartial and independent. However, that is not always
easy to achieve in volatile, fast-moving conflict
situations, where communities look to the United
Nations for protection but their leaders cite the partiality
of the United Nations in support of one side or another,
thereby increasing risks to humanitarian workers and
limiting their access to people in need.
Secondly, many of the tasks undertaken by
peacekeepers to protect civilians rely on their
impartiality. But peacekeepers are also sometimes
expected to use force. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has peacekeeping and peace-enforcement
troops under the same command. It may be the only
way in which they can protect civilians, but we must
remain mindful that, if that impartiality is called into
question — in particular if the mission is perceived
to have become a party to the conflict — its close
proximity to civilians, including in pursuit of its
protection activities, could place civilians at increased
risk of attack at the same time.
Thirdly, it is important that the civilian
contribution to implementing the protection mandate
is not overshadowed by a focus on the military role
and the physical protection of civilians. The work of
human rights, the protection of women and children
and security-sector reform staff is just as essential for
ensuring protection in the long term. Along with the
protection cluster, their work also helps to guide the
military component in its approach to the protection of
civilians.
Let me now turn to the protection of civilians
from the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. As is apparent in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and
Somalia, we must do more in that area. According to
the British non-governmental organization Action on
Armed Violence, almost 38,000 people were killed
or injured by explosive weapons worldwide in 2012.

14-232965/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Of those, 78 per cent were civilians. When explosive
weapons were used in populated areas, 91 per cent
of casualties were civilians. Last week, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan reported a
14 per cent increase in civilian casualties in 2013, as
compared to the previous year. The indiscriminate use
of improvised explosive devices by anti-Government
elements increased in 2013 and remained the leading
cause of civilian casualties.
In addition to being killed or injured, civilians are
also displaced, often for long periods and in precarious
conditions. In Syria, 6.5 million people are internally
displaced, and 2.5 million have fled the country. Many
of those displaced have fled fighting characterized
by the devastating and continuing use of explosive
weapons in populated areas — all despite the Council’s
calls for the removal of heavy weapons from population
centres.
In the Sudanese states of Blue Nile and South
Kordofan, aerial bombardment of civilian areas by
Sudanese forces and shelling both by Sudanese forces
and by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North
continue to result in death, injury and displacement.
Explosive weapons can result in horrific injuries
requiring emergency and specialist medical treatment,
rehabilitation and psychosocial support services. But
often that treatment and support is unavailable, in
part because health facilities have been damaged or
destroyed. The International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), from which the Council will hear later,
reports that explosive weapons are the leading cause of
damage to health-care facilities in armed conflicts.
Explosive-weapon use in populated areas results
in damage to, or the destruction of, housing and other
infrastructure, such as schools. Approximately one
third of the housing stock in Syria has been destroyed
by the fighting, while nearly one fifth of the schools are
either damaged or being used as shelters.
Livelihoods are also devastated as land and
other means of production are rendered unusable as
the result of explosive remnants of war, which will
continue to pose a threat to civilians until they are
removed. Damage to the agricultural sector during
hostilities between Israel and Palestinian armed groups
in Gaza from 14 to 21 November 2012 is estimated
at $20 million. Moreover, explosive remnants of war
remain buried in farmland and in the rubble of damaged

6/87

12/02/2014

buildings, posing a threat to people and those working
on rubble-removal and reconstruction.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly called on
parties to conflict to avoid the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas. He has asked
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to continue working with Member States, United Nations
colleagues, the ICRC and civil society to strengthen
the protection of civilians against such weapons. We
will work to promote Member States’ recognition of
the humanitarian impact of explosive-weapon use in
populated areas and their commitment to avoid or limit
such use in the future, including by building on good
practice in that area. I hope that all Member States will
engage in those efforts.
While our humanitarian and peacekeeping work
saves lives and can enhance the safety and security
of people affected by conflict, it remains the primary
responsibility of the parties to conflict to respect and
protect civilians and spare them from the effects of
hostilities.
Until such time as parties act accordingly, and
until such time as they are persuaded or coerced
into complying with the law — including by the
Council — or held accountable for their failures, the
lack of sustained protection for civilians will continue
to give little cause for optimism, but considerable cause
for despair, outrage and shame.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): In two months, we
will mark the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, an event that was horrible beyond words,
devastating a nation, a region and the world’s collective
conscience. But that tragedy also contributed to shaping
the United Nations and the international community.
Today’s debate is evidence of both how much has
changed and how much remains unchanged. Perhaps
never before in history have world leaders directed such
focused attention on the protection of the defenceless.
Yet, all too often, we continue to see civilians’ rights
violated during conflict. From South Sudan to Syria to
the Central African Republic, countless men, women
and children are caught in the crossfire, displaced by
conflict and even targeted because of their religion,
political affiliation or ethnicity.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

But it must be acknowledged that lessons have
been learned from past experiences, and that nowhere
are they more evident than in the field of peacekeeping.
Today, it must be emphasized that no less than 95 per
cent of peacekeepers work in missions mandated by
the Security Council specifically to protect civilians.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
worked diligently to clarify operational guidelines
in that important area, which forms the core of many
mandates — nine, to be precise.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
peacekeepers have utilized a clear and robust mandate
to respond to the perpetrators of attacks on civilians.
In that respect, I believe that the November incident
involving the surrender of the Mouvement du 23 mars
testifies to the effectiveness of such work.
Over the years, the Department has made a
determined effort to develop a consistent operational
concept on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping,
based on a comprehensive, holistic approach and
drawing on the full range of the possible activities of a
United Nations mission aimed at enhancing protection.
The Council’s clear intent and, importantly, the
consensus of troop- and police-contributing countries
together are of major importance. Protection crises are
never times for doubt. In my opinion, it is crucial, in
terms of daily operations, that the expectations agreed
to by all actors be expressed as precisely as possible.
Last month, the Council faced a very grave decision
when violence erupted in South Sudan. I believe that
the Council took decisive action, increasing the troop
strength of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
by authorizing significant reinforcements. The Mission
has met the challenge, providing what I consider to
be unprecedented protection and opening its doors to
increasing numbers of displaced persons, amounting
now to 85,000 civilians.
Yet it must be acknowledged that, despite
burdening the Mission’s human and material resources,
hundreds of thousands of other South Sudanese remain
at risk. Clearly, our soldiers cannot impose peace upon
the parties to that conflict, and resolving protection
challenges ultimately requires political solutions.
Peacekeeping is fundamentally a part of those political
solutions.
Today, virtually all of our missions not only
incorporate civilian expertise in political affairs, human
rights, the rule of law, along with, of course, military

S/PV.7109

and police officers, but many are also integrated with
our humanitarian partners. In Mali, our peacekeepers
are supporting a delicate political process aimed
at establishing an inclusive Government. In Haiti,
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, our peacekeeping missions
are supporting and strengthening the respective
Governments’ capacities to assume their protection
responsibilities.
(spoke in English)
Supporting host Governments in meeting those
protection responsibilities lies at the heart of modern
peacekeeping. It is therefore no coincidence that the
human rights due-diligence policy grew out of the work
of peacekeepers and, more specifically, their work in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo several years
back. While our troops may need to stand against rogue
Government elements in order to protect civilians,
peacekeeping is viable, ultimately, only with the consent
of the host Government. The protection of civilians by
United Nations peacekeepers should therefore never be
confused with non-consensual intervention under the
third pillar of the responsibility-to-protect framework.
With the increasing complexity of the situation in
the field, peacekeepers are vital actors in improving
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and they
play a central role in the Secretary-General’s “Rights
up front” framework. They support accountability
for human rights violations and promote compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
Peacekeepers are also important in many places for
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance while also
respecting humanitarian space.
Where applicable, our missions have developed
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians.
Those strategies draw together all mission components
in a concerted effort focused on the most critical threats
to civilians. They provide for dedicated organizational
and leadership structures to facilitate early warning
and joint operational response.
The limits of peacekeeping are real. Within their
capabilities, missions must do their utmost to protect
but, beyond those limits, other means must be found.
No peacekeeping mission can physically protect all,
or even most, civilians where a serious conflict has
broken out. Of couse, often our missions are judged by
journalists who are seeking headlines or by analysts
who emphasize too strongly the use of force. Therefore,
the Council has an important role to play in articulating

14-232967/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

its expectations for the protective capacities of
peacekeepers — expectations that will form the basis
for clear standards for action. Ultimately, civilians will
be fully protected only when there is sufficient peace
and there are sufficiently stable national structures to
sustain and protect it. That must be the overall goal.
Today, we also face a world that, in many respects,
is more dangerous than it was in 1994. United Nations
personnel now face threats that were unheard of 20
years ago. Recently, in Afghanistan, the United Nations
family lost four of its members in a senseless attack on
a Kabul restaurant. In Mali, our peacekeepers face the
possibility of terrorist groups that are willing and able
and actually want to target Blue Helmets. That makes
the job of protecting civilians an extremely challenging
task.
In navigating those new environments, we must
be more flexible — learning and adapting as an
Organization. Exploring new capabilities and adopting
new technologies will not be an optional matter in
the future of peacekeeping. We must improve our
capacities for early warning and rapid reaction, in
which gathering, analysing and acting on information
will be vital.

12/02/2014

continued vitality through our permanently reaffirmed
determination to protect civilians from violence.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Daccord.
Mr. Daccord: I am pleased and honoured to brief
the Security Council today on a topic that is very central
to my organization, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). On behalf of the ICRC, I would also
like to thank Lithuania for the invitation to participate
in this meeting.
As we meet today and debate the problems and,
I hope, possible solutions as to how better to protect
civilians caught up in armed conflict, no amount of
words alone will adequately convey the scale and depth
of suffering of many of those civilians — nor, in all
honesty, will our words offer a way to end it.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Council
for approving the use of unarmed, unmanned aerial
systems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
the consent of the Government. Clearly, that is already
making a difference on the ground.

In some of the diverse armed conflicts or other
situations of violence in which the ICRC is currently
working around the world — and here we are
thinking especially of parts of the Middle East and
Africa — the humanitarian impact of that violence on
entire populations within, but also beyond, national
borders is so overwhelming that it almost defies
description. When almost every man, woman and child
in a particular country has been directly or indirectly
affected by violence, the need for decisive actions
rather than just words really does become a matter of
life or death.

Now, do not mistake my point. Much has been put
into place, but we still continue to face challenges, and
we have a great deal farther to go. In too many places
throughout the world, civilians suffer in conflict. That
situation, whether in countries with peacekeeping
missions or without, is a vital issue that requires the
Council’s continued attention.

While the search for political solutions to a number
of seemingly intractable conflicts continues, it is the
role of humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC to
help alleviate the consequences of the fighting rather
than to question its causes. Yet that role is becoming
increasingly difficult to fulfil in many of today’s most
complex and violent crises.

Peacekeeping is an expression of the will of the
Security Council and, let me say again, of troop- and
police-contributing countries. Its success depends
upon clear, decisive and resolute direction from the
Council. It depends upon the commitment of all those
who take part in peacekeeping to fully implement the
mandate and the provision of sufficient capabilities and
resources to effectively confront the challenges on the
ground.

There are various reasons for that. The overt
politicization of aid and the polarization of States
around humanitarian issues are just two reasons,
reinforcing the need to clearly distinguish and
separate principled humanitarian action from other aid
initiatives. The widening gap between humanitarian
needs and the ability to deliver an effective response is
another reason, as is the decreasing proximity of many
humanitarian actors to the people whom they are trying
to help. Parties to armed conflicts, including complex
webs of armed groups that in many cases do not respect
or accept impartial humanitarian actions, present

Peacekeeping was born when the Council
sought to hold combatants apart. Let us confirm its

8/87

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7109

another challenge, as do the ever-present security risks.
Administrative hurdles and unjustified or arbitrary
restrictions and delays often add to the problems.

armed groups, to remind them of their obligations
under international humanitarian law and urge them to
comply.

All of those challenges are present in the single
most pressing issue facing the ICRC in many contexts,
which is to gain greater humanitarian access to people
directly affected by violence, to be close to them and to
be able to address their needs. Therefore, the protection
granted to civilians under international humanitarian
law lies at the heart of the ICRC’s mandate and mission,
and provides a framework for our assistance activities.

Of course, the ICRC’s approach is only one among
an increasing number of actors — both civilian and
military — aiming for the protection of civilians
with different mandates and ways of working. The
United Nations has gone a long way in recent years
in further integrating the issue of the protection of
civilians into its structural framework. The ICRC is
committed to maintaining and further developing its
highly constructive dialogue with the United Nations
on operational and legal issues related to peacekeeping
and to lending its support and expertise in humanitarian
law for the training of United Nations peacekeepers,
both predeployment and on-site. Professional standards
in protection work are of the utmost importance, and
in 2013 the ICRC published an updated guide on the
issue. Those standards could be used to inform the
development and implementation of civilian protection
strategies by United Nations peacekeeping missions.

The issue of humanitarian access can be extremely
contentious, as ongoing debates at the highest political
levels have shown. For the ICRC, however, the issue is
quite clear: humanitarian access in situations of armed
conflict is regulated by international humanitarian
law, the rules of which must be respected by all parties
to a conflict, both State and non-State. Those rules
unambiguously specify that States and other parties to
a conflict have the primary responsibility for the safety
and well-being of populations in territories under
their control. Where the basic needs of the population
affected by the armed conflict are not met for whatever
reason, the parties must allow and facilitate the rapid
and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief, which
is impartial in character and conducted without any
adverse distinction, although the parties retain a right
of control. That means that the offer of humanitarian
services by a neutral, impartial and independent
organization such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross cannot be interpreted as a challenge to a
State’s sovereignty, nor as recognition or support to any
party to the conflict, and the offer cannot be refused on
that basis.
We therefore take this opportunity to reiterate the
ICRC’s appeal to all State and non-State parties to even
the most violent armed conflicts today: respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law, including
those related to humanitarian access. The survival of
countless vulnerable people may depend upon it.
It is of course the general lack of compliance with
international humanitarian law by States and non-State
armed groups that presents the most critical challenge
to the protection of civilians, and that is at the root of
the widespread suffering we are witnessing in various
situations of conflict today. For my organization, the
ICRC, it is a critical aspect of our approach to engage
with all parties to a conflict, including non-State

In our daily work, the ICRC and United Nations
peacekeepers are confronted with the consequences of
the prevailing lack of compliance with international
humanitarian law. One of the most widespread and
daunting humanitarian problems arising from violations
of that law — at least in terms of numbers — is that of
internal displacement. That problem not only affects
the many millions of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) themselves, but also countless host families and
resident communities.
Better respect for international humanitarian law
is key to preventing that problem in the first place
and to protecting people who have been displaced
and easing their suffering. Humanitarian law, for
example, prohibits the displacement of people unless
it is necessary for imperative military reasons or for
the protection of the civilians themselves. If there were
better respect for the rules prohibiting direct attacks on
civilians and civilian objects and for those prohibiting
indiscriminate means and methods of warfare, to take
another example, fewer people would be compelled to
flee their homes.
During displacement, IDPs are often exposed to
further abuses and have wide-ranging subsistence
needs. Conversely, but equally reprehensible, people
are sometimes forcibly prevented from fleeing when
they wish to do so. In both situations, it is crucial that

14-232969/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

parties to the conflict allow and facilitate humanitarian
access so that the needs of affected people may be
addressed in an impartial manner.
In many armed conflicts, the prevalent use of
explosive weapons with wide impact in densely
populated areas — with all its inherent risk of incidental
or indiscriminate death, injury and destruction of
homes and vital civilian infrastructure — further
fuels displacement and inhibits return. The ICRC joins
the Secretary-General in encouraging States to share
information on their respective polices, operational
practices and lessons learned on the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. That would contribute to
informed discussions on this important humanitarian
issue, and hopefully to the development of operational
guidance by States.
Compliance with international humanitarian law
provides protection during armed conflict and after the
fighting has ended. Yet we watch in dismay as parties to
conflict continue to disregard the very rules that could
lay the groundwork for recovery and an eventual return
to stability. Fanning the flames of ethnic, religious
and sectarian hatred and violence further exacerbates
the problem, increasing the perennial instability and
fragility of many conflict-affected States.
All of us here today have a role to play in improving
compliance with international humanitarian law. For
our part, the joint Swiss-ICRC initiative to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law, which
continues to gain momentum and widespread support
from States, is just one example in that regard.
Ultimately, it is up to States and non-State armed
groups, which are also bound by the provisions of
international humanitarian law, to show the political
will to translate legal provisions into actual deeds, to
turn words and promises into concrete actions and to
make the protection of civilians a meaningful reality.
The President: I thank Mr. Daccord for his
briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among members, I shall
take it that the members of the Security Council agree
to the statement, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/3.

10/87

12/02/2014

It is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important debate
today. I also thank High Commissioner Pillay, UnderSecretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) Director-General Daccord for their compelling
and thoughtful contributions to this debate. The specific
examples they have used are sobering and underline the
importance of the subject that is before us now.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council formally
committed for the first time to protect civilians in
armed conflict when it adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
In the wake of mass atrocities in Rwanda and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, it was increasingly clear that the
international community could no longer stand by and
witness the massacre of innocent people. Yet, as we
move towards the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, we continue to bear witness to the most brutal
violations of human rights in conflictt, from Syria and
South Sudan to the Central African Republic. It is vital
that we step up our efforts to prevent and respond to
such atrocities.
Before I move on to the topic of today’s debate,
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/689) and to reiterate our full endorsement
of United Nations efforts to enhance its role in
safeguarding human rights around the world through
the action plan entitled “Rights up front”. Our objective
today is to establish and underline broad support for the
United Nations key role of protecting civilians. I think
that is why so many are here today to listen to and to
participate in the debate.
Politics and protecting civilians should not be
mixed: protecting civilians transcends politics.
Sovereignty matters, but so too do the global norms that
underpin the protection that we are seeking to uphold.
Yves Daccord reminded us just now of how essential
that is for organizations such as the ICRC, and in
particular for the individuals that they serve.
We are pleased that the presidential statement
just adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3) reiterates some
of the most basic principles and commitments that
have been made over the years by the Security
Council on the agenda item, including through the

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attached aide-mémoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex).
The aide-mémoire has been painstakingly compiled
from existing and agreed Council texts. It establishes
the clear baseline against which we operate and, as
Mr. Hervé Ladsous has reminded us, clarity is vital for
those who operate in dangerous situations in the field.
Yesterday, the Security Council heard from
Ms. Valerie Amos about the humanitarian challenges
faced in the crisis in South Sudan. Today, she has set
out clearly the huge difficulties being faced in Syria
and the Central African Republic. Tomorrow, she will
brief the Council on Syria. We believe that the Council
can and must play a key role in alleviating the impact
on civilians in such crises. That is why we strongly
support agreement on a humanitarian draft resolution
on Syria to improve the lives of the Syrian people, who
are bearing the burden of the violence in their country.
There can be no justification for any country standing
in the way of a resolution that is designed to allow
civilians access to food and medical assistance.
Early action to prevent conflict and mass human
rights abuses remains vital. That must start long before
peacekeepers may be required. Once peacekeeping
missions are deployed, their protection mandates are a
fundamental part of the ability of the United Nations
to protect civilians in conflict. Those mandates must
be fully implemented. Priority should be given to the
protection of civilians in mission planning assessments
and the allocation of resources and in activities on the
ground. We encourage all mandated missions to develop
protection strategies and to use all the assets of the
mission to achieve that task. We urge mission leadership
to establish effective coordination mechanisms so as to
include all the relevant departments that enhance data
collection and analysis and that improve early warning
and rapid response. From the police and the military
to civilian personnel, where a misison is mandated to
protect, that should be at the centre of their daily work.
We welcome the positive steps taken by missions,
as outlined in the concept paper (S/2014/74, annex), and
encourage a greater sharing of best practices among
them. Regular opportunities to analyse strengths and
weaknesses are also important and more information
should be shared with the Council in country reports
and briefings in order to highlight the challenges that
missions face every day. As Ms. Navi Pillay urged,
we welcome the effective use of the human rights due
diligence policy so as to hold perpetrators accountable,
including by the United Nations Organization

S/PV.7109

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo following the horrific Monova rapes in 2012.
We urge more consistent application of that policy
elsewhere.
The United Kingdom commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for opening its
doors to tens of thousands of South Sudanese civilians
fleeing the eruption of brutal violence in September. I
think that that is something of that the Council really
needs to take note of. The actions of UNMISS saved
people’s lives, and the Mission continues to work hard
with humanitarian actors to protect the 75,000 people
sheltering on its bases. We will continue to support the
Mission as it seeks to protect civilians more widely,
including through monitoring and reporting on human
rights violations and abuses and backing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The planning, allocation and effective use of
resources are vital. The United Kingdom provides
extrabudgetary funds to the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for the Protection of
Civilians Coordination Unit and the development of
predeployment training modules on conflict-related
sexual violence for the military, the police and civilians.
We encourage all Member States to consider providing
similar support.
The protection of civilians is among the Council’s
foremost responsibilities. Just as peacekeepers must
consider the protection of civilians in every aspect of
their work, so must we. Mr. Ladsous rightly reminded
us of the limits of peacekeeping, as well as its great
strengths. It is therefore essential that we assume our
responsibilities and use the Council’s authority to
ensure that States shoulder their primary responsibility
to prevent conflict, minimize suffering and ensure that
the cycles of conflict and pain are not repeated.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this debate. I also thank
High Commissioner Pillay, Under-Secretary-General
Amos, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and DirectorGeneral Daccord for their exemplary leadership on
protection matters.
As the Secretary-General assessed in his most
recent report on the protection of civilians (S/2013/689),
the current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism. The messages delivered by
our briefers make such bleakness plain. We have heard,

14-2329611/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in the words of Under-Secretary-General Amos, about
reactions of outrage, despair and shame.
We know that protecting civilians is at the heart of
what the Council does and peacekeeping is one of the
primary means at the Council’s disposal to do it. The
standing and authority of the United Nations depend
decisively upon the capacity of its peacekeepers to
protect civilians effectively.
We all know that today’s peacekeeping missions
are highly diverse and complex, not least stemming
from the fact that most of those missions are mandated
explicitly to protect civilians. Resolutions 1894 (2009)
and 2086 (2013) reinforce the normative framework
on protection and peacekeeping but, as always, the
real test remains to ensure that the existing norms are
implemented on the ground. I carefully note all our
briefers’ comments in that regard this morning.
In the past year, the Council has taken serious
decisions to equip peacekeeping missions with robust
protection mandates. We are seeing the positive impact
of such mandates in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali. There will always be limits to what
peacekeepers can do, but we must continue to evaluate
the effectiveness of those mandates and compile the
lessons learned to establish best practice.
Instrumental in that effort is ensuring, as UnderSecretary-General Ladsous has reminded us, that
the peacekeeping partnership — the Council, the
Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries — share a common understanding of
protection challenges. Regular briefings by United
Nations force commanders allow the Council to hear
the perspectives of those responsible in the field for
delivering on those mandates. We strongly support
United Nations police commissioners briefing the
Council in the same way.
The Council should consider upgrading the status of
its informal expert group on the protection of civilians.
That would help to build consensus about protection
challenges, allowing the Council to take appropriate
actions to enhance protection in a timely way.
We must be prepared to react nimbly, as necessary
and without hesitation, to protect civilians when
situations change quickly, as is the case in South Sudan.
Nine hundred thousand civilians have fled their homes,
75,000 of whom are sheltering in United Nations
camps. Resolution 2132 (2013) authorized an increase
in the military and police capacities, effectively using
12/87

12/02/2014

inter-mission cooperation. However, we will have to
consider carefully the future mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, with the protection
of civilians our paramount consideration. Resourcing
should not be allowed to stand in the way.
If peacekeepers are to effectively protect civilians,
they must have appropriate training, equipment and
critical enablers. The proliferation of weapons also
affects the ability of peacekeepers to provide security
for themselves and for civilians. We encourage further
support so as to assist peacekeepers in tracking and
managing illicit weapons flows and in implementing
arms embargoes, as resolution 2117 (2013), adopted last
September, requires.
We should be prepared to encourage greater use of
technologies that enhance the capability of peacekeeping
missions to perform increasingly complex tasks.
Unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles will enhance early
warning on threats to civilians, deter armed groups and
bolster the safety of personnel. The sooner they are
rolled out right across missions the better.
Ultimately, the best way in which the Council can
protect civilians is to prevent armed conflict itself in
the first instance. As the Council, we must sharpen our
ability to anticipate and to respond to emerging crises
affecting civilians. Regular horizon-scanning briefings
are one means to that end.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s “Rights up
front” initiative, which identifies concrete action to
improve the United Nations response to future crises.
Protection is at the core of that initiative, and we need
to ensure that all parts of the United Nations system
implement it both systematically and organically.
The primary responsibility to protect civilians
rests with all the parties to a conflict. That requires
full adherence to international humanitarian and
human rights law. Those responsible for committing
serious violations must be held to account, preferably
at the national level but, if not, the International
Criminal Court may have a role to play. Our design
of peacekeeping missions should reflect that need for
accountability.
The daily horror of Syria reminds us that the
international community and the Council must condemn
the denial of humanitarian access, in all its forms, as
a weapon of war, and must do all we can to ensure
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to meet the
needs of civilians. The Council needs to act through
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a resolution on this now. That is why Luxembourg,
Jordan and Australia have prepared one.
Ultimately, the international community has a
responsibility to protect populations if States will
not, or cannot, fulfil their obligations to prevent mass
atrocity crimes. That is a responsibility that the Council
needs to uphold.
To conclude, the presidential statement we have
adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3) necessarily reaffirms
the need for the Council and Member States to
strengthen further protection for the many millions of
civilians who desperately need help. The update of the
aide-mémoire pertaining to the protection of civilians,
which is annexed to the presidential statement and
was initially adopted by the Council in 2002, remains
essential guidance for the Council’s future work.
As we have agreed today, we must use it on a more
systematic and consistent basis as we further develop
and, crucially, implement our decisive and permanent
task of protecting civilians.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Thank you, Madam President, for proposing the
present debate on the protection of civilians during
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I also wish to
thank High Commissioner Pillay, Under-SecretariesGeneral Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General Amos, and
Director-General Daccord for their briefings and, in
particular, for singling out the impact of the horrific
conflicts that confront us and the challenge we face
to protect civilians. I also thank them for their tireless
efforts for international peace, security and human
rights.
We are all aware that armed conflicts today
are rarely fought between opposing military forces
lined up against each other on an isolated battlefield.
Instead, they tend to involve on one side, or perhaps
both, irregular forces that live in close proximity to
civilian populations. The result is that, when fighting
takes place, civilians are often at grave risk, either
because they are intentionally targeted or because they
otherwise find themselves in the line of fire. Even when
civilians do survive, the conflict may quickly drive
them from their homes, exposing them to a new set of
risks.
The responsibility for protecting civilians in conflict
therefore is both an important and highly complicated
one — a job we are still learning how to do effectively.
In recent years, the Council has regularly directed

S/PV.7109

United Nations peace missions to protect civilians under
imminent threat. Establishing a mandate, however, is a
profoundly simple task as compared to fulfilling one.
The challenge we face goes beyond establishing goals
to actually saving the securing the lives of civilians in
conflict. That challenge can be broken down into three
core elements, namely, prioritization, planning and
prevention.
The first of those elements is straightforward.
The protection of civilians must be identified as a key
priority in any peacekeeping mission from the very
earliest stages. No one is helped, and the credibility of
the United Nations is seriously damaged, when United
Nations troops stand by while civilians are wounded or
killed.
The second imperative is planning — a process
that should begin as soon as the evidence of a potential
crisis comes to the Council’s attention. The best way
to protect civilians is to act in time to keep conflicts
from breaking out. With effective and early planning,
peacekeeping missions can be designed with civilian
protection uppermost in mind — with the right
equipment and the best mix of military, police and
civilian personnel prepositioned to respond to potential
crises.
Part of planning is to learn from the past, while
acknowledging that no two situations are exactly alike.
In Haiti, civilian protection has centred on efforts to
return displaced families to their homes and train an
effective national police. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we are finally seeing the benefits of a
Mission that has emphasized civilian protection and that
is backed by a strong political and diplomatic strategy.
It is worth noting in this context that the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has developed a comprehensive plan for protecting
civilians, which includes mapping specific threats
and integrating that information into overall planning.
Making such data available to mission commanders can
spell the difference between success and failure.
All elements of the United Nations hierarchy have
a role to play in planning for civilian protection. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) can
facilitate the sharing of knowledge and best practices
across missions, thereby helping to disseminate
lessons learned. But mission-specific planning remains
critical, and DPKO has a duty to assist each mission in
developing a plan that fits the unique circumstances it
will face. Meanwhile, the members of the Council have

14-2329613/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a responsibility, through the questions we ask and the
wording of the resolutions we adopt, to make clear the
importance we attach to this issue.
That brings me to the third element in our discussion
today: prevention. While we can make civilian
protection a priority and devote ample resources to
planning, we can still find ourselves trying to save lives
in ways that were not foreseen. In Côte d’Ivoire in 2010,
the political crisis required rapid adjustments to enable
a democratic transition and contain civilian violence.
Just recently in South Sudan, United Nations Mission
outposts served as emergency gathering points for
more than 80,000 internally displaced persons. Inside
those overcrowded compounds, desperate families
received security, food, water and health care. Babies
were born, children studied and the sick and wounded
were treated.
Nothing is more predictable in international
peacekeeping that the likelihood that unpredictable
events will occur. The greater the flexibility we build
into our preparations and deployments, the better off we
will be. We have made progress but we can do more — to
preposition equipment and to consider in advance how
we might transport peacekeepers to remote locations
with relatively little notice and shift resources from
one area to another. And we must do the best job we
can in integrating information about changing political
dynamics into our peacekeeping strategies. We cannot
do everything, but we can at least act with wisdom and
determination in response to what we have learned.
We should also continue to explore the promise
of new technology. The deployment of unmanned
aerial vehicles in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been useful in identifying hostile troop
movements and locating civilian populations in need,
helping better protect civilians and peacekeepers.
Early-warning networks should be part of any plan for
protecting civilians, and the United Nations should
strive to be connected where appropriate to all such
networks.
The protection of civilians is an integral part of
the United Nations peacekeeping mission and must
therefore be made a top priority in the planning we
do, the preparations we make and the operations we
implement on the ground. We must keep learning and
continually review our efforts to identify what we should
be doing better. Within the United Nations, the DPKO
Best Practices Unit is driving that effort. We all have a
14/87

12/02/2014

responsibility to do our part, as United Nations officials,
Security Council members, troop-contributing nations
and members of the world community. Our credibility
is at stake, but, far more important, so are the lives of
our neighbours.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for the initiative to return to the question of
the protection of civilians during armed conflict. We
are grateful to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretaries-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their comprehensive briefings.
Despite steps taken by the international community,
the situation with regard to the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict leaves much to be desired.
From Afghanistan, Syria and other theatres of armed
conflict throughout the world, reports continue to
arrive of civilian casualties. Naturally, we condemn
deliberate attacks on civilians as well as civilian deaths
as a result of indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. We would highlight in particular the very topical
problem of civilian casualties resulting from the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones.
There is no doubt that the protection of civilians
is a priority for all parties to a conflict. An important
role here is played by peacekeepers, whose mandates
increasingly include such functions. However, we
do not agree that peacekeeping should be viewed
exclusively in terms of the protection of civilians and
facilitating the provision of humanitarian assistance,
notwithstanding the importance of those tasks. The
priorities of peacekeepers are the establishment and
the maintenance of peace, the facilitation of political
processes and ensuring security in countries of
deployment.
We view the protection of civilians as an important,
but not the only task often assigned to peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the modalities for the
practical implementation thereof should be tied to
specific mandates defined by the Security Council for
each country situation.
The modalities assigned to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) might not work
in a different situation; they might even do harm. In
United Nations practice, there have been cases, for

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7109

instance in Côte d’Ivoire in 2010, where peacekeepers,
in breach of their mandate and the main principles of
peacekeeping, rendered support to one of the parties to
a conflict and were therefore dragged into that conflict.
That led to an intense armed-conflict phase with wellknown serious repercussions.

Actions to protect civilians must be based on a
clear Security Council mandate which, in turn, should
unswervingly be complied with by those who assume
responsibility for such tasks. We condemn any action
taken under the guise of the protection of civilians that
in practice pursues far-reaching geopolitical goals.

On the other hand, there are other examples.
Although the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has a very robust mandate on the protection
of civilians, it fell well short of accomplishing the
tasks assigned to it. In that regard, we believe that we
should be very cautious when adopting a one-size-fitsall approach to the protection of civilians. We believe
that the critically important benchmarks in this sphere
should be the Charter of the United Nations and the core
principles of United Nations peacekeeping: consent by
the host country, neutrality and the use of force strictly
in line with the mandate.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Lithuania for having convened this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
at the beginning of 2014, which will mark the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council’s commitment in
the area of the protection of civilians since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999). I should like also to thank the
four briefers for their statements, which highlighted the
challenges that remain despite the progress that we have
made since 1999. Those challenges are clearly summed
up in the presidential statement we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2014/3), whose annex contains the updated
aide-mémoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, to which I wish to draw everyone’s attention.

Of course, operational mandates must be
clear, realistic and situation-appropriate, and each
peacekeeping operation should have a clear political
goal, stabilization strategy and command and
should be endowed with the requisite strength and
wherewithal, including police and civilian components.
Protection-of-civilians tasks should be carried out in a
rational manner.
It is not enough today to just put on paper powers
for the protection of civilians. It is high time to instil
among personnel an understanding of the standards
of international humanitarian law. To improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of the work of peacekeeping
operations, what is necessary is a clear division of roles
among their components so as to prevent any duplication
in their activities. A priority is also forging constructive
daily contact between peacekeepers and the relevant
local authorities, who bear direct responsibility for the
protection of their own populations.
We believe that we should focus primarily on
assisting national Governments in this area. What is
important in this regard is to work to prevent and avert
conflicts as well as the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants. It is important
that efforts in this area be duly coordinated. Nor should
we forget that the protection-of-civilians component in
peacekeeping operations should not supplant functions
for the maintenance of public order and ensuring the
security of the population, which is the responsibility
of States.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Madam President, your concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) invites us to focus on the protection of civilians in
the framework of United Nations missions, particularly
peacekeeping missions. I would like in so doing to
highlight certain operations that we deem particularly
relevant in that regard.
I would like to welcome the decisive action taken
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the help of the Intervention Brigade established
within that Mission, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since the adoption of resolution 2098 (2013),
thanks to the Blue Helmets, the protection of civilians
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo against armed groups, primarily the Mouvement
du 23 mars, has been significantly strengthened. I
should like also to pay tribute to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which is currently
protecting tens of thousands of civilians who have fled
the violence and who are being sheltered in protection
areas for civilians set up within various UNMISS bases
throughout the country.
The example of UNMISS also shows just how
difficult it is for a peacekeeping mission to fully
exercise its mandate to protect civilians when it does
not have the required capacity, be it in terms of aerial

14-2329615/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

capacity or in terms of intelligence and surveillance,
which would enable it to strengthen early-warning
systems. In general, we believe that means such as
surveillance drones, which have been used for the first
time in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, could
have a positive impact in terms of preventing conflict
and protecting civilians in other areas of operation.
In Mali, during our recent visit as members of
the Security Council, we rightly encouraged the
full deployment, as soon as possible, of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). MINUSMA has a clear
mandate for the protection of civilians pursuant to
resolution 2100 (2013). The kidnapping on 8 February
of an International Committee of the Red Cross team
between Kidal and Gao shows just how precarious the
situation remains in the north of Mali. That act, which
we condemn in the most robust terms, also makes clear
the need to address the five core challenges addressed
in the report of the Secretary-General to improve the
protection of civilians. What is at stake here is ensuring
that the rules of international humanitarian law are
respected by non-State armed groups.
Peacekeeping operations are without a doubt the
best tool that the Security Council has available to it
to protect civilians in time of armed conflict. But what
happens when the United Nations has not yet deployed
such a mission?
I shall refer now to the cases of the Central
African Republic and Syria. Civilians are the main
victims of the massacres and violence that continue
to be committed in the Central African Republic. In
the light of that situation, the Security Council has
identified the fight against impunity as a way to ensure
the protection of civilians and to deter those involved
from carrying out such atrocities. In this context, we
welcome the establishment by the Secretary-General
of an international commission of inquiry that should
soon begin its work, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2127 (2013).
In that same resolution, the Security Council gave
a mandate to the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA)
to protect civilians, and it authorized French forces
from Operation Sangaris to support MISCA in the
implementation of that mandate. To strengthen
international support for MISCA, the European Union
has just decided to establish a time-bound military

16/87

12/02/2014

operation, the heart of whose mandate will be the
protection of civilians in the area around Bangui.
The situation in the Central African Republic
challenges us all; we must come together in support of
that ravaged country and its people — all of its people. It
is there that the “Rights up front” action plan, launched
by the Secretary-General at the end of 2013, takes on its
full significance.
The Syrian conflict illustrates in probably the most
cruel way the impact of armed conflict on the civilian
population. While the talks in Geneva are making no
headway, it is difficult to envision the day when the
fighting will cease and where the conditions are met
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Syria. To protect civilians trapped in the
war, the Council has sought to appeal to the parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law.
That was the whole point of the presidential statement
adopted on 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), which
aimed in particular at improving humanitarian access
to populations affected by the Syrian crisis.
More than four months later, it is clear that that
statement has not been respected by the parties to the
conflict, primarily the Syrian authorities. For that
reason, Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg took the
initiative yesterday to present a draft resolution calling
on the parties to the Syrian conflict to fully implement
the provisions of the 2 October 2013 presidential
statement and stop their violations of international
humanitarian law, such as the use of siege and
starvation as weapons of war against civilians. While
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate,
while violations and abuses against civilians continue,
it is important that the Council take action.
As we mark the International Day against the Use of
Child Soldiers, I cannot conclude without emphasizing
once again the importance of the protection of children
in armed conflict. Children continue to be enlisted
for war and are the first victims in Syria, but also in
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and other crisis situations. We must do make
every effort to combat this scourge and to put an end to
it once and for all.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the Lithuanian initiative to hold an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I wish to thank the High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Under-Secretary-General Amos for their briefings.
China also listened carefully to the statement made by
the representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
the past 15 years, the Security Council has adopted
multiple resolutions and presidential statements and
laid down the legal framework for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Protecting
civilians has become one of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
As the nature and characteristics of conflicts evolve
over time, civilians of some countries and regions
continue to suffer from the impact of armed conflict.
The protection of civilians remains an arduous task for
the international community. China supports holding
in-depth discussions in the Security Council on the
challenges faced in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and making pragmatic and effective efforts to
achieve constructive results to that end. I should like to
focus on the following four points.
First, all parties in an armed conflict must comply
with their obligation to protect civilians. The primary
responsibility in protecting innocent civilians from
the harm of conflict and wars lies with national
Governments. At the same time, other parties involved
in a conflict must also fully comply with international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and spare no efforts in protecting
civilians. The assistance provided by the international
community and external organizations must be in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned. In
addressing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the first priority should be given to
the role of national judicial institutions, which are the
main channels in that field.
Secondly, in strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to start from
preventing and resolving conflicts and address the root
causes so as to ease the suffering that armed conflicts
inflict on civilians. The protection of civilians must
be a part of the political process in the resolution of
conflicts. Advancing political dialogue, reconciliation
processes, strengthening security sectors, economic
recovery and social development are comprehensive

S/PV.7109

means for creating an environment of durable peace.
The Security Council must make vigorous efforts
in preventive diplomacy to prevent and contain the
escalation of conflict and promote political solutions
so as to achieve lasting peace as soon as possible and
reduce the impact of conflicts on civilians.
Thirdly, in the protection of civilians, peacekeeping
operations must strictly comply with Security Council
mandates, respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, maintain objectivity and impartiality and
avoid becoming a party to the conflict. A peacekeeping
operation’s mandate to protect civilians is one of the
important measures to help the countries concerned
better protect civilians. As such, it cannot be a substitute
for the responsibility and obligations to protect
civilians incumbent upon States’ Governments and
parties to the conflicts. In developing the mandate to
protect civilians, it is necessary to give comprehensive
consideration to the situation on the ground and the
peacekeeping operation’s ability and conditions and
ensure that the mandates are clear, realistic and feasible
and that the resources and equipment are adequate
and fully guaranteed. Missions should also draw
up their strategies and operational plans in the light
of the situation on the ground and enhance internal
coordination to ensure effective implementation of
their mandates.
Fourthly, humanitarian aid operations in conflict
situations must comply with United Nations guiding
principles on humanitarian aid, maintain their
humanitarian nature, neutrality, objectivity and
impartiality, and fully respect the sovereignty of the
countries concerned. All parties to a conflict must
ensure timely access to affected civilians in order to
provide humanitarian relief. That is a major premise
for the improvement of the humanitarian situation in
conflict areas and the protection of civilians.
Humanitarian aid agencies must enhance
communication with the countries concerned and,
on the basis of winning confidence and support from
all parties to ensure the effective implementation of
humanitarian aid operations.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today’s open debate on a subject of the
greatest importance and priority for my country.
Similarly, we are grateful for the briefings we have
heard from the High Commissioner for Human Rights
Pillay, Under-Secretaries-General Amos and Ladsous

14-2329617/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross Daccord.
My delegation endorses the statement that will be
made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, of which my country is a
part.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2014/74, annex)
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689)
before us — the Secretary-General’s tenth report on
the matter — despite the fact that we are celebrating
15 years since the Security Council adopted resolution
1265 (1999), there is little room for optimism. The
briefing of Under-Secretary-General Amos speaks
volumes in that regard. Civilian populations continue
to be the most affected by armed conflicts, which today
are, in the majority, intra-State conflicts.
The primary responsibility to protect civilian
populations falls to each State. However, when that
does not occur, whether deliberately or because of the
incapacity of the State itself to act, the international
community must seek to do so in accordance with the
principles agreed upon in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document (General
Assembly resolution 60/1).
The negative situations we face today in the area of
the protection of civilians are the result, fundamentally,
of the lack of political will to confront the situation, and
not the lack of instruments or mechanisms established
for the purpose. Indeed, we have a comprehensive
legal framework, which is known and shared by the
majority of States, and which includes all the necessary
elements to respond to the protection of civilians and
other vulnerable groups. In many cases, there is no will
to act and to allow access to humanitarian aid where it
is needed, and there is a lack of willingness on the part
of some Governments affected by conflict situations to
understand that the humanitarian organizations, by dint
of their very nature, ought to be able establish contact
with non-State actors within those same States.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative
and the “Rights up front” action plan, which reaffirms
the central role that human rights play in the work
of the United Nations and provides fundamental
recommendations for the whole system, aimed at
reacting better to and dealing swiftly with problems
of human rights. Respect for human rights and for
international humanitarian law is, ultimately, the central
concept that underpins the protection of civilians.

18/87

12/02/2014

In attempting to respond to some of the concerns
raised by the Lithuanian presidency’s concept note
(S/2014/74, annex), we feel that the following elements
could contribute to the better protection of civilian
populations in armed conflicts.
First, there needs to be greater cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in order to establish clear,
realistic and achievable mandates along these lines.
Missions must be able to count on the availability, in a
timely and effective manner, of the necessary resources
and capacities needed to achieve their mandates. In
the same way, troops must be given training in the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, the improvement and strengthening of
early-warning systems will help us get ahead in crisis
situations. In that respect, we would urge improved
coordination among the various actors on the ground
so that the flow of information is adequate and timely.
With the same goal in mind, my delegation supports the
use of new, non-weaponized technologies as tools for
preventing crises. We also recognize the contribution of
mechanisms, such as horizon scanning, among others,
that can play a role in achieving that objective.
Thirdly, the establishment of a registry system
for civilian casualties could serve as a mechanism for
monitoing violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
Fourthly, accountability for war crimes and serious
human rights violations can serve as an element of
justice and redress and as a tool for deterrence and
prevention. There must be absolute certainty that
abuses and crimes committed will not go unpunished.
In conclusion, we welcome the current aide-mémoire
prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and the presidential concept
note. We recognize the aide-mémoire’s value as a tool
for query, analysis and diagnosis in matters pertaining
to the protection of civilians by the Council, Member
States and other actors of the United Nations system.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and for
producing the concept note (S/2014/74, annex). We also
thank Ms. Navi Pillay, Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous and Mr. Yves Daccord for their participation
in the meeting.
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Unfortunately, the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on today’s subject (S/2013/689) reaffirms that
civilians continue to constitute the majority of victims
in conflict. However, it is important that the Security
Council continue to be committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by promoting full respect for
international law, in particular respect for humanitarian
law, human rights law and the rights of refugees, as
well as the fight against impunity.
Likewise, as referred to in the President’s concept
note, it is imperative that we continue to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions on the ground. The Secretary-General’s report
includes a description of the activities undertaken by
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians.
In all cases, peacekeeping forces have sought to create
protected areas. The challenges they face on the ground
include avoiding an escalation of violence between
groups, supporting political dialogue to facilitate the
protection of civilians and encouraging reconciliation
between ethnic groups.
In addition, peacekeeping forces have implemented
training programmes for police to investigate crimes of
sexual violence and other crimes and have contributed
to building domestic institutional capacity. The United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a special paradigm
in that regard, where the Security Council decided to
reconfigure the mandate to authorize a peacekeeping
mission to carry out offensive operations against armed
groups via an intervention brigade.
The clear position of Argentina is that the
imposition of robust mandates by the Council and the
implementation of those mandates by peacekeeping
operations must not divert us from our fundamental
mandate to protect civilians, in line with the
fundamental principles that govern, and must continue
to govern, peacekeeping operations. We believe that,
in order for peacekeeping forces to be able to fulfil
their missions effectively, where priority is given to the
protection of civilians the mandates must be designed
carefully. Operations must also have the necessary
resources available to act effectively and in a timely
manner.
With regard to the composition of missions, there
needs to be an appropriate structure and the staffing
that is required to protect women and children from
violence, in particular sexual and gender-based
violence. We recognize the United Nations policy of

S/PV.7109

due diligence in the area of human rights, which should
continue to be part of mandates for peacekeeping
operations.
One aspect that we want to highlight with regard
to peacekeeping operations relates to international
humanitarian law. On the one hand, the training of
troops is necessary. As for Argentina, with the help
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
we carry out human rights courses for armed forces,
with a particular focus on those troops that will
be participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Our commission on the implementation of
international humanitarian law has produced a manual
on international law in armed conflict that sets out the
norms of international humanitarian law to be used by
armed forces in peacekeeping operations.
In addition, I would emphasize that peacekeeping
operations must respect international humanitarian law.
In that respect, I highlight the bulletin of the SecretaryGeneral on “Observance by United Nations forces of
international humanitarian law” (ST/SGB/1999/13).
Peacekeeping operations play an essential role in
the protection of civilians in many situations. However,
ensuring a secure environment for civilians goes
beyond the role of peacekeeping forces; it involves the
entire Organization and its States Members.
To achieve strengthened and sustainable security,
national peacekeeping and institution-building efforts
must be supported, including rebuilding national
institutions. Coordination in the area of support for
the rule of law as part of the Organization’s efforts is
crucial. But it is also important that the United Nations
and Member States make progress on the challenges
identified by the Secretary-General, with which my
delegation agrees. Those include the following.
First, we must promote respect for international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law by State
and other parties to conflict.
Secondly, parties to a conflict must make every
effort to ensure effective and timely access to
humanitarian aid, including cargo and materials. Such
assistance — including access to medical personnel,
transport and hospital facilities — enjoys special
protection under humanitarian law in all its aspects.
Thirdly, impartial mechanisms are essential in
terms of investigating violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In addition to ad

14-2329619/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

hoc commissions of inquiry, including those set up by
the Human Rights Council, I should like to highlight the
international commission of inquiry provided for under
Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949.
Fourthly, I should like to underscore accountability.
In that context, I commend the contributions of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as
well as to acknowledge the role of the International
Criminal Court.
Argentina
supports
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2014/3 and stresses the useful aide-mémoire on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict published
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
I should like to conclude by reiterating that, in line
with international humanitarian law and the Council’s
resolutions, any attacks against civilians or other
protected groups, as well as the recruitment of child
soldiers and preventing humanitarian access, constitute
violations of international humanitarian law. In that
context, I again urge strict respect for the obligations
under The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the
four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols,
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law and Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important debate. I also express our sincere
appreciation to High Commissioner Pillay, UnderSecretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
excellent briefings.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental
responsibility of the international community and a
core function of the Security Council in safeguarding
international peace and security. Over the years, the
Council has taken significant steps to implement its
commitment. Peacekeeping operations with a mandate
to protect have been one of its most effective tools.
Resolution 1894 (2009) ensures that United Nations
peacekeeping missions have protection mandates, where
appropriate, and that such protection activities should
be given priority. In 2013, a new mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the strengthened mandate of the
20/87

12/02/2014

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo represented
noteworthy achievements in that regard.
The protection of civilians lies at the core of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan’s peacekeeping
mandate, where armed clashes have taken a heavy toll
on civilians.
Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. In the case of Syria,
murder, torture, rape, arbitrary detention and other
inhumane acts are widespread. More than 130,000
people have been killed, a great number of which are
civilians. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with almost half of the population in need
of humanitarian assistance.
Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to
highlight the following points.
First, it is essential that the Council enhance efforts
to provide clear, achievable protection mandates based
on a realistic assessment and adequate resources. We
should also bear in mind that success or failure in the
protection of civilians is the most tangible barometer of
a successful mission.
Secondly, we must ensure that protection mandates
are effectively implemented. In developing mission
strategies, a coordinated response from the mission and
all of the relevant stakeholders is essential. Protection
activities must be given priority in decisions on the use
of available capacities and resources. I welcome that
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689)
includes an assessment of concrete measures taken
by peacekeeping missions. We commend the role of
the missions in supporting political dialogue in Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia, providing physical protection in
South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and building a protective environment in Mali and in
Haiti.
Thirdly, the rising challenges of unregulated small
arms and the indiscriminate use of weapons in populated
areas have also been noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. My delegation is deeply concerned about the
devastating impact on civilians. Resolution 2117 (2013),
on small arms and light weapons, adopted last year, also
recognizes that the illicit transfer and misuse of small
arms and light weapons fuel conflict and the impact on
civilians. We must intensify consideration of that issue
through discussions with greater focus.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Fourthly, I would like to reaffirm that accountability
is key to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Those who commit war crimes, crimes against humanity
and other violations of international law must be held
accountable. Accountability requires verification.
There should be investigation and documentation of
allegations of all violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law.
We recognize the significant contribution of
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions, and we reiterate our full support to them.
While the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
other international tribunals play a crucial role, the
Council must do its part, including by referring relevant
situations to the ICC.
Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
the United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers who are working hard to protect civilians
around the world.
My delegation also strongly supports presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/3, which was adopted earlier.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
your delegation, Madam President, for organizing
this important debate. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous, High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay and Director-General Yves Daccord
for their respective briefings.
As the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) for this
debate highlights, this year marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council’s engagement on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, following
the landmark adoption of resolution 1265 (1999). Since
then, the international community, in particular the
United Nations, has adopted an array of strategies to
improve and implement the protection mandates. Also
over the past 15 years, the Secretary-General has put
forward more than 100 recommendations to the Security
Council in his successive reports on the protection of
civilians. The Council has taken many steps, both in
country-specific decisions and thematic resolutions, to
improve the protection of civilians on the ground.
The combination of that normative framework and
the continuing development of mission-wide protection
of civilian strategies has led to significant improvement
in the United Nations ability to conceptualize and
implement effective protection mandates. However,

significant work remains to
implementation on the ground.

S/PV.7109

ensure

effective

Challenges faced in the implementation of the
United Nations protection mandates can easily be
identified in cases such as those of South Sudan, where
the recent lapse into conflict cost thousands of innocent
lives.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations has been conducting peace operations
since 1999 through the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but violence
against civilians by the national army and by dozens
of armed groups, including the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda — a movement that includes
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi and
Rwanda — have continued unabated.
In the case of Syria, more than 130,000 people have
been killed, while the Security Council has failed to
act to protect innocent people — even failing to speak
with one voice with regard to access to humanitarian
assistance.
In the Central African Republic, where even with
clear warnings of imminent danger people were lynched
and killed before our eyes, we hope that the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, supported by French and, soon, by European
forces, will succeed in protecting civilians.
In any case, all those situations prove that there are
still gaps in the United Nations protection mandates
since the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, 20
years ago.
As the concept note puts it, the experience of the
past 15 years offers many challenges and opportunities
for modern peacekeeping operations with protection-ofcivilians mandates. We believe that such protection
can be achieved only through the concerted efforts
of integrated civil, military and police components
with peacekeeping operations. Those efforts take into
account the special protection needs of women and
children through the deployment of senior women and
children protection advisers.
We believe that the failure to protect civilians on
the ground begins at the earliest stages of planning. A
failure to match a peacekeeping mission’s mandates,
strategies, structures and resources with the situation

14-2329621/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

facing civilians on the ground may not lead to desired
results. That is why we think that the success of any
peacekeeping operation requires enhanced cooperation
and better coordination between the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies and agencies, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. Such collaboration
is even more critical when it comes to the host State,
which retains the primary responsibility for the
protection of its citizens, as well as with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations on the basis of
their respective comparative advantage.
As one of the major troop- and police-contributing
countries to peacekeeping missions, Rwanda believes
that the Security Council and the Secretariat should build
upon the recent positive trend of holding consultations
with troop-contributing countries to seek their advice
and participation at the beginning of mission planning.
I should like to take this opportunity to again
commend troop-contributing countries that have
provided personnel in difficult and dangerous
environments to fulfil the protection-of-civilians
requirements in various peacekeeping missions around
the world.
The best way to protect civilians is to prevent
imminent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
The prevention of conflicts requires political will by
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, which should renew its commitment to the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
as recalled by resolution 1894 (2009).
In the same vein, as Rwanda commemorates this
year the twentieth anniversary of the genocide against
the Tutsi, we urge the five permanent members of the
Council to agree on a moral pact of conduct aimed at
refraining from using the veto in situations of genocide
and other mass atrocities. We thank France for its
important initiative in that respect.
In conclusion, Rwanda is grateful for the efforts
deployed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in close consultation with the
Security Council and other relevant United Nations
entities to develop and update the aide-mémoire on the
protection of civilians. We believe that this document,
as recognized by presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3,
which was just adopted, is an important tool at the
disposal of the Security Council for identifying the key

22/87

12/02/2014

protection of civilians concerned in armed conflict,
based on the Council’s own experience.
Mr. Adoum (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to join previous speakers in thanking you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate on what is not
just a relevant theme, but one that has many legal
and especially ethical implications, and is therefore
of interest to us all, so that we may find urgent and
appropriate solutions to the problems facing the civilian
victims of the various armed conflicts in the world
today.
Allow me also to commend the statements made by
Ms. Pillay, Mr. Ladsous, Ms. Amos and Mr. Daccord
on this issue.
As has just been pointed out by other speakers, civilian
populations are the main victims in armed conflict
today, despite the tireless efforts of the international
community to protect them by strengthening and
promoting international humanitarian law, human
rights and the rules, procedures and mechanisms
defined at the United Nations.
International humanitarian law stipulates a whole
array of rules regarding the protection of civilians,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. Under
those rules, the parties to a conflict are prohibited from
withholding water and food supplies from civilians,
from attacking facilities liable to release hazardous
substances, and from massive and indiscriminate
bombing of cities or any urban centres. Besides those
general provisions, women are entitled to special
treatment to protect their specific vulnerability. They
are therefore protected from rape, sexual slavery and all
discriminatory or degrading practices linked to their
gender, such as forced prostitution, forced artificial
insimination and so forth. However, we regret to
note that in conflicts under way throughout the world
those obligations are rarely observed. In fact, they are
routinely violated.
Given the challenges related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, we should recall and
welcome the fact that the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular have made
tireless efforts to put an end to humanitarian tragedy.
Thus, in its resolution 1265 (1999), the Security
Council deems that certain situations characterized
by grave violations of humanitarian law and human
rights, particularly attacks targeting civilians, could
constitute a threat to international peace and security.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of civilians,
the Council also reiterated its determination, obligation
and responsibility to protect civilians, as well as the
need to bring those responsible for the most serious
crimes to justice, including by referring such cases to
international justice mechanisms.
Many other relevant resolutions were also
adopted on the protection of civilian populations,
including resolution 1612 (2005), on children and
armed conflict, which established a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for parties to conflict; as well
as resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in armed
conflict, adopted 19 June 2008, which provides for the
possibility of targeted sanctions being imposed on those
responsible for such crimes and gives the SecretaryGeneral and peacekeeping operations a mandate to
address the various aspects of these questions.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689),
of 22 November 2013, on the protection of civilians,
and the recommendations it contains are invaluable
contributions to efforts to strengthen the tools and
mechanisms for the protection of civilian populations
in armed conflict.
The task of protecting civilians in armed conflict is
not an easy one, and difficulties on several levels make
it a difficult mission to carry out. However, whatever
the obstacles, the primary responsibility of ensuring the
protection of civilians in an armed conflict lies with the
warring parties, in particular the State, which should
under no circumstances shirk its duty to protect the
population from heinous crimes such as genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Those duties require that the domestic legal
framework be brought in line with the country’s
international commitments. The State must crack down
on violations of the instruments and conventions that it
has ratified. Such a crackdown could be carried out by
specialized military or regular tribunals. Domestic or
international tribunals’ efforts in that regard could very
well dissuade those who, absent such consequences,
would commit the most serious crimes against civilians.
In that respect, the role of the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity is a vital instrument,
and one that must be strengthened and promoted.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should reinforce their cooperation on
questions having to do with the protection of civilians
and establish a mechanism to evaluate the effectiveness

S/PV.7109

of their joint efforts on the ground to shield civilians
from the atrocities to which, unfortunately, they
continue to be subjected.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
briefers for their statements today.
France aligns itself with the statement to be made​​
by the observer of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.
The protection of civilians is an issue that requires
constant attention by the Security Council. It must be
at the heart of its work. Peacekeeping operations are the
primary instrument in that regard.
Since the adoption, five years ago, of resolution
1894 (2009), the Security Council, the Secretariat and
all the relevant stakeholders have mobilized to improve
the process of defining, monitoring and controlling
the implementation of peacekeeping operations’
mandates on the protection of civilians. All recent
Council mandates now include a protection-of-civilians
component. Such protection is therefore a priority
under any circumstance. We must continue to develop
that approach.
That is what we did in Mali. After the emergency
intervention of French forces, the deployment of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali — with a robust mandate
to protect civilians — helped to stabilize the country
and allowed for presidential and legislative elections to
be held successfully. During our visit to the country,
the Council was able to see the scope of what had
been accomplished through the determined work of
the United Nations. The Council also reiterated to the
Malian authorities and armed groups the urgent need
to launch an inclusive dialogue for a lasting solution in
northern Mali, in order for the country to finally find
peace.
That is what we must do in the Central African
Republic. In that country, the intervention by the
African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic, supported by French forces — which
will soon be supported by European forces — helped
to prevent the atrocities beign committed against
civilians from spreading. The clashes have certainly
not stopped, but there has been a kind of pacification of
most of Bangui. Securing certain areas, especially near
the airport, allowed humanitarian aid to be organized

14-2329623/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and better deployed. The mobilization of international
assistance, in Brussels and then Addis Ababa, provides
a glimmer of hope.
However, the situation remains precarious,
especially in the provinces. Civilians continue to be
attacked. African and French forces are faced with an
unprecedented situation: the hateful willingness of two
communities to settle accounts. Soldiers cannot contain
crowds. Looting, rapes and lynchings thus continue
despite our efforts. Therefore, given the magnitude of
the challenges and the nature of the threat, the Council
must shoulder its responsibilities quickly. What is
needed is a multidimensional peacekeeping force with
a significant amount of force, including, above all,
police units that are able to restore order, since soldiers
cannot fire on a crowd. Only such a force, with a strong
civilian component and sustainable funding, will
bring lasting stability to the country, help prepare for
elections and begin a national reconciliation process.
We can no longer allow the crisis to get worse, or we
will risk the Central African Republic becoming a
source of instability in the heart of Africa and mass
atrocities being committed there.
Whatever the strength of the protection-of-civilians
mandates given to peacekeeping operations, they will
be effective only if the operations themselves are
beyond reproach. That is why we welcome the policies
implemented by the Secretary-General to ensure that
the work of the United Nations fully respects human
rights. The zero-tolerance policy for sexual violence,
the limiting of contacts with persons indicted by the
International Criminal Court to that which is essential
to the mission of the Organization, and the due
diligence and filter policies are indispensable to the
work of peacekeeping operations. They guarantee the
exemplary conduct that is required of the Organization.
Compliance with those policies guarantees the
credibility of the Organization’s work in protecting
civilians.
The effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
in the protection of civilians also requires closer
communication to be developed with local communities
in order to build capacity to prevent and react to threats.
That includes, of course, a linguistic component and
the appropriate means for logistics and communication,
such as the recruitment of community liaison assistants.
The French Mission regrets that the Secretariat does
not believe that language skills should be an essential
element considered for recruitment in the field. The
24/87

12/02/2014

French Mission recalls, as it has been doing in vain for
several years now, that speaking the language of the
populations can be useful — even if that language is
French. As in previous years, I will not be heard, and
as in previous years, the Secretariat will continue to
recruit without taking language skills into account, and
I have been the representative of France for five years
now.
I will conclude by referring the situation in Syria. As
the Geneva negotiations on the future of Syria resume,
the regime continues to intensify its crackdown against
civilians. Barrel bombings have continued in Aleppo,
again causing several hundred civilian deaths last week.
While an agreement led to the evacuation of civilians
from Homs, humanitarian aid convoys leaving the Old
City have been attacked by mortar fire. Those deliberate
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers
are unacceptable. The Council can no longer accept
such repeated and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, the primary responsibility for which
lies with the regime. It must therefore call upon all
parties to ensure immediate access for humanitarian
aid to those in need.
The text of the draft resolution submitted yesterday
by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg is moderate. We
would have preferred a stronger message, given the
gravity of the crisis. But the text is a compromise to
which all countries of good faith and goodwill should
agree.
Furthermore, given the sense of impunity
prevailing in Damascus today, the Council must send
a clear message: the perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Syria, starting with Bashar
Al-Assad, should be brought to justice. That is why we
once again reiterate our call for the Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation extends its thanks to the Republic of
Lithuania for its initiative in convening this important
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We would also like to commend the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/689), which provides a
series of important recommendations on this issue
and an analysis of effective ways to promote the
protection of civilians. We welcome the adoption of
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3), including
its significant elements that will provide guidelines
for implementing such a commitment. We would also
like to thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
important participation in this meeting.
Our debate today is particularly important. Despite
of the progress made since the adoption of resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1894 (2009) — pertaining to the
commitment to international norms and instruments
on this subject, the world is still witnessing grave
violations with regard to protection that are difficult
for the human conscience to accept. The targeting
of civilians by parties to a conflict, the perpetration
of crimes against them and the indiscriminate use of
explosive devices in populated areas are some examples
that demonstrate the failure to protect, which need to be
tackled by the international community in an effective
and resolute manner. Otherwise, the debates on this
topic will remain theoretical and will not contribute to
strengthening the concept of the protection of civilians.
The culture of respect for protection must also be
promoted. That should not only be limited to national
legislation and international conventions and resolutions,
but we must also draw up a comprehensive United
Nations strategy in that regard and develop followup mechanisms in order to assess the commitment of
States to such a strategy. The international community
must not give precedence to the pursuit of peace accords
and political considerations in conflict situations over
the principle of accountability for crimes perpetrated
by parties to a conflict. Such parties think that they
are above the law and that the international community
will grant them immunity if they give up their weapons
and put an end to the conflict. That has an even greater
impact by further aggravating aggression against
civilians and the violation of their rights. Without such
a step, civilians will remain the primary and most
vulnerable victims of armed conflicts.
My delegation would now like to focus its statement
on the practical aspect of the concept, in particular the
implementation of the protection element in United
Nations peacekeeping operations mandated by the
Council. In that regard, Jordan stresses that all the
mandated peacekeeping tasks, and most important the
protection of civilians threatened by physical violence,
must be implemented in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and

S/PV.7109

the guidelines for peacekeeping operations, without
prejudice to the primary responsibility incumbent upon
the host Government to protect civilians, as well as on
all parties to armed conflict. That does not exempt the
international community from its duty to guarantee
protection and assume such a responsibility.
We would like to underscore that all States and
the relevant parties, as necessary, should give priority
to respecting their obligations under the Charter,
international law, international humanitarian and
human rights law and international refugee law. We also
stress the need to provide the necessary resources to
missions to raise awareness and promote understanding
with regard to their protection mandate, through close
interaction with host Governments, local authorities
and population.
Jordan believes that there is a number of necessary
elements to ensure the effective and full implementation
of the mandates for the protection of civilians, in
particular close and continuous cooperation among
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, so as to ensure clearly defined
protection-of-civilians mandates for peacekeeping
operations, as well as their possible completion. We
also believe it is important to provide peacekeeping
operations with logistical support and all the necessary
resources, including training, taking into account the
specific characteristics of each mission’s mandate and
on the basis of lessons learned and best pratices from
United Nations peacekeeping operations and Member
States.
We agree with the concept note presented by
the presidency (S/2014/74, annex) with regard to the
importance of protection of civilian training at all
levels of mission staff in the field, including senior
leadership, before and during deployment, and on the
basis of lessons learned from previous and current
peacekeeping operations. Since the beginning of its
participation in peacekeeping operations, Jordan has
prioritized the concept of the protection of civilians and
continues, within the framework of training its cadres,
to focus on raising the necessary awareness on this
concept. International humanitarian law and provisions
for the protection of civilians have been incorporated
in the Jordanian armed forces training programmes,
including for peacekeeping operations.
Jordan notes the importance of conducting a
clear assessement in order to align the human and
material resources available for the missions with the

14-2329625/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

requirements for the protection of civilians and the
capacity of missions to fully implement their mandates
Moreover, further proposals are required to improve
the capacity of existing peacekeeping operations to
respond to situations that have a negative impact on
civilians.
Successfully assuming the tasts related to the
protection of civilians in the event of a Security Council
mandate requires coordinated action by all elements of
the relevant mission, within the areas of its deployment.
We believe that it is important for all peacekeeping
operations mandated to protect civilians to formulate
and carry out a comprehensive protection strategy,
which should be included in the mission’s executive and
general emergency plans and be subject to regular and
effective evaluation.
In conclusion, Jordan emphasizes the importance of
close coordination between Headquarters and the
leadership in the field when it comes to the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations, especially
with regard to emergency situations, as well as the
importance of coordination between the United Nations
and regional arrangements, including country teams
as necessary, on matters relating to the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this vital debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also wish to
thank all the briefers for their invaluable insights and
significant contributions to this conversation.
Several speakers this morning have alluded to the
fact that civilians are often deliberately targeted in
armed conflicts and frequently subject to blatant abuse
of their rights under international humanitarian law.
The Security Council itself has since 1999 responded
to such threats by giving United Nations peacekeeping
mission the mandate to protect civilians. The
presidential statement adopted by the Council today
(S/PRST/2014/3) further reinforces its unflinching
resolve to tackle this problem.
Over the years, several methods have been adopted
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians in conflict areas. Resolution 1894
(2009), for example, calls for the allocation of resources
as an indication of the priority the Council accords to
the protection of civilian activities. That underscores
the need to translate normative commitments into
concrete measures for the protection of civilians.

26/87

12/02/2014

The task of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a mandate that has posed enormous challenges to
peacekeeping operations, and one that requires more
than normative commitments or a conceptual shift in
policy. While the international community expects
peacekeeping missions to perform flawlessly when
protecting civilians in armed conflict, the challenges
they face are often overlooked or not adequately
appreciated.
The protection of civilians within the framework
of peacekeeping missions has been described by the
United Nations as extremely complex. That is attributed
to four key points. First, peacekeeping missions often
have to protect civilians in harsh conditions and
with inadequate resources. Secondly, peacekeeping
missions often have to operate with partners who may
lack the capacity or will to do their own part. Thirdly,
there is an unrealistic expectation that peacekeeping
missions will be able to protect all civilians at all times.
And, fourthly, peacekeeping missions often operate in
dynamic environments where security situations can
change very quickly. A critical examination of those
challenges would show that the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is indeed a task that cannot be seen as
the exclusive responsibility of peacekeeping missions.
Aside from those challenges, there is the issue
of the different operating methods of the mission
components — military, police and civilian — involved
in the protection of civilians. The autonomy to act and
make decisions differs greatly between components in
the light of their varying mandates, agendas, donors
and standard procedures. That has raised questions
regarding coordination for effective delivery on
the protection of civilians. A key proposal under
consideration for addressing the problem is the “One
UN” concept — the idea that all United Nations
activities in a given country should fall under a common
umbrella to provide coherence and credibility.
The development of strategic coordination among
the various mission components is crucial to success in
the protection of civilians, in particular in the light of the
number of actors charged with such mandates. That is
achievable through the development of comprehensive
training on strategic coordination of the protection of
civilians for all components. It should be understood
that a clear and common understanding of mission
mandates is fundamental to the efficacy of strategic
coordination among them.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

No less significant is an understanding of the
protective measures adopted by the local population
in conflict areas. There is a need to develop those
populations by ensuring that threats are mitigated and
material assistance provided where most needed. The
strengthening of national institutions is also important
to enable them to discharge their primary responsibility
to enhance security and the rule of law in post-conflict
areas.
Missions in situations of active conflict, or where
conflict is likely to occur, may face a higher tempo of
protection of civilians activity. The need to anticipate
and promptly respond to threats to civilians in such
situations argues in favour of the timely funding of such
missions. That would convey the message to mission
leadership of the priority that the Council attaches to the
protection of civilians. It also appropriately addresses
the disparity between the objectives of meeting the
demands of protecting civilians and of doing so within
the resources available.
In terms of capacity and training to effectively
protect civilians, the concept note (S/2014/74, annex)
aptly states the critical importance of predeployment
and in-mission training for peacekeepers and civilian
staff. The United Nations Institute for Training and
Research (UNITAR) has been instrumental in offering
training to African countries as part of its Enhancing
Capacity in Africa project. Nigeria is reinforcing that
effort through its firm commitment to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and emphasizes
programmes on the protection of civilians at all
levels of predeployment training of its peacekeeping
contingents.
In consonance with that commitment, the Nigerian
Army Peacekeeping Training Centre, in collaboration
with UNITAR, conducted a training course on the
protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in August 2013 for almost 25 Nigerian
military and police officers as well as civilians about to
be deployed to various United Nations, African Union
and Economic Community of West African States
missions. Nigeria will also host a United Nationssponsored training programme in Abuja from 3 to
7 March.
In the final analysis, we believe that the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is an arduous task that
involves multiple issues and stakeholders. While
they represent the main tool at the disposal of the

S/PV.7109

international community, it is clear that peacekeeping
missions alone cannot successfully accomplish that
task. What is required is an all-hands-on-deck approach
that recognizes the strengths and weaknesses of all the
relevant stakeholders and harnesses the strengths while
minimizing the weaknesses. Today’s debate reinforces
this valid aspiration.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I should like to start by thanking today’s four
briefers for their thought-provoking contributions.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be made
later today by the observer of the European Union.
In 1999 the Security Council took a unanimous
decision to address systematically the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Fifteen years later, the gap
between the normative framework and implementation
remains considerable, as civilians continue to suffer
from conflict-related violence, which is increasingly
intentional and brutal.
In some cases, as in the Central African Republic or
South Sudan, State institutions do not have the capacity
to carry out their responsibility to protect. In others,
such as Syria, the State itself is a perpetrator. Wherever
they operate, peacekeepers can assist the host State, but
they cannot substitute for it. The primary responsibility
to protect civilians rests with national Governments.
We welcome the approach taken by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in its operational concept
on the protection of civilians, which encompasses three
tiers of protection: support for political processes,
protecting from physical violence and establishing a
protective environment.
We believe that protection mandates should involve
a broad range of activities, including, but not limited
to, ensuring respect for international human rights and
humanitarian law, facilitating humanitarian access, the
return of refugees and displaced persons, human rights
monitoring, the protection of women and children, and
addressing sexual violence in conflict.
Furthermore, implementing protection mandates
and preparing protection strategies require improved
situational awareness and analysis. Relevant data and
recommendations on the protection of civilians need to
be systematically included in country-specific reports
by the Secretariat.

14-2329627/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Interaction and the better flow of information
among missions, humanitarian actors and local
populations are crucial. In particular, humanitarian
and human right actors can contribute effectively to
a realistic assessment of the threats and risks to the
population on the ground.
Furthermore, the implementation of protection
mandates requires adequate resources, structures and
training. Military, police and civilian personnel should
receive the relevant pre-deployment guidance and
training. Having a pool of experts available on short
notice through standing capacities or rosters is helpful
for early planning or filling critical gaps.
We welcome the drafting by the Office of Military
Affairs of baseline guidance on the protection of
civilians for the military component; the development
of a mobile training teams project; and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations core pre-deployment
training on child protection.
Mission leadership, in our view, is crucial, as it
must ensure that protection is considered a priority
across the whole mission. We would also like to stress
the importance of the sharing among the missions of
effective protection practices. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for example, established an
early-warning system that enabled the better protection
of rural populations. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan keeps a civilian-casualtytracking system which, combined with tactical
directives focused on civilian protection, is helping
to reduce civilian casualty rates. Unmanned aerial
systems observing Kivu and border zones contribute
to enhancing the capacity of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to respond.
Adequate resources, training and mandate
definition are just one side of the story in the context
of the protection of civilians. Peacekeepers cannot
ensure the protection of civilians in an environment
where lawlessness and impunity prevail. Strengthening
the rule of law and building local justice mechanisms
and judicial capacities to tackle impunity constitute
an important part of protection efforts. Ensuring
accountability is an important deterrent in itself and
thus a contributing factor to success in protecting
civilians.
International justice mechanisms such as mixed and
special tribunals, as well as the International Criminal

28/87

12/02/2014

Court, have an important role to play in that regard.
The Council must place special emphasis on ending
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity and
gross violations of human rights. The perpetrators of
such crimes, as well as all those who attack and kill
humanitarian and medical workers, journalists and
peacekeepers, must know that there is no escaping
justice.
This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions, the foundation
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. But
today we also mark the International Day against the
Use of Child Soldiers. Perpetrators against their will,
such children are also the tragic victims of conflict. It
is incumbent upon the Council to make sure that those
children, as well as all of the countless civilian victims
who continue to suffer conflict-related atrocities, are
guaranteed the protection they need.
My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Secretary-General and
welcomes the presidential statement adopted earlier
today (S/PRST/2014/3). The urgency of implementation
cannot be stressed enough. Bridging the gap between
the normative basis and concrete actions on the ground
is paramount to saving lives.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
In view of the fairly long list of speakers, I should
like to encourage everyone speaking to respect the
four-minute limit in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
longer statements are encouraged to circulate their
texts in writing and to deliver a shorter version when
speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all members
concerned that we shall be carrying on this debate right
through the lunch hour, so that we can all speak before
it is very late into the night.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Urmas
Paet, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Paet (Estonia): At the outset, let me congratulate
Lithuania, the first Baltic State to serve on the Security
Council, on having assumed the presidency of the
Council.
The Secretary-General notes in his latest report
(S/2013/689) that the current state of the protection
of civilians leaves little room for optimism. Estonia
strongly condemns all forms of violence against

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilian populations and violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. We hear with great
concern about children being killed and maimed in
Syria and women being raped in the Central African
Republic. The outbreak of armed conflict should be
avoided to the extent possible by using all available
measures.
The greatest responsibility to maintain stability and
to find sustainable solutions guaranteeing the safety of
civilians is in the hands of the State concerned. However,
if the conflict is escalating despite all preventive efforts
and there is a risk that the lives of civilians might be in
danger, the international community, with the Security
Council at the helm, must act.
In addition to systematically condemning the
violations, the Council can also use targeted measures
against those who commit the violations, mandate a
commission of inquiry or even refer the situations to
the International Criminal Court.
There are numerous examples that prove the
crucial significance of United Nations peacekeeping
missions as the first stabilizing force to reach a conflict
area. United Nations peacekeepers have often played
a central role in restoring peace and preventing tragic
losses of human life.
Estonia continues to support United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. That is evidenced by the fact that
last year we raised our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations considerably, sending our
military observers to the most complicated areas in
the world. Under the auspices of the United Nations,
Estonians are currently serving without any caveats
in the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. But the bulk of our
peace-support troops are still deployed as part of the
International Security Assistance Force mission in
Afghanistan.
Maintaining peace and protecting civilians is the
ultimate goal and requires a quick and determined
reaction. That is why Estonia has decided to take part,
with an infantry platoon, in a European Union-led
peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic.
We remember the Rwandan genocide in 1994, when
the international community reacted too late. Such
situations should never happen again.
United Nations peacekeeping operations receive
mandates from the Security Council. Therefore it is

S/PV.7109

also the Security Council that bears responsibility for
setting realistic margins for operations. A clear and
precise assessment of the situation on the ground is a
prerequisite for the sufficient allocation of resources
and operational capabilities. The clarity of a mandate
will have a direct impact on the success of the operation.
Therefore, in order to strengthen the means to protect
civilians, the Council should also remain involved in
the implementation process.
Estonia is particularly concerned about the
implications of armed conflicts for the most vulnerable
groups. There is growing understanding that women and
children are impacted uniquely and disproportionately
by the effects of conflict and its aftermath. I should like
to encourage the Council to include in the mandates
of peacekeeping missions provisions on human rights
monitoring, with special focus on the rights of children
and women. We also urge the further and timely
deployment of gender advisers, women’s protection
advisers and child protection advisers to peacekeeping
missions. In addition, I should like to stress that the
predeployment training must cover the subjects of
sexual and gender-based violence and the protection of
children. Bearing that in mind, I welcome the Secretary
General’s “Rights up front” initiative to make the United
Nations more accountable for its responsibilities. That
is an awaited move forward in acknowledging the
crucial need to respond as early as possible to human
rights violations.
The protection of civilians is based on the principles
of humanity, impartiality and neutrality. Estonia has
focused its development cooperation, humanitarian
assistance and human rights activities on supporting
the countries in most need — Afghanistan, the Central
African Republic, Mali, South Sudan and Somalia, to
name a few.
Over the past couple of years, Estonia has supported
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation of refugees
from Syria with almost €1 million. Recently, Estonia
has also provided €100,000 for the effort to relieve
the situation of internally displaced people suffering
violence in the Central African Republic. However,
we are in a situation where humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) experience
increasing difficulties in reaching the most vulnerable
parts of society affected by conflict. With great
disappointment, I have to admit that the humanitarian
space is shrinking. The latest examples are Syria and the
Central African Republic. Humanitarian organizations

14-2329629/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and NGOs often have to make compromises in order to
get access to conflict areas. Those limitations function
as alarming hindrances to humanitarian principles.
The Security Council needs to send a clear
message to all parties in armed conflict and to remind
them of their obligations. Violations of international
humanitarian, human rights law and international
criminal law must be condemned. All parties to an
armed conflict must refrain from targeting civilians.
They must also facilitate humanitarian operations
and allow rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel to all affected
populations. The protection of organizations and
institutions providing humanitarian assistance, as well
as humanitarian workers, assets and goods, must be
ensured at all times. It is important to set up simplified,
expedited mechanisms such as the registration of
humanitarian organizations and project agreements,
the exemption of humanitarian goods and workers
from fees, duties and taxes, in-country movement of
personnel and goods, and visas.
Parties to conflict must facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance in the most effective ways,
including, where appropriate, across lines and borders.
I agree that it is important for national and international
humanitarian actors to ensure a more coordinated
approach to negotiating, securing and maintaining
access. Estonia welcomes the initiative of Switzerland
to produce legal and operational guidance and training
materials on the matter.
Our goal must be to prevent conflicts, grave crimes
and human rights violations. We must strive for a
deterrence-centred approach; but, whenever it is clear
that unacceptable war crimes and violations of human
rights have taken place, we must act in a timely way
and bring the persons responsible for the atrocities to
justice. By ensuring that there are effective mechanisms
for investigating and prosecuting crimes, we strengthen
accountability and decrease the possibility that similar
inhumane injustices will happen again.
National Governments have the primary
responsibility to adopt and adjust their domestic
legislation to ensure the prosecution of persons suspected
of grave crimes. Building up strong and effective
legislation is a prerequisite for protecting witnesses
and victims — whose cooperative engagement in court
proceedings is crucial. States must also ensure that
their investigative and judicial infrastructure has the
knowledge and capacity to prosecute atrocity crimes.
30/87

12/02/2014

Witness-protection programmes must be in place to
ensure the safety of those brave enough to testify.
In addition to national mechanisms, the international
criminal system must also be constantly strengthened.
Especially significant is the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which has the power to deter
further atrocities or prevent their escalation. But the
ICC’s jurisdiction is limited to the territory of States
parties unless the Security Council is willing to refer
the matter to the ICC. In other words, the ICC can
meet its full potential only when national Governments
are determined to cooperate with the Court, but also
only if the Security Council is willing to enforce that
cooperation and to refer all appropriate situations
consistently. Otherwise, civilians would be unequally
protected in armed conflicts throughout the world.
To sum up, allow me to repeat the five crucial
points for Estonia in today’s debate. First, the
protection of civilians must remain the central idea
behind peacekeeping operations. Estonia remains
determined to support peacekeeping efforts. Secondly,
the mandates of peacekeeping operations must set
achievable goals and should be adequately resourced.
Thirdly, protecting civilians means protecting human
rights, and vice versa. The Secretary-General’s “Rights
up front” initiative is a step in the right direction.
Fourthly, violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law must be condemned and the protection
of humanitarian workers must be ensured at all times.
Humanitarian assistance remains a crucial part of
protecting civilians. Fifthly, former Estonian President
Lennart Meri said once, “Crimes against humanity are
crimes against humanity regardless of who commits
them”. Therefore, those who are responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other serious violations of international criminal law
must be brought to justice. That is possible only when
national Governments adopt corresponding legislation,
empower their domestic judicial systems, ensure the
protection of witnesses and support and cooperate with
the ICC. It is the responsibility of all States to put an
end to atrocities and to impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the delegation of Lithuania for
having organized this open debate to commemorate
the 15 years since the Security Council gave fresh
impetus to the task of the protection of civilians in
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflict. We are also grateful to Ms. Navi Pillay,
Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Mr. Yves
Daccord for their respective statements.
We also appreciate the concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) circulated by the presidency among all
delegations, which contains valuable guidelines to focus
our debate, since the issue is extraordinarily complex
and the mandate is so broad that we must prioritize our
activities in order to be able to generate the necessary
funding.
In the past two years, we have had the privilege
of having contributed to the development of the
evolving conceptual framework behind the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It was
during our membership of the Council that the Security
Council adopted resolutions 2086 (2013) — the first
to recognize the importance of the protection of
civilians as part of the multidimensional mandate of
a peacekeeping operation — and 2106 (2013), which
also established the practice for staff of peacekeeping
operations — military and civilian alike — to be given
extensive training in gender issues, including on sexual
violence and gender-based violence, all of this in the
framework of the protection of civilians.
In his tenth report on the subject (S/2013/689),
of 22 November 2013, the Secretary-General
clearly identifies that the protection of civilians is a
fundamental duty, and for the parties to a conflict a
legal obligation to be met by all. He also indicates that
his previous recommendations, including the five basic
challenges for improving the protection of civilians, are
still in force. He also requests the Council to review
them and add them to those contained in the present
report. Our delegation shares that point of view.
At the same time, it is worth reiterating that United
Nations contingents cannot substitute for the State
in complying with the latter’s basic commitment to
protect its civilian population. When States are unable
or unwilling to honour that basic commitment, we face
major humanitarian disasters, as we have seen again
and again in recent years and even in the past few
weeks in Syria, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, among others.
The recent joint investigation by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
criticizing the Council for not having offered clearer

S/PV.7109

and more detailed guidelines that would have permitted
the United Nations to improve the ability to offer
effective protection to civilian populations is eloquent
in that regard.
On the other hand, let me return to one of
the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General concerning support for the
investigation of serious violations involving the use of
modern technologies, such as distance-guided aircraft
and remotely controlled weapons. Those technologies
make it more difficult to apply the fundamental
norms of international humanitarian law concerning
the distinction and proportionality of those methods
or asymmetric conflicts and precautions. That may
prevent the determination of responsibility and the
prevalence of impunity that allows the proliferation
of mass atrocities and serious violations of human
rights. We have insisted on the singular utility of the
Rome Statute and the International Criminal Court
in making determinations of individual or collective
responsibility, as the case may be.
Finally, I should like to acknowledge OCHA
for preparing an update of the aide-mémoire, which
constitutes a practical guide to the study of issues
related to the protection of civilians and which describes
various measures that can be considered and adapted
to each situation in the preparation of the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
We welcome Lithuania’s initiative to hold an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and we thank the four briefers for their important
contributions and excellent leadership.
The Nordic countries welcome the latest
report of the Secretary General under review today
(S/2013/689), as well as the adoption by the Council of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3 and its updated
aide-mémoire. The Nordic countries also welcome
the Secretary-General’s “Rights up front” action
plan, which puts the imperative to protect people
and preventive efforts at the heart of United Nations
strategies and operational activities. Promoting respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights by

14-2329631/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

12/02/2014

States and non-State armed groups alike, and ensuring
accountability for violations, is fundamental.

Syria. We support the adoption of a Security Council
resolution to address this urgent matter.

A new generation of peacekeeping mandates has
emerged. Peacekeeping operations are increasingly
given a robust mandate and are being deployed to
places with high levels of violence. Efforts to protect
civilians and minimize civilian harm should begin at
the very early planning stages of a mission. We therefore
encourage the efforts to strengthen the effective
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandates
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ensuring
that Council-mandated missions have a strong human
rights-monitoring mandate and adequate, as well as
modern, resources to implement the mandate should
be part of those efforts. One starting point must be the
mission-specific conditions, recognizing the different
needs of men, women, boys and girls. The Nordic
countries support the Secretary-General’s human rights
due diligence policy as an important tool to strengthen
the implementation of human rights on the ground and
to prevent atrocities.

Efforts to combat sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict must be strengthened. The Nordic countries
welcome Security Council resolution 2122 (2013) and
its much-needed focus on women’s participation and
empowerment. We look forward to it being translated
into action.

The Nordic countries also strongly encourage
the incorporation of a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations. As part of the Nordic Defence
Cooperation, we have established the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations in Stockholm, and
note with satisfaction that the demand for its services
is increasing.
Attacks against humanitarian workers are war
crimes, which may also amount to crimes against
humanity, and should not go unpunished. We are deeply
concerned at the increasing attacks against, and killing
of, humanitarian workers and the impunity that persists
for those crimes. We are particularly concerned that
the denial of health care and food, as well as attacks
on hospitals and schools, are deliberately used as
a tool to inflict harm on the civilian population in
some conflicts. That violates the most fundamental
principles of humanity as well as humanitarian law
itself. Attacking health care and food aid — which are
core elements in humanitarian action — is indeed an
attack against the whole humanitarian system. The
horrific tragedy in Syria is a case in point. We call
on the parties to that conflict immediately to uphold
their obligations to protect civilians and to facilitate
unimpeded humanitarian access to the whole territory.
Immediate progress in humanitarian access is crucial
for improving conditions for the civilian population in

32/87

Specialized capacity and focus are needed to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence in United Nations
operations. We welcome the deployment of women’s
protection advisers in five ongoing missions. We urge
the Secretariat to undertake an early evaluation of their
work to assess their contribution in the prevention of
conflict-related sexual violence. We fully support the
development and implementation of predeployment
and in-mission training of peacekeeping personnel on
sexual and gender-based violence. We must seek to
ensure that all peacekeepers are being trained to the
same standards and operate accordingly.
In order to combat sexual and gender-based
violence, perpetrators must be brought to justice. All
parties to an armed conflict should take all the steps
necessary to ensure accountability, through national
prosecutions or by referrals to the International
Criminal Court. National capacity must be enhanced to
investigate and prosecute those crimes.
The use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas puts the civilian population at grave risk of
death and injury and increases the destruction of vital
infrastructure. The indiscriminate and disproportionate
use of explosive weapons that we witness in many
situations today must never be accepted. The need to
ensure appropriate restrictions on warfare in such areas
remains one of the central challenges of contemporary
armed conflict.
At the same time, experience from Afghanistan
and Somalia demonstrates how armed forces may, if
the will is there, in fact restrain the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas without impeding military
effectiveness. We support the Secretary-General’s call
for States to share information on policy and practice
regarding that matter. We stand ready to contribute
in developing practical measures and guidance on the
basis of lessons learned.
Lastly, I should like to recall that the adoption
and — even more important — the full implementation

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of the Arms Trade Treaty will be an important
instrument in preventing armed violence and reducing
human suffering, including gender-based violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, allow me
to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month and to highly commend the Lithuanian
presidency for convening this important meeting.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add the following in my national
capacity.
The fifteenth anniversary of the Security Council’s
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the adoption of its landmark resolution 1265
(1999) provides us with the opportunity to take stock
of the efforts made so far and to reflect upon ongoing
and emerging concerns. This is also an opportunity
to stress once again that the protection of civilians
goes hand-in-hand with full respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law; one must not be
separated from the other.
The hundredth anniversary of the beginning of
the First World War is an occasion to reflect on the
profoundly changed nature of war, in which civilians
are increasingly becoming the primary target. In the
First World War the ratio between military deaths and
direct civilian deaths was 10 to 1. These days, civilian
casualties in conflict often surpass those on the military
side. Simply said, victims of modern armed conflict are
much more likely to be civilians than solders. Civilians
are regularly targeted and are subject to indiscriminate
attacks and other violations by parties to the conflict.
Because of all of that, today’s topic is not only timely:
we must return to it over and over again when needed.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/689), the current state of the protection of
civilians leaves little room for optimism. The conflict
in Syria represents a stark example — unfortunately
not the only one — of how devastating is the impact of
conflicts on civilians and how torn the fabric of civilian
society can become. It is a collective tragedy composed
of countless individual dramas and misery, so often lost
and forgotten in the tide of destruction.

S/PV.7109

Croatia, remembering too well the horrors of
war, strongly condemns the continued widespread,
systematic and gross violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law in Syria, including targeted
killings, arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence and
the use and recruitment of children to participate in
hostilities.
We are appalled by reports of rape and other
forms of sexual violence that are being used as
weapons of war, targeting in particular women and
girls. That is not isolated to a single conflict, nor can
it be regarded as collateral damage of war. It is of the
utmost importance that rape and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict be recognized as war crimes and
crimes against humanity and fall under the competence
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Against that
background, we fully welcome the further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council.
While the increased use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a war tactic has already been addressed in the
Security Council, most notably through its resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), it is undeniable that this
kind of violence continues to occur at an alarming
rate. It is therefore necessary for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to effectively address the
impact of armed conflict on women and children and
to support women’s participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding as much as possible. Women should
also play an important role in peacekeeping missions in
order to enhance confidence-building with the targeted
communities.
With all the aforesaid in mind, Croatia joined
the United Kingdom’s initiative on preventing sexual
violence in conflict and supported the elaboration of
an international protocol on the investigation and
documentation of rape and sexual violence in conflict.
The link between the protection of civilians and
peacekeeping operations is crucial. The safety and
security of civilians is critical for the legitimacy of
peacekeeping missions, which operate in complex and
challenging conditions. The success of a peacemaking
or peacekeeping mission will largely be judged upon
its ability to protect the most vulnerable parts of the
population.
One cannot thoroughly address today’s topic
without mentioning the responsibility to protect — a
vital part of the efforts needed to prevent suffering
and protect civilians from it. I should also like to use

14-2329633/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

this opportunity to stress that all Croatian civilian
and military personnel participating in international
missions and operations must go through rigorous
training. The Ministry of Defence and the Ministry
of the Interior, in their training centres, regularly
organize international predeployment courses for all
staff, including diplomats, which are selected to be
deployed in United Nations, European Union or NATO
missions or operations abroad. The Ministry of Defence
is also conducting a United Nations protection-ofcivilians course based on the official Department of
Peacekeeping Operations modules, while the Ministry
of the Interior’s training is based on the United Nations
police officers course.
Croatia is firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as their vital function concerning the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We strongly
urge all parties in conflict to respect international
obligations, bearing in mind that the State and local
authorities carry the primary responsibility for the
implementation of international humanitarian and
human rights law and have to be held accountable for
that.
Croatia firmly supports the recommendations from
the report of the Secretary-General, especially the
one on establishing a common United Nations system
systematically to record civilian casualties. We are of
the view that a close connection has to be achieved
between all the relevant actors — military troops on
the ground, fact-finding missions, commissions of
inquiry and the staff of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Finally, we welcome the adoption of presidential
statement
S/PRST/2014/3
with
the
updated
aide-mémoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity. Given the paucity of
time and the large number of speakers, I will read out
an abridged version of our statement, which is being
circulated for the record.
We thank the briefers at this meeting and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/689). We also
thank and congratulate you, Madam President, for the

34/87

12/02/2014

concept note circulated for this meeting (S/2014/74,
annex).
As the concept note reminds us, this year marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the Council’s engagement on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. However,
the targeting of civilians is not a recent phenomenon.
It in fact predates the United Nations first large-scale
mission, which was launched in the Congo in 1960.
It certainly goes back to the two world wars of past
century, which saw large-scale killing of civilians in
concentration camps and indiscriminate air raids. We
also need to take cognizance of the grim conclusion
that dispatching foreign troops does not automatically
protect the civilian population.
We need to ask: who is the civilian and who is the
combatant? Are the civilians the tens of thousands of
Nuer who last December took refuge in the compounds
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) in Juba? Or are they the equal number of
Dinka who were doing so in United Nations compounds
in Jonglei? We need to question whether a robust
mandate automatically translates into the protection of
civilians?
On 19 December 2012, some 2,000 armed youths
attacked the UNMISS base in Akobo that was
providing protection to Dinka refugees. The 40 Indian
peacekeepers were heavily outnumbered. They had
superior fire power and a robust mandate that would
have allowed them to use force, not just in self-defence
but also in defence of the mandate. Had they opened,
fire hundreds of lives would have been lost. Would
those lives have been civilians or combatants? And the
troops who availed themselves of their superior fire
power, would they have been peacekeepers or warmakers?
Those are real-life situations. They are known to
those who have boots on the ground, and to those who
give up their lives in defence of the highest ideals of
the United Nations. While a bloodbath was avoided
on 19 December 2012, Warrant Officers Kumar Pal
Singh and Dharmesh Sangwan paid for it with their
supreme sacrifice. Were they exposed to risks that were
unacceptably high? That is a tragic but real conundrum
that cannot be ignored.
The concept note very correctly refers to the
disparity between mandated tasks and allocated
resources being an important challenge. The note can
certainly not be accused of overstating the case. The

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment met
last month for the first time in three years. Troopcontributing countries (TCCs) asked for a revision of
the daily allowance. It is now $1.28 per day, and has
been so for the past 20 years. The TCCs also asked for
a revision of the rest-and-recuperation allowance. It is
$10 per day, and has been so for the past decade. The
Committee could, however, only agree to an overall
increase of $0.75 per cent to the contingent-ownedequipment rate. The challenge that the United Nations
faces in the disparity between mandates and resources
is truly an important one.
Turning to mandates and their interpretation, the
concept note again very wisely refers to the requirement
for consultation, including among the Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries, prior to
the establishment of and throughout the life cycle of
peacekeeping missions.
Troop-contributing countries put at risk the lives
of their soldiers in the service of the United Nations.
The TCCs know the situation on the ground better than
most, as they are in daily touch with developments and
can, on the basis of practical experience, advise on what
needs to be done. Their advice will be sound, objective
and unbiased. It can serve the Council well.
Some five decades ago when the first operation was
set up, in the Congo, there was a conflict within a State.
Regional Powers were involved. There was a collapse
of administration and the United Nations was invited
in. At one stage, India provided 6,000 of the 16,000
troops deployed. Fifty-three years ago, my predecessor
the Permanent Representative C.S. Jha spelled out why
India wanted to have an influence on the Council’s
thinking. His words are just as valid today. He said,
“We cannot forget, nor should the Council forget,
that we have involved ourselves in the Congo at
very great sacrifice, and that involvement does not
mean merely the discomfort, the inconveniences
and sometimes the loss of life to our young men
serving in the Congo. This involvement is related
to the whole state of public opinion in our country,
and, ourselves being a democratic country, this
naturally has a great influence on our Parliament
and on our Government.” (S/PV.982, p. 4)
Alhough C.S. Jha voiced our views on what needed
to be done, the views were ignored. Things started
to go bad. More than half a dozen troop contributors
withdrew from the Congo operations because they could

S/PV.7109

not agree with the way it was run by the Council and
by the Secretariat. That is, inter alia, why we ask that
consultations be held whenever there is a change in the
situation on the ground. The TCCs are the first to know
that things are going wrong. Consultations must be held
before the Council changes a mandate. The TCCs must
know and accept in advance material changes to the
terms and conditions under which they committed their
troops. That is also important for TCCs because their
Governments, Parliaments and their people want to
know why their soldiers have been sent into situations
not anticipated when the United Nations request for
forces was accepted.
We hear in the corridors of this building that
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is going to change. We have
not been told, but those who wield the pen would know.
We understand that you, Madam President, will
be organizing an open debate on the rule of law next
week. We do not know if we will participate. When we
spoke in the Council on 24 November 1961 our voice
was not heard. We fear that the same may happen today.
We hope that the consequences will not be the same.
In the event that we do not make ourselves heard on
19 February, we avail ourselves of this opportunity
to request the members of the Council to remind
themselves of the requirements of Article 44 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The rule of law, as far as
the Council is concerned, requires TCCs to participate
in the Council’s decisions, and not just be consulted on
them.
In conclusion, I will lay a few questions before the
entire membership of the United Nations, because it is
on their behalf that the Council acts.
Does the peacekeeper shoot to protect? Should
he have done so on 19 December 2013? Should he
do so in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
once a revised mandate is adopted for the entire
Mission that requires — not as an exception but as
a rule — MONUSCO to take on targeted offensive
operations against armed groups? Who will then be the
civilian and who will then be the combatant when we
cross the Mogadishu line in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo once again?
The President: I give the floor now to the
representative of Mexico.

14-2329635/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank the presidency of Lithuania for
having chosen this item for its first open debate.
Civilians in armed conflict are still the majority of
victims, largely due to the use of weapons in densely
populated areas.
I should also like to thank the speakers who spoke
before me in introducing their respective reports, as
well as the Secretary-General for his tenth periodic
report on this item (S/2014/689).
Peacekeeping operations are the most important
means available to the Organization to protect civilians,
but they are also among its most complex tasks. That
is why it is crucial to have the utmost conceptual
and operational clarity for this mandate in all of the
stages of a peacekeeping operation and among all of
its components and actors. It is crucial to guarantee
that the resources that are authorized and deployed
correspond to the descriptions and expectations of the
mandates granted to missions, and that they serve to
build the capacity of national Governments. Let us not
forget, nonetheless, that the main responsibility for the
protection of civilians falls upon the parties in conflict,
and in particular the States.
Mexico believes that the United Nations system,
especially the Security Council, has the necessary
tools to achieve the effective protection of civilians
in armed conflict. That is why my delegation would
like to point out that effective protection for civilians
must guarantee absolute respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law by all actors,
including the Organization. Mexico fully supports the
action plan entitled “Rights up front”.
As established in resolution 2117 (2013), the illicit
trafficking and accumulation of small arms and light
weapons impedes peacemaking and keeping. We
therefore reiterate our appeal for Member States to join
or ratify the Arms Trade Treaty.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s vision on
the use of unmanned aerial vehicles. As he points out
in his report,
“Maintaining the distinction between ... counterterrorism operations and the Mission’s stabilization
activities is important, including for the effective
protection of civilians and humanitarian action.”
(S/2013/689, para. 43)

36/87

12/02/2014

Allow me to remind the Council that, in the context
of the recent session of the General Assembly, my
delegation introduced a draft resolution that sought
to establish for the first time that the use of those
technologies should be carried out in full compliance
with international humanitarian law, including the
principles of distinction and proportionality.
Mexico reaffirms its concern about the restrictions
to humanitarian access that have prevented the safe and
timely delivery and supply of assistance that we have
seen, unfortunately, very recently in Syria and South
Sudan. Those limitations on the flow of assistance and
the attacks on humanitarian personnel require urgent
attention from the Security Council and the rest of the
States Members of the United Nations.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the French proposal to draft
a code of conduct among the five permanent members
of the Security Council whereby, when considering
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide, the permanent five will renounce their right
to exercise the veto.
In a few weeks, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda. We note that
the international community has made substantial
progress since then in improving the protection of
civilians and that the Council has been a fundamental
part of that process. However, it is clear that, although
we have a long way to go, intensifying our efforts to
create a true culture of protecting civilians at the
national and international levels should not, under any
circumstances, be merely an option, but rather our
collective obligation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate Lithuania on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Jewish tradition places great importance on
upholding the sanctity of life. The Talmud famously
teaches that “Whoever saves a life, it is considered as
if he saved an entire world.” The Talmud also goes on
to teach that “Whoever destroys a soul, it is considered
as if he destroyed an entire world.” In Syria, almost
130,000 worlds have been destroyed.
We will soon mark the third anniversary of
the Syrian conflict, and there is no end in sight. We

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

cannot sit comfortably in this Chamber discussing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict when, before
our eyes, the crisis in Syria has reached catastrophic
proportions. We have all been criticized for not doing
anything substantial to help the people of Syria. The
endless meetings, discussions and good intentions are
not good enough. All of that is doing nothing to change
the situation on the ground. Each of us represents a
nation, but we also represent the aspirations of millions
of people throughout the world. The Security Council
has often been divided on the issue of Syria, but time
is running out. The Syrian people cannot wait as the
wheels of diplomacy spin in the mud of debates and
dialogues.
How many nations can say that they truly help
protect civilians? Looking back on 2013, it is clear that
very few had the courage to act on their ideals. When
hostilities erupted in the Central African Republic,
the African Union acted swiftly to avert a potential
genocide. And when violent extremists began a swift
campaign of terror in northern Mali, France took
the lead with decisive action that saved the lives of
countless civilians.
Each and every country must do its part. Horrified
by the savagery and violence that has ravaged Syria,
Israel has refused to be indifferent to the suffering. We
have treated hundreds of Syrians in desperate need of
medical care.
When Governments are unable or unwilling to
protect their civilians, the United Nations is often the
last line of defence. Peacekeepers have saved tens of
thousands of lives, but the reality is that millions of
civilians are still in need of protection. Those innocent
men and women turn to the United Nations for help, but
find themselves standing alone.
I want to thank the Permanent Representative
of India, who spoke just now, for raising important
questions that need to be addressed by the Council
honestly and openly. In this age of modern warfare,
it is difficult to distinguish between combatants and
bystanders. Petty politics have drained the efforts and
attention of the Security Council. Instead of opening
the channels of humanitarian aid, little more than a
trickle of assistance is reaching those who need it the
most.
If we are really honest with ourselves, then we will
admit that we have not done enough. Somewhere in the
world there is a mother shielding her children as rockets

S/PV.7109

and mortars explode all around. Somewhere in the world
there is a father crawling through rubble searching
for scraps of food to feed his hungry children. And
somewhere in the world there are children labouring
day and night to help ease the burden on their families.
Ronald Reagan said, “Let us be sure that those who
come after will say ... that in our time we did everything
that could be done.”
Those men, women and children should not stand
alone. We should be standing at their side, easing their
burden and ensuring a safer and more secure future
for them. We share the fundamental responsibility to
protect civilians from the three “Ts” — terror, torment
and tyranny. We must set aside our differences and
make a lasting change for generations to come.
The clock is ticking, and time is running out. It is
time to stop talking and take decisive action. Every life
we save is a world unto itself. No nation is free from
responsibility. I call on each and every one of us today
to act now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians in Armed Conflict, which is comprised of
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.
I would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing today’s important
debate.
The Group of Friends welcomes the latest report of
the Secretary-General under review today (S/2013/689).
In the past couple of months, crises have emerged,
re-emerged or have been amplified in many different
places, and it is with great concern that we observe that
the number of civilians affected by armed conflict has
significantly increased over the period covered by the
report in almost all of the countries reviewed. While all
civilians may be victims of conflict in various ways,
women and children are particularly exposed during all
stages of armed conflict. The full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions is crucial
in that regard.
The Group of Friends also welcomes the adoption
of today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3),
which endorses the revised aide-mémoire, reflecting

14-2329637/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

important developments since the adoption of resolution
1894 (2009), whose implementation remains the overall
way forward for ensuring the effective protection of
civilians. In the same vein, the Group of Friends notes
with interest the Secretary-General’s “Rights up front”
action plan, which places the imperative to protect
people and preventive efforts at the heart of United
Nations strategies and operational activities.
The Group of Friends also notes the UnderSecretary-General’s assessment in her briefing today
that
“Mandating peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
remains among the most significant actions taken
by the Security Council to enhance protection”.
Resolution 2086 (2013) recognized the importance
of that mandated task in the context of modern,
multidimensional peacekeeping missions.
The Group welcomes the normative progress that
has been made through the development of training,
guidance and policies, and acknowledges the need
to translate that into action. Mission assessment
and planning processes, where appropriate, should
prioritize the protection of civilians and the resources
and capabilities that are required to address them.
Member States and peacekeeping missions should
continue efforts to train and support peacekeepers so as
to address the challenges and scenarios they may face in
the field, drawing on materials that have been developed
by the United Nations. The Group also encourages the
Secretariat to continue its work in developing further
guidance for peacekeeping missions to work alongside
host Governments to build the long-term capacity to
protect civilians.
While the core challenges in the protection of
civilians identified in the previous reports of the
Secretary-General still need our sustained attention,
the latest report (S/2013/689) also identifies several
protection policy priorities that need to be explored. In
particular, the following emerging issues would benefit
from our attention, and the Group of Friends stands
ready to act as a platform to advance them.
First, we need to address the arbitrary withholding
of consent to relief operations. The Group recalls that
international humanitarian law obliges all parties to a
conflict to protect civilian populations from the effects
of such conflicts. One way that that can be achieved is by

38/87

12/02/2014

allowing and facilitating access for humanitarian relief
operations, including by simplifying and expediting
procedures for the rapid and unhindered delivery of
life-saving assistance. The Group is concerned about
intimidation, threats, arrests, detentions, injuries and
killings of humanitarian workers.
In that regard, the Group notes the intention of the
Secretary-General to examine the issue of arbitrarily
withholding consent to relief operations. We note the
fact that several drafting seminars involving legal
experts from diverse backgrounds have taken place.
Responding to the Secretary-General’s recommendation
in that regard, the Group expresses its readiness to
discuss their findings, among other inputs, with a view
to elaborating guidance on how to facilitate consent in
a peaceful manner. All parties to a conflict must abide
by international humanitarian principles and practices
to protect civilians; the international community needs
to take the initiative to guarantee that.
Secondly, we turn to the issue of casualty tracking
and recording. The Group of Friends notes that civilian
casualty tracking, where practicable, plays an important
role in efforts to reduce harm to civilians. The Group of
Friends calls on parties to a conflict, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to recognize the
potential value of such a role. With regard to casualty
recording and in the light of the recent presentation
of the “Rights up front” action plan, the Group notes
the continuation of efforts to ensure effective and
credible recording mechanisms, noting further that
the establishment of systematic and credible records
of civilian casualties in the right context could support
broader efforts to monitor and report on violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
while taking into account the practical challenges in
recording casualties, civilian or otherwise.
Finally, on the issue of lethal autonomous weapon
systems, the Group is of the view that further discussions
are needed and welcomes the fact that the issue will be
examined in Geneva in May 2014, in the framework of
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. The
Group hopes that such discussions will also examine
the issue with due consideration to the protection
of civilians as part of a comprehensive debate that
includes legal, military, operational, technological and
ethical perspectives. In time, discussion should focus
on the relevance of such systems to the protection of
civilians, in particular, in the context of international

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7109

humanitarian law and with regard to the principles of
distinction, precaution and proportionality.

of civilians, the Security Council also has an important
role to play.

(spoke in French)

As the guardian of international peace and security,
the Council must respond decisively when massive
violations of international humanitarian law escalate
a conflict, as we have been witnessing in Syria for
such a prolonged period now. The arbitrary denial of
humanitarian access should be among the Council’s
core concerns and triggers for action. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, parties to conflict must
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief. The presidential statement from
October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) represented a rare and
welcome moment of unity in the Council, but it did not
lead to any changes on the ground.

Allow me now to briefly touch on three points in
my national capacity.
First, Switzerland shares the Secretary-General’s
concerns regarding humanitarian access, particularly
in Syria and the Sudan, where millions of people are
in great need of assistance. As other delegations have
already stated, States have the primary responsibility
to protect their civilian populations and must therefore
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian actors to civilians in need.
Secondly, we support direct interaction with
non-State armed groups to protect civilians in situations
of conflict. The existence of a dialogue in no case confers
legitimacy on any armed group nor on its methods. But
today it is not realistic to believe that civilians can be
protected in modern-day conflicts without the direct or
indirect involvement of armed groups. The SecretaryGeneral quite rightly identified that issue as being one
of the main challenges for the protection of civilians,
and a welcome step would consist in identifying the
best practices and experiences of the United Nations
and other actors in a future report by the SecretaryGeneral.
Thirdly and finally, my neighbour from the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has
already mentioned the joint initiative with Switzerland
to strengthen respect for international humanitarian
law. I will limit myself to calling on all States to
actively participate in the consultations that the ICRC
and Switzerland will continue to organize to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
report by the Secretary-General (S/2013/689) on the
protection of civilians, especially the emphasis placed
on the five core challenges. Let me use the opportunity
today to focus on two of them, namely, enhancing
humanitarian access and accountability.
The protection of civilians must be addressed by
a broad range of stakeholders, including those present
here today. While the parties to conflict bear the
obligation to comply with international humanitarian
law, and are thus primarily responsible for the protection

It is now high time for the Council to step up
the pressure and adopt a resolution urging all parties
to conflict to make sure that civilians in need can
be reached and that humanitarian and medical
personnel are adequately protected. Given the lack
of implementation of the presidential statement, the
resolution should at the very least make it clear that
the Council will, in cases of non-compliance, follow
up with measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We call upon Council members to
adopt such a resolution without further delay, thereby
fulfilling their responsibility under the Charter. It
would be inexcusable to use or threaten the use of the
veto against such a draft resolution, aimed at preventing
or ending violations of international humanitarian law,
many of which may amount to war crimes.
We congratulate France on its commitment to
develop a code of conduct with a view to restricting the
use of the veto. We, along with other States and civil
society actors, continue to support that initiative. The
veto is both a privilege and a responsibility. It must not
be used to prolong and legitimize human suffering.
One important incentive for conflict parties to
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarin law is the prospect of accountability.
Those responsible for war crimes must be brought
to justice. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) sends a clear message and states
specifically that willfully impeding relief supplies may
constitute a war crime. Ratification of the Rome Statute
remains the ultimate expression of commitment to
respecting international humanitarian law and ensuring
accountability. It does not mean that the ICC should or

14-2329639/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

can deal with all serious crimes in any given situation,
but it is a manifestation of the State’s commitment
to hold perpetrators to account or, should that not be
possible, to transfer them to an international judicial
institution.
Until such time as the Rome Statute system has
reached universality, the Security Council has a crucial
role to play in triggering the Court’s jurisdiction, and
thereby realizing its full deterrent effect. More than a
year ago, 58 States requested the Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the ICC — a call that still remains
unanswered today. The repeated expression of interest
of the Syrian opposition to submit to the jurisdiction of
the ICC gives some hope that accountability will not
fall off the table.
As we know by now, from many years of experience,
accountability needs to be pursued through a range
of measures that go far beyond criminal proceedings
against particular individuals. Efforts must be made
to preserve the rights and dignity of endless numbers
of victims, to fight impunity on a larger scale, to help
establish a common historical narrative and to lay the
building blocks for long-term reconciliation.
As stated by the Secretary-General, accountability
encompasses the political, legal and moral responsibility
of individuals and institutions for past violations. Such
responsibility can be upheld only where the activities
of conflict parties are monitored, thereby propelling
decision-makers to act. Conflict parties engaging in
casualty tracking can also help to foster accountability.
Furthermore, the United Nations “Rights up front”
approach is an important new development in that
regard, as is the undertaking of civilian casualty
recording.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that peacekeeping remains an important tool in
protecting civilians and that sustained efforts to provide
missions with sufficient resources and capabilities are
essential to achieving that goal. We must also ensure
that all individual protection components of mission
mandates are fully implemented.
Through resolution 2100 (2013), on the situation in
Mali, the Security Council requested the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali to support the efforts of national authorities and
the ICC to bring to justice those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We encourage
the creation of an inter-agency task force to deal with

40/87

12/02/2014

that and other matters related to international criminal
justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for convening this debate.
United Nations peacekeeping missions embody the
most noble of our collective security responsibilities.
Whether Caucasian, African, Asian or Arab, all
peacekeepers are united in our common cause to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, while nine peacekeeping operations are
currently deployed with mandates on the protection
of civilians, the latest report by the Secretary General
(S/2013/689) indicates that the current state of the
protection of civilians leaves little room for optimism.
My delegation is concerned that the practice of
protecting civilians in the field may not be able to catch
up with how the international community envisions
taking that process forward. Our expectations are
unreachable, while our efforts remain rudimentary.
We feel that there is a need to take stock of the lessons
learned, given the lack of success in establishing an
effective regime for the protection of civilians.
Malaysia is all too aware of the complexities
involved in protecting civilians in conflict areas. Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders of United Nations missions are facing
intricate and unique challenges. Nevertheless, Malaysia
sees the protection of civilians as a fundamental
component of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to underscore
the proposal of the Secretary-General, contained in
his report, on the recommendation of a mechanism to
record and track civilian casualties. Such a mechanism
not only warrants our attention, given the need to protect
civilians from harm, but can also be an instrument to
guide United Nations missions in taking proactive and
preventive measures to reduce the number of civilian
casualties in conflict areas.
As the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security,
it should also be kept abreast of the latest developments
in the field. We believe more efforts should be made by
the leadership of United Nations peacekeeping missions

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to brief the Council in a more timely and frequent
manner. That would enable continued engagement
between the Council and the field on developments,
progress and prioritization in the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates.
My delegation also sees the merit of proper policy
planning and preparedness in peacekeeping missions.
When undertaking a protection-of-civilians mandate,
peacekeeping missions must consider implementing
that mandate through an integrated approach. Military
and police units, along with United Nations agencies,
cannot work in silos.
An integrated apporach to peacekeeping would
need to be balanced between instilling peace and
security and seeding economic growth and development
in the host country. The Council, in collaboration with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, should capitalize on the
synergies between those two important mechanisms,
each with important roles in instituting good governance
and economic growth.
We also believe that there must be effective
coordination so as to provide a platform for interaction
and the sharing of information, based on expertise
and priorities set by the Council. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes the formulation of a comprehensive
protection strategy for the implementation of the
civilian protection mandates of four United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
We are equally pleased to note that the Office of
the Military Adviser is also finalizing the drafting
of baseline guidance on the protection of civilians.
We believe that those developments will improve
inter-agency coordination and communications and
eliminate gaps in carrying out protection mandates.
Training is the cornerstone for ensuring the
standardization of the work of peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians. Peacekeepers and civilian
personnel must be trained through a common
protection-of-civilians module prior to deployment. We
believe efforts should also be made to include substantial
elements on the religious and cultural sensitivities of the
local people in the common training module for United
Nations peacekeepers. The significance of respecting
cultural sensitivities and their impact on relations
between peacekeepers and the local community must
not be underestimated.

S/PV.7109

Giving due importance to training and exposure,
the Government of Malaysia, with the support of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, hosted a
training course on the protection of civilians at the
Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre in Port
Dickson from 9 to 13 September 2013. Malaysia
expresses its appreciation to the United Nations mobile
training team that was tasked to conduct the module for
26 international and Malaysian military officers. The
training module included mission-specific scenarios
based on incidents faced during United Nations
missions. We believe that such training can benefit host
countries and peacekeepers alike.
The experiences accumulated by the various
United Nations missions are unique and often result
from custom-tailoring efforts in the implementation
of mandates. Those experiences should be shared with
Member States and other United Nations missions. My
delegation believes that such exchanges of experience
can be carried out through the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We furthermore believe that such
measures would improve awareness and generate a
common understanding of the protection of civilians.
To conclude, peacekeeping remains the only feasible
instrument to protect civilians caught up in armed
conflict. In order to improve the status of the protection
of civilians in conflict areas, we must ensure that
peacekeeping remains an effective tool and diplomatic
instrument. That requires commitment, resources and
coordination by leaders of peacekeeping missions, host
Governments and civilians in the field. My delegation
would like to underscore the importance of unanimous
action by the Security Council to develop a framework
to ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We need to ensure that the United Nations is always
endowed with the resources necessary to implement
protection-of-civilians mandates effectively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like, first, to
congratulate the delegation of Lithuania and you
personally, Madam President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council. I would also like to thank
you, Madam, for organizing today’s open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his tenth report on the subject (S/2013/689), and to express

14-2329641/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

our appreciation to Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their informative briefings.
Despite the fact that this year marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council’s engagement in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict by giving
peacekeeping operations explicit protection mandates,
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in current armed conflicts. They continue
to be subjected to indiscriminate attacks and other
forms of violence by parties to conflict. The targeting
of civilians because of their religion or ethnic or tribal
affiliation in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan is very alarming. Civilians are still suffering
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, despite the robust peacekeeping mandate that
has been given to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The situations in Syria and the occupied
territories are clear reminders of the tragedies civilians
endure on a daily basis. All that underlines the fact that
United Nations bodies, especially the Security Council,
should adopt more effective measures in that regard.
I would also like to thank the delegation of
Lithuania for the excellent concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) it has prepared and its suggestion that we
focus today’s debate on the protection of civilians
through United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
contribution of peacekeeping missions to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is extremely important.
We support providing missions with the necessary
mandates, personnel and equipment to enable them
to become effective mechanisms for early warning
when violations occur. Developing a comprehensive
framework for the future work of United Nations
peacekeeping missions so as to ensure the protection
of civilians and accountability for any violations that
occur during the implementation of their mandates
is essential to achieving a common and effective
understanding regarding the protection of civilians.
We stress that United Nations peacekeeping
missions should uphold the principles of respect for the
sovereignty and cultural specificities of host countries.
The protection of civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence in any armed conflict is the primary

42/87

12/02/2014

responsibility of the host country of any peacekeeping
operation. Peacekeeping missions with protection
mandates should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government in
that regard.
The successful conduct of tasks relating to the
protection of civilians, wherever a United Nations
mandate exists, requires a holistic approach that
encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the required training,
in addition to clearly defined and achievable mandates.
The consent of the host State as a fundamental principle
of peacekeeping must be respected. That requires
open and regular political discussions between senior
mission leadership and national authorities, as well as
effective follow-up on how to implement all mandated
tasks, including, of course, the protection of civilians.
Existing legal challenges in identifying who are the
civilians whom peacekeepers should protect and how
to differentiate them from insurgents in some areas of
operations should also be addressed.
As a major troop-contributing country, Egypt has
always stressed the need to establish high standards
of conduct on the part of peacekeepers. We provide
mandatory predeployment training for all our military
and police personnel, including training on the
protection of civilians according to United Nations
standards.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
reiterated the need for compliance with the provisions
of international law and international humanitarian
law by States and armed groups involved in armed
conflict. We believe that all parties, in particular
States, must comply with the principles of distinction
and proportionality in armed conflicts. All parties
must refrain from targeting medical facilities and grant
access to those providing humanitarian assistance.
Peacekeeping missions should consider tracking and
reporting any violations.
Egypt also supports what the report has called
for regarding the need to act consistently across all
relevant situations, considering that, without such
consistency, there will be a significant gap between the
commitments undertaken by the Security Council in
the abstract and the actual performance of the Council
in responding to violence against civilians in armed
conflicts, when performance matters most.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We share the concerns expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report about the increasing use of drones and
unmanned aerial vehicles, and its implications on the
nature of conflicts and the negative impact on civilians
and accountability. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, has to ensure rapid
and effective accountability for any violations against
civilians in armed conflicts. The establishment of
international and national commissions of inquiry into
such violations has proved to be an effective tool.
We call on the Security Council and the United
Nations bodies concerned to take decisive actions to
stop the indiscriminate attacks against civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territories and to lift the unjust
blockade imposed by the Israeli authorities on the
Gaza Strip. We remind Israel of its clear obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law in that respect and its primary responsibility,
as the occupying Power, for the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Egypt, for its part, is
doing everything possible to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip by opening the Rafah crossing
whenever possible, despite the security challenges that
we face in the Sinai.
Finally, we look forward, in future, to greater
attention and a broader discussion, including with troopcontributing countries, be devoted to the emerging
challenges linked with the protection of civilians
during armed conflicts, in addition to the current core
challenges identified in the Secretary-General’s report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I, too, would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this timely
and important debate.
More often than not, civilians constitute the bulk
of the victims of armed conflicts around the world.
Although, at the normative level, significant progress
has been made over the past decade to enhance the
protection of civilians, the same progress has not been
reflected on the ground. Security Council resolutions
and the Secretary-General’s reports, although
unanimously adopted and endorsed by Member States,
lack the required implementation in the field. A more
efficient and better coordinated protection effort is
needed in order for the necessary level of protection to
be reached.

S/PV.7109

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one of the core responsibilities of the
Security Council,. Although the main responsibility
lies in the hands of the parties involved in a conflict,
the protection of human dignity, along with the
consolidation of human rights, is the responsibility of
all Member States.
The use of new weapon technologies is a new threat
to civilians and, at the same time, raises questions
about the compliance of those weapons with the rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution set out
in international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. However, that same technology is
capable of facilitating the tracking and recording of
civilian casualties, while contributing to easing civilian
suffering and pain and to bringing perpetrators to
justice. Humanitarian access and the relevant corridors,
whenever feasible, should remain unimpeded.
On another note, attacks against journalists and
media personnel covering armed conflicts continue to
increase. Local journalists account for the majority of
victims, and female journalists are routinely targeted.
Combating impunity will undoubtedly decrease the
deaths, including among journalists working under
dangerous conditions.
Moreover, the role of journalists in conflicts is
further expanding, as they remain in the field from
the very beginning until the end of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Besides, journalists’ role in
reporting on conflict is dependent upon their ability
to provide independent and fair coverage of all sides.
However, with a changing media landscape that relies
increasingly on freelancers, Internet journalists and
social media, conflict journalists and their work are
becoming progressively more vulnerable.
My delegation shares the view that the protection
of civilians should include, in all its aspects, the
component of the protection of journalists in an effort
to introduce this dimension into the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding stages through a comprehensive
approach in which training plays a crucial role. Training
is a fundamental pillar, and Greece is contributing to
that effort by supporting training initiatives to develop
safety and security for civilians, peacekeepers and
United Nations staff in the field.
In that vein, we also welcome the presentation
provided on the protection of civilians in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and we note

14-2329643/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the attention given by the Special Committee and its
sensitivity to the issue of the protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians remains a serious
challenge for the international community, but we
cannot allow ourselves to fail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): Let me start by thanking
Lithuania for convening this important debate and
by expressing our appreciation for the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3.
Austria aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and the Human
Security Network.
In the interest of time, I will read out a shortened
version of my statement.
Fifteen years after the adoption in 1999 of the
first Security Council resolution mandating a United
Nations peacekeeping operation with the task of
the protection of civilians (resolution 1270 (1999)),
peacekeeping operations with protection-of-civilians
mandates are now the rule rather than the exception.
Significant progress has been made over the recent
years in implementing resolution 1894 (2009) with a
view to strengthening protection on the ground. The
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has contributed to an enhanced understanding
of protection-of-civilians activities among all the
relevant actors.
Other requests still need to be fully implemented.
In resolution 1894 (2009) and the presidential statement
adopted exactly one year ago (S/PRST/2013/2),
the Council reaffirmed its practice of requiring
mission-specific benchmarks in order to measure and
review the implementation of peacekeeping mandates,
and we hope for more information in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports in that regard. Concerning the use of
targeted sanctions and the designation of individuals
or groups committing violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law, we call on the Council
to ensure a more coherent practice by sanctions regimes
that have listing criteria linked to such violations.
In order to complement the United Nations work on
protection-of-civilians training modules with national
efforts to better prepare peacekeeping personnel,
44/87

12/02/2014

Austria has developed an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians that is open to
national and international participation by senior
decision-makers in the armed forces, police, civilian
administration and other civilian stakeholders and
experts. In addition, Austria continues its cooperation
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
will, for the second time this year, host a United Nations
training course on the protection of civilians for United
Nations peacekeeping personnel. Furthermore, Austria
stands ready to support the work of mobile training
teams on the protection of civilians with an Austrian
expert.
We commend the Secretariat’s efforts, including
the Chatham House seminar organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs last year,
to raise awareness about the devastating humanitarian
consequences of explosive weapons for civilians and to
restrict their use in populated areas, where they cause
indiscriminate harm. Austria welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas and
the Secretariat’s efforts to develop practical measures
and guidance to reduce their humanitarian impact. We
stand ready to assist in those endeavours.
Arms technology is undergoing rapid changes.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call on
Member States to ensure that attacks by armed drones
fully comply with international law. Unfortunately,
the circumstances of such attacks all too often
lack transparency, which in turn results in limited
accountability and limited or absent avenues for the
victims of such attacks to seek redress.
In a not-too-distant future, fully autonomous weapon
systems might become available. The implications
of those developments on the implementation of
international humanitarian law require a truly urgent
engagement by the relevant United Nations forums, as
well as further discussions.
Finally, parties to conflict have to take all feasible
measures to mitigate civilian harm resulting from
their operations. Innovative mechanisms have been
created by the International Security Assistance
Force in Afghanistan and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. The same is expected where United
Nations peacekeeping missions are authorized to
carry out targeted offensive operations. The provision
in resolution 2098 (2013) relating to MONUSCO’s
Intervention Brigade to take into account “the need to
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protect civilians and mitigate risk before, during and
after any military operation” is a welcome step in the
right direction. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a common United Nations system
to systematically record civilian casualties, and we look
forward to receiving an update on those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its States members.
The candidate countries Turkey and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; as well as the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I shall deliver a shortened version of my statement,
the full version of which will be circulated in the
Chamber and be made available on our website.
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the representatives of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings. I also
thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this
timely debate.
Let me start by stating that the EU continues to
be concerned about the heavy civilian casualties,
massive displacement of populations, serious human
rights violations and worsening of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic. In that
context, the EU is currently drawing up support for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights so that human rights monitors can be
deployed. We welcome the recent appointment of the
members of the commission of inquiry and encourage
the United Nations to swiftly deploy it on the ground.
We look forward to working with the United Nations,
the African Union and other actors in ensuring the
complementarities of ongoing initiatives.
A more robust response to the crisis is urgently
needed. For its part, the European Union has responded
swiftly through a combination of humanitarian,
stabilization and development support. The European
Commission has increased its allocation up to
€39 million and has furthermore substantially scaled
up its humanitarian engagement, moving to a collective
contribution by the EU and its member States of

S/PV.7109

€76 million by the end of 2013. The EU has been fully
mobilized since the beginning of the crisis to support
the efforts of our African partners.
As authorized by the Council, the EU is committed
to sending a crisis management mission in order to help
provide a safe and secure environment, protect civilians
in the Bangui area and permit internally displaced
persons to return to their homes, as well as to create
the conditions for humanitarian actors to operate freely.
The European Union thanks the Council for adopting
resolution 2134 (2014), which authorizes that action.
With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU
remains gravely concerned about the continuing and
indiscriminate bloodshed among the civilian population
and calls for the cessation of all violence so as to allow
urgent humanitarian access on the ground. It strongly
condemns the regime’s escalating and indiscriminate
attacks, including the use of Scud missiles, barrel
bombs and air and artillery strikes, and its brutality on
the ground, notably in Aleppo. The regime bears the
primary responsibility for the conflict. Its actions on
the ground are undermining the potential for genuine
political transition and are fuelling extremism.
We call on all parties to the conflict to immediately
uphold their obligation to protect civilians, as well as
medical personnel, facilities and transport, to allow
and facilitate immediate and unimpeded humanitarian
access to the whole of the territory and to guarantee,
without delay, the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel in the exercise of their duties. The EU will
continue to defend human rights and will remain active
in ensuring accountability for the widespread and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated in Syria.
The EU reiterates its call on the Security Council
to urgently address the situation in Syria with regard
to those aspects, including a possible referral to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as requested in
the Swiss letter to the Security Council of 14 January
2013. The EU recalls that all those responsible for
crimes against humanity and war crimes must be
held accountable. We reaffirm our support for the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, established by the Human
Rights Council.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2013/245) reminds
us of the challenges ahead. We have seen progress in

14-2329645/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

some areas. However, children in too many countries
are suffering terribly as a result of armed conflict. The
situation in Syria is of special and most urgent concern.
The EU reiterates its call in support of the “No Lost
Generation” strategy for the children of Syria. The
difficult situation of children in Mali and the Central
African Republic is also highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In cases where
the national authorities fail to take the necessary steps
to ensure accountability, the Security Council can, as
appropriate, play a more proactive role.
The ICC continues to play a crucial role in fighting
impunity. Serious crimes of international concern
should be dealt with by national judicial systems but,
when they are unwilling or unable to do so, States
parties to the Rome Statute should consider referring
those situations to the ICC. Further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council
and the effective follow-up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the ICC could assist in ensuring
accountability.
In addition to bringing perpetrators to justice, we
strongly believe in early and decisive action to try to
prevent such crimes from being committed and in the
need to forcefully remind the authorities responsible of
their primary responsibility to protect civilians, or be
held to account. There is much room for improvement,
including in the way in which the United Nations
system responds to early warnings and evolving
situations. The EU welcomes the Secretary-General’s
“Rights up front” initiative as an important element of
the Organization’s efforts to strengthen early warning
and prevent atrocities against civilians.
For a number of years, the mandates of many
peacekeeping and other missions have included
protection-of-civilians activities. Many challenges
remain in terms of the effective implementation of
those protection mandates, and we need to continue
to address them. The implementation of protection-ofcivilians mandates requires better planning support to
missions, gleaning the lessons learned effectively and
improving understanding of how to support host States
in protecting civilians.
46/87

12/02/2014

The EU also welcomes the use of new technology in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
supports the delivery of its protection mandate. We
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to further explore opportunities to use state-of-the-art
technology in peacekeeping missions.
In many ways, training is the cornerstone for
improving the implementation of the protection of
civilians by missions. For its part, in Somalia, the
EU has provided training to Somali soldiers, with
the prevention of the perpetration of war crimes and
other premeditated acts of violence against civilians,
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
among other elements, as an integral part. In future,
the European Union Training Mission in Somalia
will also provide strategic advice to the General Staff
in Mogadishu on designing and developing training
concepts, policies and programmes.
With the aim of assisting Malian authorities in
consolidating peace and security and, more generally,
in order to find lasting solutions to the crisis in the
Sahel region, in close coordination with other regional
and international stakeholders, from the beginning the
EU Training Mission in Mali has been incorporating
the issues of the protection of civilians, human rights
and gender in the training curriculum.
The EU civilian mission launched at the request
of Niger’s Government in the summer of 2012 aims,
in part, at strengthening the rule of law by developing
criminal investigation capacities and ensuring respect
for the criminal justice system.
Let me end by saying that the Security Council
should continue to request the Secretary-General to
explicitly report on the implementation of protection-ofcivilians mandates by peacekeeping operations.
The protection of civilians should also be a standard
benchmark against which we measure the success of
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for this month and for scheduling
several open meetings, such as today’s on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
nearly 15 years ago, the protection of civilians under
the imminent threat of violence has become an integral
part of United Nations peacekeeping mandates and a
core function for more than 95 per cent of the current
peacekeeping deployments. Today’s briefings addressed
protection issues from the peacekeeping, human rights
and humanitarian angles, thereby giving us a broader
picture of both challenges and opportunities.
By now, the protection of civilians within the
context of peacekeeping is a widely recognized norm.
We need to continue to work on the implementatin
of mandates and to refine them by focusing on the
consolidation and strengthening of the relevant
frameworks and mechanisms, compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law by all
sides, humanitarian access and accountability.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of wars and
conflicts. What is euphemistically called “collateral
damage” results in civilian deaths, injury and
displacement. Women and children become the primary
victims of violence and brutalization during conflicts.
We have done relatively better in situations where the
United Nations and the Security Council have invested
political and diplomatic capital and have deployed
peacekeeping resources. Pakistan fully supports the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and, as part
of many United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
have contributed to the efforts to achieve that objective.
Today, peacekeepers are tasked with protection-ofcivilians mandates in increasingly complex and volatile
situations. They are also mandated to do much more
work without the provision of adequate resources.
That reality on the ground has two direct negative
consequences: unmet expectations and heightened
concerns about the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. Both are evident in the recent
experiences in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Recent briefings in the Committee of 34, as
well as the statements made today, affirm that there are
limits to which peacekeeping missions can fulfil their
protection mandates within their respective areas of
operation, configurations and available resources. We
should incorporate lessons learned into the planning
and assessment stages that lead to the authorization of
the relevant mandates and resources by the Council.
A capability-driven approach, if pursued earnestly,
enhances the effectiveness of protection mandates.
Credible and feasible rapid-reaction capacities are

S/PV.7109

important, as are, increasingly, new technologies that
augment the situational awareness and operational
capability of missions. It goes without saying that the
mission leadership is crucial throughout the entire
process. As indicated by other speakers, consultations
with troop-contributing countries are essential in the
formulation of changes in mandates and in all phases of
peacekeeping operations.
Despite the varying views regarding robust
peacekeeping, the consensus remains strong around the
basic principles of peacekeeping. While peacekeepers
cannot be passive bystanders, they should not be
perceived as partisan. That is why the neutrality and
universal character of United Nations peacekeeping
activities are so important. Our experience has shown
that a proactive stance in implementing protection
mandates — such as through effective and frequent
patrolling, disarmament and demobilization — serves
as a credible deterrent and, in many situations, obviates
the need for the use of force.
Lastly, aklthough peacekeeping missions are there
to assist, the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians remains with the host country. Peacekeeping
missions cannot become an arm of a country’s national
defence force. It is therefore important to continue
to build national capacities in the rule of law and to
bolster security institutions, even as peacekeepers are
deployed in a country.
A clear distinction must also be made, as UnderSecretary-General Ladsous advised us today, between
the protection of civilians and the responsibility to
protect. The conflation of the two concepts creates
legal confusion. International consensus and legal
opinion support the view that for the protection-ofcivilians agenda, international humanitarian law covers
only situations of armed conflict. That consensus must
be respected. The mandate and discussion on that
item in the Council are also limited to situations of
armed conflict, especially those on the agenda of the
Council. That distinction must be maintained to avoid
the frequent drift into reporting about situations that
do not come under the purview of armed conflicts as
recognized by international law.
In his latest report (S/2013/689) on the protection of
civilians, the Secretary-General draw attention to the
use of armed drones in Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
occupied Palestinian territory. In that context, he raises
concerns regarding compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, in particular the

14-2329647/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

rules of distinction, proportionality and precaution. The
Secretary-General also underlines the related aspects
of the investigation of drone attacks, transparency,
accountability and the ability of victims to seek redress.
The Secretary-General also raises concerns about
the impact of armed drones on individuals, children,
families and communities in areas of Pakistan. Those
concerns include the interruption in the education of
children, the undermining of religious and cultural
practices and the fear of being caught in secondary
strikes.
Drone strikes have violated Pakistan’s sovereignty,
killed hundreds of civilians — men, women and
children — and radicalized more people. The use of
drones has therefore been counterproductive. In the
past month or so, there has been a pause in drone
strikes. That has given some respite to civilians in the
areas affected. What we have called for and continue to
call for is a cessation in the use of armed drones.
We support the presidential statement on the
protection of civilians adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3)
and, finally, we pay tribute to peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors in the field who, under very
difficult circumstances, are trying to protect civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to express our congratulations
to you, Madam, on your country’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the present
month. I also thank your delegation for the initiative of
convening this important meeting.
This year coincides with the one-hundredth
anniversary of the outbreak of the First World War,
a war that underscored the importance of creating
an international body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security. Following the failure
of the League of Nations to prevent the outbreak of the
Second World War, the United Nations was established,
giving the peoples of the world renewed hope that this
Organization, entrusted with the fundamental mandate
of maintaining international peace and security and
saving humankind from the scourge of war, would
succeed. Although the Organization has to date
succeeded in avoiding the outbreak of another world
war, it has not been able to put an end to war or to the
suffering of humankind.

48/87

12/02/2014

Despite the fact that 15 years have passed since the
Security Council first debated this item, namely, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in a series of
annual debates, practical experience has regrettably
proved that the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict clearly continues to be used selectively.
It has been repeatedly exploited in the service of
agendas that contravene the most fundamental norms
of international law.
My delegation has read the concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) presented by your delegation, Madam President,
to guide today’s discussion. We should like to underline
the following fundamental points.
First, preventative action — to prevent the outbreak
of conflict and seek the rapid and peaceful settlement
of crises — is the ideal means to protect civilians and
avoid the scourge of war.
Secondly, the fundamental responsibility for the
protection of civilians from any threat they may face,
including the responsibility to protect them from
terrorist acts, falls within the purview of the State
concerned; it is the only actor mandated to maintain
security and stability on its territory.
Thirdly, the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict cannot be settled except through full
commitment to the principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
foremost among them the principles of the sovereign
equality of States and non-interference in internal
affairs.
Fourthly, it is utterly unacceptable for the topic
of the protection of civilians to be taken up in an
opportunistic manner, thus rendering it a tool to serve
the political objectives and interests of influential
States. The exploitation by some Member States of
the issue of the protection of civilians, both within
the Security Council and beyond, and the application
of selective policies and double standards will only
further detract from the role entrusted to the Security
Council in the Charter.
Fifthly, the issue of the protection of civilians
must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner that
addresses any type of harm done to civilians, including
unilateral coercive measures imposed by some States
on the peoples of other States, thereby exposing them
to suffering and a slow death by depriving them of
daily necessities — including food, medicine and

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

fuel — actions that the United Nations has stressed are
illegitimate.
My delegation stresses the need to provide
protection to civilians under Israeli occupation in
the occupied Syrian Golan and the other occupied
Arab territories, and to put an end to the practices of
the aggressive Israeli occupying authorities against
them, with a view to ending the occupation. The
Council’s silence in the face of Israel’s violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law has led Israel to believe that it is
above accountability, and it has therefore persisted in
its aggressive policies, threatening international peace
and security and undermining the principles and rules
of international law.
It is regrettable that some States have once again
exploited this meeting to reiterate their allegations
relating to the situation in my country, in order to
disrupt the ongoing developments with regard to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the ongoing
Geneva II talks. Despite our objection to such methods,
we stress that the Syrian Government is more concerned
than anyone else for its own people. It is carrying out its
constitutional duty to restore security and stability and
to protect our people from the terrorism that is targeting
the Syrian State and the Syrian people.
In this regard, we call on the Security Council
once again to shoulder its responsibilities to condemn
the terrorism being carried out against Syrians and to
hold accountable those States that provide weapons,
money, training and safe haven to the armed terrorist
groups that cross borders in flagrant violation of all
international instruments and resolutions on counterterrorism, and to make those States withdraw their
mercenaries from Syrian territories and stop attempting
to foil all efforts to reach a political settlement of the
Syrian crisis, through dialogue, in a way that will allow
the Syrian people to decide their own fate, free from
agendas of extremism, terrorism and violence.
Finally, we find it very bizarre that the representative
of Israel would speak about the need for an intervention
by the United Nations in order to protect Syrians,
while Israel has continued for 60 years to occupy Arab
territories and to violate the most fundamental rights
of Arab peoples under this occupation. The call on the
United Nations to intervene in order to protect civilians
and those under Israeli occupation has been, and
continues to be, at the very heart of the statements by

S/PV.7109

many Member States, particularly under the item that
we are debating today. This call has always been met
with violations on a larger scale, in terms of continuing
the occupation, expanding settlements and ignoring the
legitimate rights of peoples under Israeli occupation.
Let me recall here that Syria has always believed in
the central role of the United Nations in international
relations, as evidenced by Syria’s cooperation with the
United Nations and its specialized entities during the
current crisis in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/689), for which we thank him, provides us
with a sad truth: the situation of civilians has worsened
in most armed conflicts. It is appalling to see that
terrorizing the civilian population has become an
integral part of the military strategies of many parties
to conflict.
In Syria, in the Central African Republic, in South
Sudan and in many other conflicts, we are confronted
daily with abominable violence against civilians. In
Syria alone, more than 10,000 children have already
died in the conflict.
Although the responsibility for those atrocities lies
with the parties to conflict, the international community
needs to do its utmost to improve the protection of
civilians in all situations of conflict. The genocide in
Rwanda 20 years ago is a constant reminder of that
obligation.
On Red Hand Day, let me recall that those who are
traditionally the most vulnerable members of society,
women and children, deserve our special attention and
protection.
We therefore welcome actions such as taken by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to break the
cycle of violence, rape and death affecting thousands
of civilians and in particular women and children.
While the situation on the ground remains volatile, we
also commend the role of the United Nations Mission

14-2329649/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

12/02/2014

in South Sudan in providing shelter and protection to
more than 70,000 internally displaced persons in South
Sudan. It is essential that we build on those examples.

the Geneva negotiations cannot in themselves produce
even small progress if they are not backed by active
international diplomacy.

We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
“Rights up front” initiative and call for its swift
implementation. The initiative, if taken seriously, has
the potential not only to help peacekeeping missions to
better protect civilians, but also to place the overall goal
of protecting people at the centre of the Organization’s
policies throughout the system. The implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions,
particularly concerning the need for protection against
sexual violence in conflict, is equally important in this
context.

We look to the Council to follow up on its
commitments and ensure that the basic principles of
international humanitarian law are upheld in Syria.
In that regard, Germany fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a strong humanitarian resolution.

We have seen how illegal and irresponsible transfers
of weapons can contribute to increased instability,
exacerbated conflicts, atrocities, human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law. We therefore welcome the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) as the first treaty that addresses those risks at
a global level by establishing clear and legally binding
criteria, also with regard to international humanitarian
law. The ATT needs to be swiftly signed, ratified and
fully implemented on a global scale.
What else can we do? In his recent reports,
the Secretary-General has identified a number of
challenges, some of which I would like to briefly touch
upon.
First, we need to ensure that those responsible for
grave breaches of international humanitarian law, in
particular for war crimes, as well as for violations of
human rights, are held accountable. Impunity fosters
crime. It is therefore crucial that we further strengthen
the International Criminal Court. We urge the Council
to insist that Member States cooperate fully with the
Court.
Secondly, the arbitrary withholding and denial
of humanitarian access in Syria cannot be tolerated.
Using starvation as a method of warfare constitutes a
war crime. We urge all parties to the conflict in Syria
to allow unimpeded humanitarian access to all people
affected, as the Council demanded in its presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).
Since then, the situation of civilians has only
worsened, in blatant disregard of the appeals made by
Syrians and the international community alike. The
Old City of Homs stands as testimony to the fact that

50/87

Finally, as witnessed in Syria and beyond,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians using explosive
weapons with wide impact in densely populated areas
remain
an appalling aspect of conflicts to which the
international community has to react. We share the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in that
context and welcome the Secretariat’s continued
engagement with Member States and others to raise
awareness of the issue and to provide further guidance
on the matter.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, let
me congratulate Lithuania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. We
offer our thanks and congratulations to the Lithuanian
delegation for placing this important item on the agenda
and for the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) it prepared, which outlines key elements for the
discussion today. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his substantive report on the issue (S/2013/689), as
well as the briefers for the information and insights
they have again imparted.
As a member of the Human Security Network,
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
this afternoon on behalf of the Network by the
representative of Slovenia.
For a number of years, we have discussed in this
Chamber the subject of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. A number of Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements on the issue
have been adopted. Yet, regrettably, we still see today
an alarming number of civilian casualties, including,
unfortunately, women and children, in many areas
plagued with armed conflict.
Since today’s debate focuses on enhancing the
protection offered by United Nations peacekeeping

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

missions, which is one of the five core challenges to
the protection of civilians highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral, I shall keep my statement within that scope.
First, the following principles are now well
established. It is the State that has the primary
responsibility to protect its citizens. All parties to
armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Leaders of
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates need
to understand clearly their mandates and priorities
derived from the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Likewise, military and police personnel and other troop
components at all levels in the chain of command need
to be fully informed and understand their mandates and
responsibilities. It is therefore essential that Member
States and the United Nations work closely to ensure
that those key elements are communicated to, received
and implemented by all those involved in such missions.
Secondly, it is essential that there be a common
understanding of peacekeeping mission protection
mandates by the relevant actors, namely, host countries,
troop- and police-contributing countries, parties to
the conflict, military and police personnel and other
protection actors. A clear and comprehensive United
Nations policy guidance codifying protection-ofcivilians mandates needs to be developed and revised
as needed. The guidance can be developed through an
exchange of information, experiences, best practices
and lessons learned among peacekeepers in the field, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries,
host Governments and other actors. With that type of
clear guidance, a mission’s planning process, strategy
development and translation into systematic operation
on the ground can be more effective. In turn, the
mission’s ability to protect civilians will be enhanced
and be more effective.
Thirdly, intensive predeployment and periodic
in-mission training, both on operational tasks and other
protection-related elements, is vital. Those elements
include, inter alia, international law, gender-based
issues and cultural sensitivity. Tailor-made training
courses for military, police and civilian personnel in
response to different situations on the ground also
need to be developed through close consultations and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
contributing countries.

S/PV.7109

Fourthly,
peacekeeping
missions
with
protection-of-civilians mandates are often conducted
with insufficient resources or with a lack of capacity or
both, which ultimately compromises their operational
ability to protect civilians. Therefore, the assessment
of threats to civilians must be incorporated into any
mission strategy, structure and resources before
mandating missions, so that they can be designed
properly and resources allocated accordingly.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General,
who, in his report, states that the informal expert group
on the protection of civilians is a valuable forum that
can provide the Council with information, analysis
and options on situations involving serious protection
concerns. The Council should consider making full use
of that body.
The protection of civilians is an important task that
allows for no compromise, so when the Council gives
missions the protection mandate and if we expect them
to perform their duties successfully, we must do our
utmost to support them. We must provide them with
adequate resources and equip them with the necessary
capacities.
In conclusion, I wish to thank and congratulate
Lithuania once again for continuing to focus attention
on this important issue. Let me reiterate that, in
Thailand’s view, durable peace is not tenable if civilians
lack security and are not safe. Furthermore, attacks
on civilians, whether deliberate or indiscriminate, are
unacceptable. Those who commit such crimes must be
held accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): We salute the initiative of
the Lithuanian presidency to bring this important topic,
highlighted by the recent crises in Syria, the Central
African Republic, Mali and other countries, to our
attention. It is worth noting the symbolism of holding
our discussions today on the International Day against
the Use of Child Soldiers. Slovakia would like to express
its appreciation for the work of Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Hervé
Ladsous and Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Yves Daccord.

14-2329651/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
The protection of peace and the prevention of war
are among the most important objectives of the United
Nations. Not long ago, we discussed in this Chamber
the lessons of war and the search for a permanent
peace in post-conflict areas (see S/PV.7105). In
today’s discussion we tackle another question: how to
achieve substantial progress in two equally important
tasks — the prevention of war and the protection of
civilians once a conflict breaks out.
In the event that we fail to prevent wars or conflicts,
we must combine our efforts, capacities, means and
resources to protect those who are most vulnerable,
namely, women, children, older persons and persons
with disabilities. Those groups are always the easiest
targets in conflict situations and the most likely victims.
But we should ask ourselves: can we take immediate
and well-focused action to ease suffering and provide
effective assistance? Can we protect volunteers, United
Nations employees and other dedicated women and men
who are providing or trying to provide humanitarian
assistance and relief, often putting their own lives
in danger? What is the price of overcoming political
divergences, national interests and global objectives in
situations where we see millions of people suffering,
when they are internally displaced, forced to flee their
homes or killed in military action? How do we protect
children recruited to fight, women used as human
shields, girls who are being sexually abused?
Blue Helmets and United Nations symbols are,
perhaps more often than we think, the only safe haven
they can hope for. By failing to take decisive action, we
betray those hopes, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the essence of humanity. But above
all, we betray ourselves.
The number of civilian casualties in current
conflicts is extremely disturbing. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689),
1.1 million people remain displaced in Somalia. More
than 2.6 million have been internally displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Civilians are also
targeted in other conflict and post-conflict zones, such
as Mali, Yemen, the Sudan and South Sudan. In those
conflicts, even United Nations peacekeepers have been
under attack.
In the Central African Republic, it was probably only
the swift action of the Security Council that prevented

52/87

12/02/2014

the worst-case scenario from occurring. Nevertheless,
more than 1 million people have been forced from their
homes, and the humanitarian situation is alarming. The
security situation there is still very fragile and, even
with the deployment of European Union forces on the
ground in the next few weeks, stabilizing the country
will be a challenge. To date, the conflict in Syria has
cost 100,000 human lives, and, since March 2011,
more than 6.2 million have been internally displaced.
More than 9.3 million people are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.
Through various channels, Slovakia has, as an
emerging donor, helped to lessen the suffering of
refugees from Syria and Mali. Last year, we joined
the family of donors in the Peacebuilding Fund, which
supports countries emerging from conflict.
Since the first peacekeeping operation was
mandated to protect civilians in 1999, we have
accumulated substantive information about possibilities
and limitations. While the Security Council has the key
role to mandate peacekeeping operations, we have to
face reality and seriously discuss the way forward.
Numerous challenges and shortcomings impede
peacekeepers’ capacity to effectively protect civilians
on the ground. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
recently acknowledged, the relevant actors continue
to struggle over what it means for peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians, in both definition and
practice. The perennial problem of many operations
is summarized very well by the Brahimi report from
2000 (see S/2000/809): peacekeepers may not be able to
justifiably use force against attackers in order to protect
civilians when they feel morally compelled to do so.
In the world of continuous globalization and growing
interdependence between national developments and
regional stability, we should look more deeply into
the concept of national sovereignty when dealing with
internal conflicts and should seek the highest possible
international legitimacy for our much needed action.
In that context, the role of an international body
for post-conflict justice and for taking action against
impunity for crimes against humanity should be
reinforced. In many instances, attacks against civilian
populations could amount to crimes against humanity
or war crimes. It is necessary that the individuals
responsible for such crimes be held accountable and
tried by an independent and impartial court of law. If
authorities at the national level are unwilling or unable

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to adequately address the issue, the International
Criminal Court should step in.
There are many areas in which we may improve the
situation of protecting the innocent and vulnerable. Let
me mention just a few of them.
First, global adherence to the Geneva Conventions
should be improved, especially to the Additional
Protocols of 1977, as well as to the protocols prohibiting
the use of certain weapons.
Second, we need to accelerate the acceptance of the
2000 Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, on the involvement of children in armed
conflict.
Third, we must improve the ability of national
and international units to reach people living in areas
affected by conflicts.
Fourth, the safety of humanitarian volunteers
and workers when accessing people in need must be
improved.
Fifth, a ban on the use of public facilities in war
must be fully implemented. It is unacceptable to
tolerate the use of civilian facilities such as hospitals or
schools as shields or covers for military operations, not
to mention using civilians as human shields. We must
stand firm against the recruitment of child soldiers.
Six, more effective mechanisms to monitor the use
of explosive weapons in heavily populated areas must
be created.
Seven, we should concentrate on the elimination of
post-conflict effects on the mortality rate of children
and women as an indirect cause of war. In ongoing
conflicts, men die more frequently in direct armed
actions, whereas women die more frequently in the
post-conflict period.
Eight, when appropriate and when on-site
developments require it, we must consider taking action
in the humanitarian field separately from political,
security or military decisions.
In conclusion, as a small step for the United Nations
but a leap for the Security Council, we commend France
for its initiative designed to limit the use of the right
of the veto in cases of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing or crimes against humanity. We suggest that
other members of the Council give serious consideration
to that initiative.

S/PV.7109

We welcomed the Secretary-General’s proposals
for further strengthening United Nations mandates
on the protection of civilians, and we call on Security
Council members to act consistently across all relevant
situations, while using a broad range of tools to improve
the actions of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): The Council will not be
surprised that Italy aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and with
that by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict. Nevertheless, we wish to add a few
remarks in our national capacity.
The stakes of today’s debate could not be higher.
The news we hear from several conflict areas is
appalling. The involvement of defenceless civilians in
armed conflicts seems to have become the rule rather
than the exception. Civilians are victims of senseless
violence. Neither children nor other vulnerable groups
are spared in, for instance, Syria, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic from massacres that have
ethnic, religious or political motivations. Our first
duty is therefore to state loudly and clearly that there
can be no justification for those acts and that those
responsible, whether individuals or Governments,
can be held accountable. The condemnation of the
international community and of the United Nations
must be unanimous and unequivocal.
The responsibility to protect belongs primarily to
States. That is a consolidated principle of international
law from which we cannot waver. But there are,
unfortunately, far too many situations in the real world
where that principle simply does not work because
States are too weak or somehow unable to deliver. That
is where the United Nations needs to grab hold of the
reins, which it can do only if its Members allow it to.
Take, for example, the fact that some 75,000 civilians,
mostly women and children, are being sheltered in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan camp in Juba. I
wonder whether that information is taken into account
by the people who so easily criticize this Organization
and dismiss its work to mitigate the troubles of the
world.
But the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
is a relatively new task for the United Nations and
its peacekeeping missions. It is a mandate that Italy

14-2329653/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

supports, in the firm belief that, as a world organization,
we have a duty to oppose the folly that too often invades
the behaviour of human beings. But it is a mandate that
requires appropriate tools and fresh thinking about the
relationship between peacekeeping and humanitarian
actions.
First and foremost, it requires the unity of
peoples and nations on the action needed, at least at
the humanitarian level. When humanitarian aid is
necessary and humanitarian access is requested, we
need to think solely about those who are suffering and
join forces to provide them with relief.
Secondly, Italy welcomes the most recent
developments in peacekeeping operations, notably the
introduction of modern technology. The unmanned
aerial systems currently used by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo already seem to have significantly
improved the situation on the ground and have enabled
the Mission to deliver on its mandate to protect
civilians. They have also strengthened the security of
the peacekeepers themselves. Without ignoring the
precautions those tools require, we strongly encourage
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to continue
on this path and to explore the possibilities offered
by modern technology for the protection of civilians.
Even in the most inaccessible and remote areas, new
instruments can help us to identify at-risk groups of
civilians, to deliver aid and to prevent attacks against
them.
Thirdly, it is essential that the Council strengthen
coherence in seeking recourse to the International
Criminal Court and helping the Court to fulfil its
mandate, including by ensuring appropriate follow-up
to Security Council referrals. The effective protection
of civilians depends on a culture of accountability in
all conflict scenarios. To strengthen the protection of
civilians, we must make sure the perpetrators of crimes
realize that the Council is serious about enforcing
individual responsibility for crimes under international
law.
Allow me to conclude with a word about the safety
of journalists. It is commendable that the Security
Council took up the question in an open debate in
July (see S/PV.7003). Thanks to journalists, we know
when the world’s worst brutalities are taking place. We
must remain vigilant on the issues. Protecting a free
press means protecting free speech, and a free press is

54/87

12/02/2014

what most threatens the perpetrators of crimes against
defenceless civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand applauds
the fact the Lithuania continues the tradition of elected
Council members paying close attention to the issue of
the protection of civilians.
The updated aide-mémoire adopted with today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3) is a useful
achievement. But we have to be realistic; it is only a
modest step. There are already many generic statements
from the Council on the protection issue. New Zealand
believes that, at this time, the real challenge is finding
ways to mainstream those thematic statements into the
real-life situations on the Council’s agenda and that we
can meet that challenge by carefully assessing where the
gaps lie between Council decisions and actual practice,
and determining how to fill and close those gaps.
In short, we urge that the effort of those who sit at
the Council table be focused on protecting real people
in real conflict situations and on achieving results.
It only adds to the tragedy in Syria that today we are
debating the issue of protection in the abstract, instead
of applying the energy of the Council to a real-life
protection crisis that calls out for attention — and it is
an agonized call, at that.
Moreover, other real life situations demonstrate that
conflict can easily re-emerge in countries where there
is already a United Nations peacekeeping or special
political mission. Experience is showing that such
missions need much clearer guidance on fulfilling their
protection mandates. Events in South Sudan, with tens
of thousands of civilians sheltering in United Nations
compounds — the safe haven of the Blue Helmets,
of which Slovakia has just spoken — and nearly
1 million people displaced, underline the importance of
peacekeeping missions being better prepared and better
mandated for implementing practical protection roles.
New Zealand is convinced that protection works
best when combined with prevention. That means
that the Council must be better informed of emerging
protection challenges. Early warning is one element of
that. Regular briefings focused on emerging civilian
protection challenges should be treated as essential,
not just as “nice to have”. But having been warned, are
we prepared to act? Sometimes, even early warning

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

is not enough. Finding the political will to act is
equally critical — in which regard the Council must
be congratulated for its prompt action, in December,
on South Sudan. But it is worth reflecting on how the
protection needs of civilians in the Central African
Republic and Mali might have been better achieved if
the Council had sent missions to those countries much
earlier in the evolution of their conflicts. Similar, lowerlevel missions were sometimes used in that way to good
effect in the past. And they should be used again.
Given its tremendous responsibility to civilian
populations in danger — sometimes in mortal
danger — capacity bottlenecks in the Council should
never become a reason for delaying action. The Council
must ask which aspects of its current practice carry
the risk of delay, and how they can be remedied, thus
allowing it to respond to an emerging threat to civilians,
even if it is already dealing with other crises elsewhere.
It may also be that United Nations peacekeepers
could be better trained and equipped to fulfil
protection-of-civilians mandates. Peacekeepers might
need the relevant enablers, including air assets, to
enhance situation awareness, mobility and force
protection. The finalization by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of tactical-level training
material on the protection of civilians is very welcome,
and its adoption by training centres and troopcontributing countries will further develop the capacity
and capability of peacebuilders and peacekeepers.
But, as we have said previously, in addition
to training and resources, actually implementing
a protection mandate also requires common
political will. Generating that willingness and
coordinating protection-of-civilians activities across
multidimensional missions is a complex task, and thus
New Zealand supports a strong protection-of-civilians
coordination capacity.
Like Germany, New Zealand is convinced that
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is one of the key factors threatening the safety of
civilians — indeed, threatening the safety of the
peacekeepers sent to protect them. Peacekeepers should
be mandated to assist in tracking illicit transfers of
small arms and in implementing restrictions on their
movement in their areas of operation. That would have
a real impact on the protection environment.
Looking forward, we must acknowledge that, when
the protection of civilians fails, all too often that failure

S/PV.7109

is accompanied by grave war crimes and atrocities.
As the representative of Italy has just emphasized,
where States cannot or do not fulfil their obligations
to ensure accountability for breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law, international
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, play an important role in preventing impunity.
As we have seen so recently, there are important
questions about when, and in what circumstances,
such mechanisms should play their role. Therefore,
Madam President, the debate on rule of law, which
your country, Lithuania, has scheduled for 19 February,
will be an ideal opportunity for the linkage between
protection and accountability to be explored. New
Zealand will welcome the opportunity to contribute to
that discussion as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke Pizzorno (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate and for
promoting the adoption of the presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2014/3). Similarly, I
wish to thank the speakers who preceded me for their
contributions to the debate.
Uruguay aligns with the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict. Nevertheless, my delegation would like to
make some comments in its national capacity.
We welcome the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/689). Unfortunately, despite
the significant progress of recent years — for example,
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, which as a troopcontributing country we can affirm — the civilian
population continues to be most affected in armed
conflicts, with the highest numbers of victims. The best
remedy to that problem should be prevention.
The prevention of massive violations of human
rights is indeed a complicated matter. However, the
question that arises is whether or not we could do more
in that area. The early identification of signs from the
field and the prompt sending of appropriate signals
to the relevant actors on the obligation to respect
the physical and moral integrity of individuals are
fundamental. That is a crucial priority aspect that, in
the year of the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, should prompt deep reflection.

14-2329655/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Finding a peaceful resolution, inclusive political
dialogue, the strengthening of State institutions, and
thus of the rule of law, the promotion of sustainable
socioeconomic development and reconciliation are
inseparable elements of prevention, while at the same
time represent fundamental elements for the creation of
durable protection environments.
But very often, certainly, prevention efforts are
fruitless or they fail. In those cases, it is absolutely
necessary to facilitate access by humanitarian
personnel and to ensure that all parties involved and in
all situations respect international humanitarian law so
as to ensure suitable security conditions for the those
personnel to perform their tasks. We agree with the
Secretary-General on the need to further discuss the
issue of arbitrary denial of access to relief operations
and the consequences of denial.
Promoting accountability is another basic element
in preventing the most serious human rights violations.
In that context, the competent organs must consistently
make use of the instruments established by the
international community, such as the International
Criminal Court and the fact-finding mechanisms.
On the other hand, the issue of registering victims
is among the areas of emerging attention that could
enhance the protection of civilians. We are sensitive
to that important activity, which is aligned with the
principles of humanitarian law, first in relation to some
of the most fundamental values of human dignity, and
also because of its potential practical effects, as such
a record could shed light on the causes of the harm
inflicted on civilians and the necessary measures to
stop the harm and prevent its recurrence.
For Uruguay, consultations with the troopcontributing countries participating in peacekeeping
operations are of particular importance.
Uruguay has taken note of the unique and
exceptional nature of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is reflected in what is also
a unique solution, contained in resolution 2098 (2013),
through the creation of an Intervention Brigade. It is
a solution that goes beyond the traditional concept of
peacekeeping operations. In my Government’s opinion,
such operations must continue to be developed in
accordance with the basic principles of the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of legitimate defence and in defence of the
mandate.

56/87

12/02/2014

It is essential, on the one hand, to receive
information from conflict zones in the most transparent
and accurate way possible, through authorities
competent in humanitarian and human rights matters.
On the other hand, we have to redouble the efforts to
strengthen consensus and confidence in the concept of
the protection of civilians, which is based on respect
for the universally accepted norms of international,
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the presidency of the Republic
of Lithuania for organizing today’s open debate and for
the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) distributed earlier,
which has significantly contributed to our deliberations
today.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
One of the purposes of the debate today is to see
the United Nations more engaged in addressing all
the relevant challenges. Therefore, the ability of the
international community to monitor and assess the
human rights situation in the areas where the authorities
of a given State cannot exercise their sovereign rights is
of the utmost importance. Safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors is essential not just for muchneeded humanitarian aid, but also as an early-warning
mechanism for assessment and evaluation of the
human rights situation on the ground to avoid further
deterioration of an already grave situation.
Fifteen years have passed since the Security
Council held its first open debate on this issue (see
S/PV.4046). But while reflecting on our endeavours,
we have to confess that innocent civilians continue to
be the overwhelming majority of victims, deprived of
existential necessities and basic human rights. Such
is the reality in many corners of the world. It includes
my country as well, which had to endure yet another
wave of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as an aftermath of a military aggression from a
neighbouring country a few years ago.
As I make this statement, 20 per cent of my
nation’s territory remains under Russia’s illegal
military occupation, and the number of refugees and
IDPs is over 400,000. Despite serious concerns raised
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

by the relevant United Nations agencies, hundreds of
thousands of Georgian IDPs and refugees continue
to be denied their internationally recognized right to
return to their homes — a right reaffirmed on numerous
occasions by the community of nations.
The people residing in the occupied regions and in
the adjacent areas are deprived of their fundamental
rights and freedoms, including the freedom of
movement, family life, the right to education in their
native language and other civil and economic rights.
Furthermore, the installation of barbed wire fences and
embankments and the so-called “movement detectors”
by the occupation forces along the occupation line in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions of Georgia — in
itself a gross violation of fundamental human rights and
illegal under international law — significantly affect
the livelihoods of the local population by dividing
families and communities, preventing people-to-people
contacts that are essential in building confidence
among communities. The local population — being
fenced off from arable lands and grazing fields,
potable and irrigation water systems and from local
cemeteries — are now compelled to flee their places
of residence, which creates a new wave of IDPs. We
see this as a continuation of a deplorable practice of
forcible demographic change.
Much of what I have just mentioned could have
been averted if the international community had had
a presence in the conflict area. Unfortunately, the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia was terminated following its blockage by
a Security Council member in 2009. The European
Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) is now the only
international mission on the territory of Georgia. It
plays a key role in averting the deterioration of the
situation on the ground, but being denied the access
to the occupied territories, the EUMM cannot fully
implement its mandate.
I brought here the case of my country as yet another
example of the urgent need to take concrete steps to
alleviate the consequences of armed hostilities for
civilians and to safeguard their rights and freedoms.
Strengthening our common efforts to protect civilians
in armed conflict has no alternative, and I would like to
join other speakers in calling on all the relevant actors
to ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to conflict-affected populations worldwide. For
our part, we stand ready to contribute to concerted

S/PV.7109

international efforts to ensure more efficient protection
of the civilian population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I should preface my
remarks by congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency for the month of February.
We also thank you for convening this open debate
and for your helpful and well-structured concept note
(S/2014/74, annex).
My delegation thanks the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their respective briefings.
While this year marks 15 years of pronounced
focus and engagement by the Security Council on the
protection of civilians, the international community
continues to witness the deplorable fact of increasing
civilian deaths. The Council’s efforts, particularly in
mandating a number of United Nations peacekeeping
operations with the protection-of-civilians tasks,
have heightened international attention and led to the
development of an important normative framework
on this issue. Yet many challenges have to be tackled
to satisfactorily enhance the safeguarding of people
during conflicts.
With that background in mind, Indonesia
welcomes the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/3), which reiterates the commitments
regarding this issue and reaffirms many important
elements from our previous relevant presidential
statements.
We recognize that protecting civilians is one
of the most challenging tasks of United Nations
peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2013/689) notes, peacekeepers are mandated to carry
out increasingly complex missions in increasingly
dangerous environments. That necessitates that
all peacekeeping stakeholders — not least the
Council — ensure that there is full clarity on the concept
and operationalization of the protection of civilians and
the provision of requisite equipment and resources, with
robust and rapid support to and coordination with Blue
Helmets and United Nations civilian staff at all times.

14-2329657/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We value the various significant steps on improving
the capabilities of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in that regard.
It is also important to be mindful in this
deliberation that the protection of civilians is the
primary responsibility of the host country. But human
life is most precious, and human dignity must be
safeguarded regardless. Indonesia strongly believes
that United Nations missions should conduct their tasks
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
host Government to protect civilians. In that context, I
would like to mention three points.
First, it is crucial to understand the local
dynamics — how the civilian populations try to protect
themselves — and to develop strategies that can
effectively address threats to civilians at the earliest
phase of mandate planning. Indonesia concurs with
the concept note that there is a lack of pre-mandate
planning and assessment on the protection of civilians.
It is therefore very important for the Secretariat and
the Security Council, in consultation with the host
Government and troop- and police-contributing
countries, to develop a sound pre-assessment of
the protection of civilians. There should be wellfunctioning mechanisms based on realistic assessments
that can identify early threats before mandate planning,
as well as during the various stages of missions.
Secondly, the coherence of efforts on the
protection of civilians by the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries,
host Governments and other relevant actors cannot be
emphasized enough. That collaboration and cooperation
can set up the necessary political dialogue to mitigate
hostilities on the ground between the parties in conflict
and harness the required equipment and resources,
yielding essential support and situational awareness for
the United Nations missions.
We stress the importance of regular evaluation
and reporting on the implementation of protection-ofcivilians mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
operations and an open dialogue between the
Secretariat and Member States, including in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to undertake
a comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
Thirdly, Indonesia wishes to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that the implementation of
protection-of-civilians mandates does not exceed the

58/87

12/02/2014

mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Indonesia recognizes the importance of monitoring,
evaluating and reporting by United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the implementation of
their protection-of-civilians mandates in that regard.
While the approach must be holistic, we reiterate that
protection mandates should be clear and achievable,
with explicit goals and guidelines for Blue Helmets.
Moreover, the senior mission leadership should maintain
close coordination and have a clear understanding of
the mechanisms available to work on the protection of
civilians.
In that context, we also underscore that the relevant
planning processes, guidance materials and training
modules, before and during deployment, should be
based on information gleaned from contemporary
missions and be up to the mark.
Indonesia concurs, in that regard, with the call made
in 2012 by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations on the importance of widely disseminating
information among peacekeeping personnel about
the Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian and human rights and refugee law,
including in training materials, in order to enable them
to better understand the interconnections between the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate
and those fields of law and to act accordingly.
Furthermore, as peacekeeping has grown to
encompass the broader humanitarian approach, it is
worth underlining the importance of strengthening our
efforts to increase the number of female peacekeepers in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Their role and
presence in United Nations peacekeeping missions have
been critical, including in supporting peacebuilding
and protecting civilians.
For its part, Indonesia is committed to enhancing
the capacities of its peacekeepers in the area of the
protection of civilians before deployment and will
continue to improve its training on that issue at our
peacekeeping training centre, the Indonesian Peace and
Security Centre.
Finally, we hope that the fifteenth anniversary of the
Council’s initial engagement on this issue will further
the promotion of the culture of protection and strengthen
cooperation and synergy among the concerned entities
inside and outside the United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
express our appreciation and respect for the historic
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
This debate is timely and important. The legal
basis for the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is of course strong, but a lack of clarity surrounds
the concept and its operationalization in practice, as
Lithuania mentioned in its excellent note for this debate
(S/2014/74, annex).
In our view, a close relationship exists between
the two concepts of the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians in conflict situations.
Conceptually, the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians are distinct. The responsibility
to protect is focused on four specific crimes: genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, in conflict and non-conflict situations. The
protection of civilians is different in scope, as it aims
to protect the general safety, dignity and integrity of all
human beings in conflict situations.
At the same time, the two concepts are also closely
related, as they share a similar normative foundation:
the protection of individuals is a primary responsibility
of the State, and prevention and early warning are key
to both concepts. The international community plays a
supportive role in both principles.
I would like to focus my comments today on
the protection of civilians on three issues, namely,
prevention, protection and accountability.
On prevention, it is obvious that the best way to
protect civilians in any situation is to prevent a conflict
from happening. The means of the pacific settlement of
conflict, as defined in Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations, are crucial.
Therefore, the Netherlands supports the United
Nations as a global actor in the field of mediation.
When it comes to the judicial settlement of conflicts,
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, which are both housed in the Peace
Palace in The Hague, are global icons of the pursuit of
peace by means of the law and of conflict prevention.
Another crucial element is early warning. My
Government fully supports the initiative of the United
Nations under the action plan entitled “Rights up
front”, which of course is also closely linked to the

S/PV.7109

responsibility to protect. We believe that interaction
between the countries in the Security Council and other
United Nations States Members should be improved so
as to strengthen early warning and early response.
When it comes to protection, international
humanitarian law should be respected by all parties
to a conflict. That is why, in January in Kenya, the
Netherlands organized a training course for military
and civilian representatives from 11 African countries
on gender awareness and the prevention of sexual
violence in peacekeeping.
Secondly, peacekeeping mandates, as has been
stated by other speakers, must be clear on the protection
of civilians, and implementation must be a priority.
New concepts, such as civilian-harm tracking, the
appointment of civilian-harm mitigation advisers and
ways to make amends, are being tested, and we believe
that the results warrant further assessment and use.
Peacekeeping missions must be better prepared and
outfitted for that part of their mandate, and we must
all chip in. The Netherlands is sending a peacekeeping
unit to Mali, and we deploy experts in the protection
of civilians and sexual and gender-based violence in
various United Nations missions.
Thirdly, the Security Council should act decisively
when civilians are at risk. In South Sudan, the Council
was united and swift. It is crucial that the Security
Council adopt the draft resolution on humanitarian
access in Syria. We are gravely concerned about
the situation in Homs and call for access on the part
of humanitarian organizations to all besieged areas
in Syria. Furthermore, my Government supports
initiatives aimed at voluntary restraint in the use of
the veto by the permanent members of the Council in
situations of mass atrocities.
I now come to my last point: accountability.
The perpetrators of crimes must of course not go
unpunished, and accountability is also crucial in view
of the preventative effect it has. In our view, the Council
should refer Syria and the crimes perpetrated there to
the International Criminal Court (ICC). In anticipation
of that, the Netherlands supports the Syria Justice and
Accountability Centre in The Hague. We do so with the
conviction that, even though the world at this moment is
unable to stop the tragedy, the foundation must be laid
for bringing the perpetrators of the atrocities in Syria
to justice when sufficient stability returns to Syria.
The Council could more consistently use its ability to

14-2329659/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

impose sanctions, or refer a situation to the ICC. That
would send a strong signal to perpetrators.
Together we can bring the concept of the protection
of civilians into practice. In our view, the Council’s
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians should
intensify its work and its interaction with rest of the
membership. Protecting civilians in armed conflict is a
fundamental objective that we must all work tirelessly
to achieve together, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands ready to be a part of that effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
I would like to commend Lithuania for having
convened this open debate on the important theme
of the protection of civilians, as well as the speakers
who have briefed us on the issues and challenges
encountered in the protection of civilians. I would
also like to acknowledge the outstanding work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
of the peacekeepers who risk their lives for the cause of
peace and security.
I will confine my comments to Kazakhstan’s
experiences of deployment in Iraq and other
interventions, as well as our future deployment in
the coming months to the missions in Liberia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Western Sahara and Haiti.
While it is clear that the maintenance of peace and
the protection of civilians is the joint responsibility and
task of the Security Council, DPKO, the Department
of Field Support, troop- and police-contributing
countries, peacekeepers themselves on the ground and,
most important, the host Government, it is often found
that adequate cooperation and operational clarity on
the implementation of mandates have not always been
possible. That is due to the differing perceptions and
geopolitical standpoints of members of the Security
Council, the parties involved in the conflict and the
players on the ground. There is therefore an imperative
need for a clear understanding, interpretation and
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) through
greater cohesion among mandates, intentions and
expectations, especially if civilian protection requires
the use of force.
Recently, the multifaceted nature of present-day
peacekeeping operations, with political, military, human
rights and humanitarian components and mandates and

60/87

12/02/2014

operating under the aegis of a single United Nations
mission, is a welcome development and leads to positive
synergies and ease in decision-making on enhancing
the protection of civilians. On the other hand, we run
the risk of blurring roles and responsibilities, especially
between humanitarian work, judicial investigation and
the provision of security through an armed presence,
all of which require our attention as we move forward.
We are pleased to note the efforts of DPKO, which,
together with the International Committee of the Red
Cross, humanitarian aid agencies and the countries
contributing troops and police personnel, in preparing
a conceptual framework to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various components of a mission.
Moreover, when United Nations forces are drawn into
an armed conflict, it is obvious that international
humanitarian law should govern military operations,
to which all parties to the armed conflict, including
United Nations forces, should adhere.
Civilian protection is complex and requires
multidimensional provisions and different competencies
and skills for each vulnerable group: women and
children subject to horrific atrocities; child soldiers;
survivors displaced by force or, for lack of choice,
taking refuge in camps where they are often defenceless
against armed attacks and harassment; victims maimed
by mines and other indiscriminate munitions; and
those dying of the indirect effects of armed conflict,
such as disease, malnutrition and famine. Each mission
therefore must bring together many different actors over
time, from planning to execution, including the active
participation of women at each stage of the process.
Maintaining relations with host countries is a
critical issue, particularly in situations where the host
Government bans peacekeepers from entering the
country or decides to expel peacekeepers before they
have completed their mandates, thus jeopardizing the
safety of the civilian population.
My delegation recalls with great appreciation the
operational innovations in a number of missions, such as
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite the
limited resources and hazardous security environments.
Those operations have increasingly used and developed
mobile operational bases, quick- response units and
early-warning systems to anticipate, prevent or deter
violence against civilians or to rapidly intervene to stop
it. Such examples are worthy of replication.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The issues of mission size, troop strength, adequate
resources and equipment, especially for remote areas,
the expertise of personnel and their commitment and
cooperation among the parties are factors that lend
credibility to any mission — the greater their extent,
the greater the effectiveness to protect civilians against
armed attacks by Government forces or rebels. States
Members of the United Nations are therefore urged
to make larger contributions and to provide capacitybuilding and technical assistance for peacekeeping
operations and to enable the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office to fully discharge
their functions.
Kazakhstan, in bidding for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2017 to 2018, is
committed to working with the international community
in supporting and strengthening the capacity of DPKO
and the Security Council to fulfil their peace and
security mandates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General for having submitted
his tenth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2013/689). We agree with his conclusion that
the current situation leaves little room for optimism.
Cuba supports the need to protect civilians in
armed conflict in accordance with international law, in
particular, international humanitarian law, enshrined in
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
We are nearing the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization’s establishment as a result of the resolute
decision of its peoples to protect future generations
from the scourge of war. We have been successful in
preventing a third world war but not in avoiding wars
altogether. That is still unfinished business of the
Organization and is the responsibility of all its States
Members. Nothing justifies the killing of innocent
people, and Cuba strongly condemns such action
wherever it may occur. Nor do we accept genocide in
the name of peace or the spurious justification to protect
civilians to conceal the real objective of overthrowing
a political, economic and social order that the people
subject to the aggression have decided to build in the
exercise of its soveriegn powers, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and their
self-determination.

S/PV.7109

As States Members of the United Nations, we
must act decisively to prevent conflicts. Preventing
their outbreak is the safest and cheapest way to protect
civilians. As Member States, we must strictly uphold
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for its principles and purposes. We must not foment or
fuel conflicts when they unavoidably occur. The pursuit
of peace, and its strengthening once it is achieved, must
be the main objective when a conflict flares up. United
Nations peace forces must devote their efforts and
resources to achieving those objectives.
There is no justification for world military spending
continuing to reach astronomical figures. Today, it
amounts to $1.75 trillion, which is equivalent to 2.5 per
cent of the world’s gross domestic product. The arms
race is not slowing down. On the contrary, every day
we see the appearance of new and more sophisticated
kinds of weapons. Against whom will those weapons be
used? Are they intended to protect civilians? The wars
in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya, to mention but a few
examples, show that that is not the case. The civilian
deaths in those wars were more than 90 per cent of the
casualties.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
particular those that have a mandate to protect civilians,
must be guided by the principles of the Charter and
under no circumstance become a means to change
Governments or to engage in military aggression. The
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility of
the host State of the peacekeeping operation. United
Nations peace force mandates must therefore be
implemented without prejudice to the responsibility of
the host State.
It is important to recall that the General Assembly
has the primary responsibility in the United Nations for
developing concepts and polices and for dealing with
the budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations. In
that context, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations is the only forum in the United Nations with
a mandate to broadly review all aspects of peacekeeping
operations. Its recommendations cover the question of
the protection of civilians and are very relevant for
today’s debate.
Coordination among the host countries of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and troop- and
police-contributing countries is essential. In his report,
the Secretary-General also highlights the modifications
made to the mandates of some field operations so as

14-2329661/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to authorize offensive actions. That is a delicate and
contentious point, in the light of the basic principles
governing the operation of peacekeeping missions of
the Organization since its inception: respect for the
sovereign equality, the political independence and the
territorial integrity of all States, and non-interference
in their internal affairs. Member States must ensure
that those principles are strictly upheld and remove any
barriers to their application.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
regarding the use of new technologies, in particular
of remote-controlled unmanned aircraft and so-called
autonomous weapons systems. If we truly want to take
action to protect civilians in armed conflicts, we cannot
leave such developments out of our deliberations. The
General Assembly should consider them with a view
to preventing such technologies from being used to
commit extrajudicial killings and other crimes against
innocent civilians. In addition, those responsible must
face justice and be held accountable for their crimes.
The Security Council should not stand on the sidelines
of those issues.
The report of the Secretary-General remains
silent once again on the dangers posed by nuclear
weapons, despite the fact that some nuclear-weapon
States stand ready to use them, even in conventional
conflicts. The international community is redoubling
its efforts to finally achieve the goal of a world free
of nuclear weapons, which is the only sustainable
solution in response to the immense threat they pose.
On 26 September, we will mark the first International
Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
as declared by the General Assembly in its resolution
68/32. The humanitarian consequences of such weapons
are part of the problem, and Cuba advocates that they
be addressed with the same approach.
It is impossible to advocate for the effective
protection of civilians in conflicts while at the same
time defending the use of nuclear weapons as part of
military doctrines. It is impossible to advocate for the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflicts while
at the same time stoking armed clashes and supplying
weapons to non-State actors, as is occurring at present
in Syria. It is impossible to advocate for the effective
protection of civilians in conflicts while at the same
time being complicit in the crimes being committed
against the Palestinian people and other Arab peoples
under occupation.

62/87

12/02/2014

The region of Latin America and the Caribbean
has taken a leading role in promoting peace and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Just a few days ago,
on 29 January, the leaders of theStates members of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
meeting at the second Summit of the Community in
Havana, declared Latin America and the Caribbean
as a zone of peace, as part of a comprehensive process
that seeks to end forever the threat or use of force as a
means of resolving conflicts, social inequality, poverty,
illiteracy and the lack of free and universal access to
basic services such as health and education — a world
guided by solidarity and cooperation among our peoples
to achieve prosperity and a region where human rights
are promoted and protected, including the rights to
development and to live in full freedom and dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this timely and important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to thank High Commissioner Navi Pillay,
Under-Secretaries-General Valerie Amos and Hervé
Ladsous, and Director-General Yves Daccord for their
presentations.
Brazil firmly believes that conflict prevention
is one of the most effective ways to protect civilians.
The international community must be guided, first
and foremost, by the objective of avoiding the risks of
armed conflict and the human costs associated with it.
In situations where conflicts occur, diplomacy should
be given priority and coercion should remain a last
resort. As the international community has observed
in many of the challenges it has had to confront, the
mirage of the military solution often degenerates into
the nightmare of greater civilian suffering.
Where coercive measures may be contemplated,
the use of force needs to be as moderate as possible, in
order to avoid harming civilians, who must be protected.
That is why Brazil is of the view that the international
community should not only abide by its responsibility
to protect civilians, but also demonstrate responsibility
while protecting civilians.
Furthermore, as highlighted on previous occasions,
we understand that, in order to create a more stable
environment for civilians, it is crucial to address the
root causes of conflict. Social and economic issues can
become potential drivers of conflict. A comprehensive

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

approach is of the utmost importance for achieving
sustainable solutions and, as a consequence, the
long-term protection of civilians. Also, in a world
with thousands of nuclear weapons, civilians will be
truly safe and protected only when genuine nuclear
disarmament is materialized.
As the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) prepared
by Lithuania rightly underlines, 2014 marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the Security Council’s formal
engagement with the protection of civilians. The United
Nations has made great strides in this area since then,
both in the Council and in other forums. Protection
mandates are now regarded as an essential dimension of
peacekeeping operations. The international community
agrees that it is part of our collective responsibility to
safeguard civilians from the scourge of conflicts. The
commitments that all Member States undertook in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights must be upheld.
However, as is pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report (S/2013/689), the current
state of the protection of civilians leaves little room
for optimism, with serious violations being reported
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
occupied Palestinian territory and elsewhere. Clearly in
many cases, a military-centred approach to peace and
stability, with the aim of providing improved protection
to civilians, has not achieved satisfactory goals from
either a security or a moral perspective. That only
enhances our responsibility in ascribing priority to
mediation, diplomacy and negotiation. If we mean what
we say when we adopt texts affirming that there is no
military solution to a certain situation, we must act
accordingly and invest more resources in mediation and
preventive diplomacy.
In peacekeeping operations, the protection of
civilians should be seen as a multidimensional task to
be pursued by all mission components in the field, and
by both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support at Headquarters.
Let me also recall that we are currently witnessing
new experiments in some pivotal peacekeeping
concepts. The authorization for more robust and
offensive mandates, which may pose serious risks to
the protection of civilians, requires an even higher and
more careful degree of planning and training. It is also
essential to ensure that peacekeeping missions have the
capabilities and resources they need to discharge their

S/PV.7109

protection responsibilities as effectively as possible.
Too many missions lack the equipment, personnel or
assets that are necessary to properly protect civilians.
The humanitarian imperative that should guide the
United Nations requires that the protection of civilians
be implemented in a universal and non-selective manner.
It is worth recalling, in that regard, that multilateral
efforts must comply with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including in
the context of the fight against terrorism.
We should also reflect on the use of new weapon
technologies, particularly the use of drones. As the
Secretary-General emphasizes in his report, the use of
such technologies raises important concerns over
“compliance with international human rights law
and with the international humanitarian law rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution”
(S/2013/689, para. 26).
The International Committee of the Red Cross
has also underlined that there can be no doubt that
international humanitarian law applies to new weaponry
and to all new technology used in warfare.
One should not underestimate the complexities
that arise from the use of such new autonomous
weapons systems and their extraterritorial deployment,
which, especially when armed, may violate airspace
sovereignty, including in areas outside of conflict
zones. Many elements have to be carefully considered,
such as the fact that armed drones subject targeted
countries, communities, families and individuals to a
high degree of asymmetric vulnerability, in defiance of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights.
When discussing the protection of civilians, one
should also note that the adoption of sanctions may
have a profound negative impact in the lives of the
civilian population, while not necessarily contributing
to the solution of a crisis. As a matter of fact, the rush
to economic sanctions may aggravate situations of
concern, instead of resolving them. In many occasions,
it creates a logic of punishment and isolation, instead of
a dynamic of dialogue and persuasion.
The situation in Syria serves as an example in
that regard. The international community has failed
so far to reach an agreement to end the provision
of weapons to parties in conflict, which would be
instrumental in protecting civilians and would send

14-2329663/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a clear message indicating that there is no military
solution to the conflict. On the other hand, some States
have decided to adopt unilateral economic sanctions,
which, as demonstrated by the Human Rights Council’s
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, end up having a harmful
impact on the Syrian civilian population.
Brazil believes that the fifth revision of the
aide-mémoire prepared by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and adopted by
the Council today (S/PRST/2014/3, annex) is a useful
and practical lessons-learned guide. We hope that it
will further contribute to the concrete implementation
of the Council’s decisions on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The Council can count on Brazil’s
support for that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me congulate
Lithuania on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February and for
organizing this debate. We appreciate the briefings
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2013/689), which is the basis of our
discussions today.
Botswana attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Our contribution to
the discussions on that thematic area, including
peacekeeping, and on how best to assist Governments
in protecting their own populations remains a key
priority for my delegation. We remain committed to the
promotion of and respect for humanitarian principles
in accordance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law. We believe that this is the best
way to achieve an effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the necessary space to access vulnerable
populations in conflict situations.To that end, we
reiterate our long-held belief, which is shared by many,
that States have the primary responsibility to protect
their own populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The promotion of accountability for human rights
violations and access to justice also remains a key issue
64/87

12/02/2014

for my delegation. Botswana joins the international
community in deploring the continuing human rights
violations in battlefields around the world where
innocent civilians have become casualties of merciless
killings by warring factions. We are disheartened by
the fact that perpetrators of those crimes continue to
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their acts and deeds.
As a friend and supporter of the International
Criminal Court, we have a commitment to upholding
the rule of law, and we have strong faith in the
institution as an international court of last resort.
We remain concerned that hundreds of human rights
abusers remain at large, frustrating the course of justice
and endangering innocent women and children. We
call for collaboration and coordination between the
International Criminal Court and the United Nations,
through its peacekeeping missions ,to hunt down, arrest
and investigate perpetrators of human rights abuse.
We believe that this synergy will go a long way in
strengthening the international criminal justice system
and putting a human face on the victim. We believe that
the international community, as a peace-loving world,
has a moral obligation and responsibility to intensify
efforts to protect innocent civilians, especially women
and children, who are often victims of torture and rape
and other sexual abuse.
Turning to the report of the Secretary-General,
my delegation takes note of the five core challenges
to enhancing the protection of civilians. We note that
several initiatives are being pursued in that regard.
We also recognize the attention drawn to the concerns
expressed by an increasing number of States about the
emergence and use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. We share the Secretary-General’s view on the
need to strengthen the protection of civilians from the
use of those weapons and that parties to any conflict
should refrain from their use.
With regard to the role of peacekeeping and
other missions, we take note of the deployment of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in many countries around the world as the most
significant action taken by the Security Council. The
proliferation of such missions illustrates just how
instrumental they are in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We recognize the complex and
violent environments in which peacekeeping personnel
operate. We also share the view that care and attention
should be given to strengthening missions’ capabilities.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

To achieve that, we believe that constant training and
capacity-building of personnel before deployment is an
absolute necessity.
Botswana believes that timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access is a fundamental prerequisite
for humanitarian action to save the lives of civilians.
However, we note with regret the challenges that
continue to constrain humanitarian response in a
number of situations, as stated in the report, including
restrictions on movement and violence against
humanitarian workers.
Regarding accountability for war crimes and
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, we
note the important measures that some States continue
to be take, but we believe that more needs to be done
to support the Secretary-General’s recommendations in
that regard.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s support
for the international community’s efforts to protect
innocent civilians. I wish to stress the importance of
consolidating and ensuring the implementation of the
existing normative frameworks on the protection of
civilians in country-specific situations.
Finally, we support efforts for better coordination
and cooperation within the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, as well as with other peacebuilding actors,
for promoting engagement in fragile and conflictaffected countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for organizing this important
debate.
The framework for the protection of civilians has
increasingly advanced since the human tragedies of the
Rwanda and Srebrenica genocides. The need to protect
and assist civilians affected by armed conflict has been
stressed in numerous Security Council resolutions
since 1999. The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/689), the recommendations made by the Internal
Review Panel on the United Nations Action in Sri
Lanka, and the agenda entitled “Rights up front” have
been the latest examples that have contrubuted to the
elaboration of a conceptual and normative framework
related to the protection of civilians. It is now time to
look into how to translate that into practice.

S/PV.7109

However, the civilian death toll continues to
rise, with recent alarming signals coming from
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, among many other places. The SecretaryGeneral’s report points out a multitude of challenges
in Syria, ranging from attacks on civilians and civilian
deaths to displacement, a lack and arbitrary denial of
humanitarian access, the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, the indiscriminate use of heavy
wepons and aerial bombardments, summary and
extrajudicial executions, enforced disapperances and
attacks on schools, hospitals and other public facilities,
among many others.
The role of peacekeeping and other missions in the
protection of civilians in conflict is essential. It is high
time to start developing coherent and effective general
strategies in order to respond to the ever-worsening
situation of civilians in armed conflict. Those strategies
should also respond to the changing international
context and the new realities on the ground.
States have the primary responsibility for
protecting their civilians. Parties to conflict must
uphold humanitarian and human rights principles and
comply with their international humanitarian and
human rights obligations, ensure accountability and
provide the necessary support and services to those who
are suffering or have suffered in situations of conflict.
The United Nations and the international community
must assist them in this burdensome task, supporting
them in terms of capacity-building and the provision
of available resources in times of need, upon request,
and taking the necessary measures when the actors
primarily responsible fail to do so.
Monitoring and reporting are among the most
important contributions that peacekeeping and other
missions can provide, especially in field missions
where accessibility is a problem. United Nations and
other missions can be crucial sources of trustworthy
information, which can lead to awareness-raising as
well as to better planning, protection and response. That
increases the importance of objective, consistent and
responsible reporting. From this perspective, we also
fully support fact-finding missions and commissions of
inquiry, and we believe that we should be able to make
better use of their findings. To that end, States should
provide full access to mandated missions to observe
and report.

14-2329665/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Furthermore, the United Nations, its missions and
its agencies could play a valuable coordinating role
among the many actors involved, which could contribute
towards realizing protection-of-civilians mandates. For
United Nations missions and peacekeeping operations to
achieve those goals, it is essential that they be provided
with necessary support, equipment and resources.
Disadvantaged categories of the population, such
as women, children, people with disabilities and older
persons, should be given special attention in the process
of the design of protection-of-civilians mandates and
strategies, as well as in the training programmes of
military, police and civilian personnel. The prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, as well
as the provision of services to those suffering from such
violence, should be a particular area of focus.
There is a compelling need, in working on such
strategies, to listen more attentively to regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors that are active
in crisis areas. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/689) highlights the comprehensive and crosscutting nature of efforts relating to the protection of
civilians and the importance of bringing together
different actors towards that end. Mediation and other
conflict-prevention mechanisms should be utilized to
the fullest extent. As such, we welcome the relevant
part of the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) prepared by
the Lithuanian presidency, which emphasizes the need
to consult a broad range of actors in the implementation
of civilian-protection tasks and beyond.
For protection-of-civilians mandates to be fully
realized, the strong support of the international
community is essential. The Syrian crisis, which is
resulting in the loss of thousands of civilian lives before
our very eyes, is a sad and striking reminder of the
importance of unity and immediate joint action.
In concluding, I would like to stress our appreciation
to the hardworking personnel of the United Nations,
whose courageous and tireless efforts help prevent the
loss of the lives of thousands of civilians around the
globe every day.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I wish at the outset to
align my delegation with the statement delivered on
behalf of the EU and its member States.

66/87

12/02/2014

In his most recent report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/689), the SecretaryGeneral concludes that the current state of the protection
of civilians leaves little room for optimism. His report
describes in stark terms the violence, insecurity
and human rights violations which are at present
characteristic of Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Iraq, Mali, South Sudan and Syria.
Although those conflicts and insecure environments
have their own distinctive features, they have at least
one element in common: it is civilians who bear the
brunt of the suffering being inflicted and who account
for the vast majority of the casualties.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies, of course, with the parties to a given
conflict. There is, however, a crucial role to be played
by United Nations peacekeepers. The protection of
civilians caught up in war remains at the heart of what
the United Nations does and what it stands for. As the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and its member States put it, the protection of civilians
must be the benchmark against which we measure the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In his report, dated 22 November 2013, the
Secretary-General urges Member States to ensure
that their peacekeepers are given the pre-deployment
training they need for the protection of civilians
according to United Nations standards and that
important resources such as air mobility assets and
early warning are provided along with troops.
We have seen the difference made by 3,000 wellequipped South African, Tanzanian and Malawian
troops in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Force
Intervention Brigade. To complement the deployments
made by traditional large troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat should make a concerted effort to
broaden the base of troop contributors. The Security
Council and the Secretariat should work to enhance
interaction with all troop contributors, in accordance
with presidential note 630 (S/2013/630) of last October.
This year we are marking the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide in Rwanda. It is also 15 years since the
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999). During this period,
we have seen a number of positive developments relating
to the role of United Nations peacekeepers in protecting
civilians. These include the increased integration of

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians into the mandates for United
Nations peacekeeping missions; improvements in the
capacity of these missions, including the establishment
of women’s protection advisers and of mobile human
rights teams; and the increased role played by regional
organizations in relation to preventing and limiting
violations of international humanitarian law.
But significant challenges remain. There has
been an alarming growth in the incidence and scale of
intra-State conflicts, which are responsible for rising
civilian casualties and where we are also seeing — as
in South Sudan at present — the increased targeting of
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel.
My delegation welcomes the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in Security Council resolutions.
We would like, furthermore, to see the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping missions strengthened
through standardized in-mission training, through
the development of protection-of-civilians mission
strategies, and through resources being made available
which would permit a greater focus on prevention and
early-warning analysis.
Small arms are the weapons of choice in many of
today’s conflicts. As a strong supporter of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT), Ireland looks forward to the early
entry into force of ATT provisions, which will help to
stop destabilizing flows of arms into conflict regions.
We are also keenly aware of the excellent work being
undertaken by the United Nations Mine Action Service,
including the steps it is taking in Libya and elsewhere
to secure and demilitarize stockpiles of weapons and
ammunition. If such work had been possible in the
Central African Republic during the course of 2013,
significant amounts of weaponry might have been kept
out of the hands of militant groups, and civilian lives
would have been saved.
It is a truism that the most effective form of
protection is prevention. And yet it remains the case
that far too little emphasis is placed on peacebuilding
and prevention. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan is on the whole a good example of the impact
that a United Nations mission can have in mitigating
the risks to a local population. Yet there are also clear
lessons to be learned from recent events there. In South
Sudan and in other fragile or post-conflict societies, the
need to build sustained and resilient peace, including
through efforts towards reconciliation, has never been
more apparent.

S/PV.7109

Nowhere, finally, is the need for protection of
civilians more apparent than in Syria, where more
than 3 million people remain trapped in areas of
heavy fighting which are besieged by Government or
opposition forces. Under-Secretary-General Amos has
spoken frequently and eloquently of the humanitarian
plight of ordinary Syrian men, women and children.
While the regime bears primary responsibility for the
conflict, both the authorities and armed opposition
groups must take immediate action to uphold
international humanitarian law and to facilitate the safe
and unhindered delivery of assistance to those who so
urgently need it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank the Lithuanian
delegation for taking the initiative to convene today’s
open debate on a very serious issue that has been the
subject of a series of debates in the Security Council
for almost 15 years, but with little progress to show.
Clearly, it is very difficult to make progress on such a
complex and difficult issue.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
treaty obligation under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, which States have
the responsibility to respect and observe. But few treatybased obligations are as abused and overlooked as the
obligation to protect civilians in armed conflicts. That
is a real tragedy, and it highlights how much we have
failed as an international community. There can be no
higher obligation than protecting civilians — women,
the young and the old — during times of armed conflict.
As mentioned earlier, the protection of civilians
is also a treaty obligation that all self-respecting
nations have a responsibility to scrupulously observe.
I am deliberately stressing the role of the State in this
context because States obviously have the primary
responsibility for ensuring the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict. I do so also because in the
various reports of the Secretary–General on the matter
there appears to be a yawning gap with respect to the
way in which the role of the State is presented. I will
come back to that shortly, but first permit me to make
a general comment on the five challenges to ensuring
more effective protection for civilians that have been
underlined by the Secretary–General in his various
reports.

14-2329667/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

While all five challenges — enhancing compliance
by parties to conflict with international law, enhancing
compliance by non-State armed groups, enhancing
protection through United Nations peacekeeping
missions, improving humanitarian access, and
enhancing accountability for violations — are all
extremely relevant, one wonders nonetheless if there are
no other challenges that are possibly equally relevant.
From our experience in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) region, it appears
necessary to stress the value of respecting the
principles of international law governing inter-State
relations. That is critical, including from the point of
view of enhancing trust — which is a critical element
in this endeavour — between humanitarian agencies
of all kinds and their workers, on one hand, and the
concerned States, on the other.
Another challenge is the need to enhance
transparency with respect to the way in which those
who take up the noble task of protecting civilians in
armed conflicts as a vocation carry out their activities.
It must be emphasized that while indeed there are those
who take their responsibility and calling seriously, there
are also adventurist types who are there to help what
they take to be the underdog and give scant attention to
the concerns of State authorities. The result is suspicion
directed at the activities of those who carry out their
obligation with scrupulous neutrality. The cause of the
protection of civilians suffers as a result.
There is also sound justification for objecting to
the way in which one of the five challenges mentioned
in the report (S/2013/689) of the Security-General is
supposed to be promoted. This relates to what is referred
to as enhancing compliance of non-State armed groups
with international law. First of all, that fails to make
a distinction between situations where States have
collapsed and situations where there are States fully
capable of discharging their responsibilities but which
might face difficulties with respect to some part of their
territories and for a given duration of time. The reports
of the Secretary-General rely heavily on the work of the
Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law
and Human Rights to find ways of ensuring compliance
by non-State armed groups with international law.
In our view, that goes overboard in seeking with
incentives with which to cajole non-State armed groups
into offering their cooperation. It seems clear that the
result of all of that is the partial undermining of State

68/87

12/02/2014

authority. In the long run, the cause of the protection of
civilians also suffers.
That brings us back to what I said at the beginning
with respect to the gap in how the role of the State is
presented in the reports of the Secretary-General. We
in the IGAD region have had a lot of experience in that
regard. Of course, based on the latest developments in
our region, we would be mindless to ignore the failure of
States to provide protection to civilians. That requires
extensive analysis, for another day. But different
situations should not be conflated, and context matters.
Where there are strong State institutions, undue
overtures to non-State actors might contribute to the
weakening of States, thus compounding the challenge
of providing protection to civilians.
Undoubtedly, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is becoming more, not less, complex and
difficult. Technological progress and resort to various
methods of waging war have made the challenge ever
more complicated.
Let us be frank — few States can claim to have
fully met their international obligations in protecting
civilians. It is very difficult as well to argue that the
United Nations record in this area has been sterling.
Perhaps what is critical now is to undertake a frank
assessment of what we have done over the past 15
years, where we are now and how we wish to proceed to
ensure that the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is a genuine commitment devoid of the inclination to
politicize the issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
We thank the Lithuanian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his very forward-looking
tenth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2013/689).
The protection of civilians in times of
war — a concept at the heart of international
humanitarian law — imposes on parties to an armed
conflict the obligation to protect civilians by respecting

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

fundamental principles, such as the distinction
between civilians and combatants, proportionality and
prudence in attacks and, naturally, the prohibition of
indiscriminate attacks. Similarly, parties to a conflict
have the obligation to give special protection to medical
staff and equipment and humanitarian assistance. They
must guarantee access to medical care and humanitarian
assistance. Unfortunately, those principles are violated
on a daily basis, particularly in Syria and South Sudan.
The Syrian Government is bombing certain
locations with barrels containing explosives, thus
killing many civilians, including children. However, the
use of indiscriminate explosive weapons in populated
areas violates the rules and principles of international
humanitarian law, as the Secretary-General noted in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Moreover, besides the agreement concluded for
the evacuation of women and children from the city
of Homs, the parties must allow humanitarian relief
to reach the entire civilian population, guarantee
the security of humanitarian convoys and remove
administrative obstacles. The parties must guarantee
humanitarian access to the civilian population.
In September 2013, at the initiative of the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, 27 States from several
continents and the European Commission signed a
petition calling on all the parties to the Syrian conflict
to immediately respect their obligations with regard
to protecting civilians as well as medical personnel,
infrastructure and transport vehicles, to authorize
and facilitate immediate and unhindered access to
humanitarian relief throughout the country and to
guarantee without delay the security and safety of
humanitarian personnel in carrying out their functions.
Belgium today wishes to reiterate that appeal,
which the presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15) partially integrated and which the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
earlier today also addressed. Belgium also wishes
to recall that 11 actions that could be implemented
immediately were developed in Rome on 3 February
by the high-level working group on the humanitarian
challenges in Syria.
Belgium would also like to reiterate that there can
be no lasting peace unless justice is done — unless
the perpetrators of atrocious crimes are punished by a
criminal jurisdiction. Granted, as the Secretary-General
states in his report, some progress is being made in that

S/PV.7109

regard in a number of countries. But further efforts are
always required from States, which bear the primary
responsibility for combating impunity. Belgium calls
on all States that have still to do so to adopt national
legislation providing for the prosecution of persons
suspected of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
crimes of genocide, to ratify the Rome Statute and to
fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Belgium encourages Member States to establish
witness protection programmes, for which it is ready to
share its own technical expertise. Finally, we stress the
need to bolster inter-State judicial cooperation in order
to facilitate the prosecution of those crimes before
national jurisdictions, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity.
I also want to recall — as the Head of the European
Union delegation just did — the letter that was
addressed to the Security Council over a year ago by
57 countries, including Belgium, expressing their wish
to see the situation in Syria referred to the International
Criminal Court Prosecutor.
Allow me to emphasize that it is always preferable
to prevent conflicts before getting to a point where
peace missions are necessary. That is why we support
the Secretary-General’s “Rights up front” initiative,
which stresses the promotion of early warning and
timely action.
I would like to reiterate the initiative of France
on voluntarily restricting the right of the veto when a
situation of a mass crime is recorded — a voluntary
approach that does not involve a revision of the Charter
of the United Nations. Belgium encourages the other
permanent members the Security Council to be open
to this.
The primary responsibility for the protection
of civilian populations lies with the parties to the
conflicts. The Security Council nevertheless has a role
to play in ensuring that peacekeeping operations have
a clear mandate, enjoining them not only to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid but also to protect
civilians, particularly those under imminent threat of
physical violence, as provided for in sub-paragraph 8
(h) of resolution 2086 (2013). Everything must be done,
both by the United Nations and the Member States,
so that all persons engaged in those operations are
aware of the obligation to protect civilians. Similarly,
we must ensure that the meticulous preparation of
peacekeeping operations, their organization and the

14-2329669/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

requisite coordination with the local authorities and
all international stakeholders guarantee the success of
the protection-of-civilians aspect of the United Nations
mandate.
In his report the Secretary-General refers to the
challenges that new weapons technologies pose to the
protection of civilians in times of war. First, concerning
armed drones, their use must be in accordance with
the rules of international law, including humanitarian
law and the laws governing armed conflicts. Secondly,
regarding autonomous weapons systems, or killer
robots, before their use becomes widespread, it is
essential to begin thinking and discussion, including
in the United Nations, on the ethical questions and
criminal responsibility arising from the use of such
weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlOtaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are very confident in its abilities to guide
the work of the Council. We are also grateful for the
preparation of the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) and
for this debate. Our thanks also goes to the President of
the Security Council in January, the representative of
Jordan, for his outstanding leadership of the Council,
which coincided with the beginning of Jordan’s twoyear term as a member of the Council.
Today we are considering a question very important
for international relations — the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The last time the Council addressed
the question was in August 2013 (see S/PV.7019). We
have an important opportunity to assess challenges
facing civilians in conflict situations. The majority
of statements made today have stressed the sensitive
concerns regarding the issue. Many tragic examples
have been referred to — examples from a large number
of countries that have suffered from civil wars, conflicts
that have left many civilian victims. Various United
Nations reports reiterate the importance and scope of
this issue.
There is no doubt that responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests above all with the States
concerned. When there are mass violations of
international humanitarian law, which we have been
noting in many regions, the State should be responsible
for ending those violations. If it is powerless or does not

70/87

12/02/2014

wish to do so, the international community must play a
role in putting an end to such violations.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
is closely linked to the question of supplying
humanitarian aid. At a time when we are witnessing
a resurgence of activity by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in response to many
humanitarian crises around the world, we must note
that the international community has been unable
to ensure the effective protection of civilians where
those conflicts have emerged. As a result, civilians
bear the brunt of any armed conflict, since the parties
to conflict take no account of their needs and prevent
the provision of humanitarian assistance in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Moreover, the parties in conflict
hinder relief operations.
Therefore, we need to reach out to parties in conflict
in order to prevent human rights violations, to strengthen
international mechanisms of accountability, and to
bring to perpetrators to justice. We must criminalize
those violations. We should add that strengthening
the protection-of-civilians aspect is part of mandates
assigned to certain peacekeeping operations.
Every meeting in which we discuss the protection
of civilians in armed conflict — every time — we think
about the situation of the Palestinian people, who have
suffered from violence and from the perpetual Israeli
occupation, the siege of Gaza and the imprisonment
of thousands of Palestinians in prisons in flagrant
contradiction to international humanitarian law.
We are also witnessing humanitarian disasters
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Yet the worst crisis is that of the Syrian people, who
have suffered since the start of that conflict from the
indiscriminate use of all types of weapons, particularly
those that the use of against civilians is prohibited. At
a time when the international community has managed
to neutralize the use of chemical weapons, which left
thousands of victims, the fact remains that the Syrian
Government continues to use barrel bombs, dozens of
which have fallen on urban centres.
The agreement between the parties to the conflict
in Syria to extend the ceasefire for three additional days
in the City of Homs augers well. It allows unimpeded
access to United Nations humanitarian assistance to
a greater number of besieged citizens, in line with
international humanitarian law.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In that context, Kuwait stresses the need to bolster
efforts to put an end to the violence and work towards
a political solution to the crisis, in step with the
aspirations of the Syrian people. We call on the Council
to assume its responsibilities and not turn a blind eye
to the major, grave human rights and international
humanitarian law violations that continue to reflect
everyday reality throughout the entire Syrian territory.
which are coupled with impeded access to humanitarian
assistance.
In that regard, we would welcome the adoption of a
draft resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, given the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. All signs indicate the lack of any genuine
progress since the adoption by the Council of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/15, on 2 October 2013, or even
since the two rounds of negotiations at the “Geneva II”
Conference. In reality, the data indicate that the number
of victims has increased from 100,000 to over 130,000.
The number of refugees has increased from 2.2 million
to 2.5 million, while the number of internally displaced
persons has risen from 4 million to 6.5 million and to
close to 250,000 persons find themselves under siege.
Aware of the scale of the Syrian crisis and its impact
on international peace and security, Kuwait hosted the
second donor conference for Syria, in January, with
the participation of 69 States that pledged $2.4 billion.
Kuwait also pledged $500 million to mitigate the
suffering of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the need
for serious efforts aimed at guaranteeing respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights in
order to prevent human rights violations, particularly in
armed conflict — as shown by my country’s committed
efforts and those of the international community — with
a view to bolstering the principle of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): In too many places,
civilians are deliberately targeted and continue to
suffer from unspeakable violations. Canada welcomes
this open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in order to highlight situations where
civilians are in danger and. more important, to identify
opportunities where more can be done to ensure their
protection in line with legal obligations.

S/PV.7109

As the 2013 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/689) points out, parties to conflict, States,
the United Nations and other partners all have a
responsibility to do more to ensure that civilians enjoy
the protection they so rightly deserve under appropriate
laws.
Over the years, Canada has sought to encourage and
facilitate serious work on improving how the United
Nations prevents and responds to situations of armed
conflict. We are principally concerned with addressing
the protection needs of the most vulnerable in these
contexts — including women, religious communities
and children.
(spoke in French)
In conflict situations, women and girls, men and
boys, can become victims of abuse. Women and girls
in particular continue to face increased risks of sexual
violence, including rape and early and forced marriage.
Canada remains at the forefront of efforts to prevent
and address violence against those most vulnerable,
and in promoting their empowerment.
We must continue to work closely to strengthen
efforts and coordination to prevent and respond to
sexual violence, such as rape as a weapon of war, sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion and enforced sterilizations. Even in times of
conflict, the promotion of accountability, including by
increasing the capacity to prosecute perpetrators of
such acts, is important.
Canada remains committed to advocating for the
rights of religious communities in situations of armed
conflict, who are often persecuted for their beliefs. We
are deeply concerned about situations where individuals
from religious communities experience difficulty in
their ability to practice their faith in peace. In the face
of such injustice, including when pilgrims have been
killed, churches or mosques attacked and religious
leaders taken hostage, Canada has not been silent.
And we have not sat idly by. We are speaking out on
behalf of religious communities that are under threat.
In that regard, we call on United Nations agencies to do
more to ensure that the protection needs of vulnerable
religious communities are addressed.
(spoke in English)
We wish to draw special attention today to the
urgent need to address the impact of the indiscriminate
use of explosive weapons, and in particular their impact

14-2329671/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

12/02/2014

on children. As the report of the Secretary-General
highlights, in Syria and in far too many other conflicts,
tens of thousands of civilians have been targeted or
subjected to indiscriminate attacks, including the
widespread use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. Opportunities to strengthen civilian
protection in that regard should include creating
stronger political barriers to the use of indiscriminate
explosive weapons and building recognition among
parties to conflict that the use of such weapons should
be avoided, particularly in densely populated areas.

administrative and logistical arrangements pertaining
to customs, visas and travel authorizations.

We furthermore condemn the intentional targeting
of schools, teachers and students as a tactic of war and
the practice of using schools for military purposes
during armed conflict. That practice has a clear negative
impact on children’s safety and access to education,
and we call on parties to armed conflict to refrain from
such military use of schools. We also encourage States
that have not yet done so to take appropriate measures
to restrict the use of schools for any military operations.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding, under your presidency,
Madam President, of this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the adoption of a new
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3) to reinforce the
legal arsenal resulting from the Council’s work in this
field. The Security Council addresses this important
issue on a regular basis, and that is, sadly, entirely
justified, given the turbulent international environment,
which is of concern to us all. Moreover, the relevance
of this debate was aptly reflected in the briefings this
morning by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

(spoke in French)
The conflict in Syria continues to have a devastating
impact on the civilian population. Canada continues
to call on all parties to conflict to adhere to their
international obligations, as well as to provide full, safe
and unhindered access to humanitarian actors seeking
to provide emergency relief to affected populations.
We also demand, in the strongest terms possible,
that parties refrain from attacking hospitals, medical
facilities and health-care workers, which are protected
under international law.
(spoke in English)
The crisis in Syria is but one of many examples
where civilians are not only suffering from the
devastating impacts of conflict, but are also being
denied access to lifesaving humanitarian assistance
and protection. In South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali
and Afghanistan unacceptable constraints on access
are undermining the ability of humanitarian workers
to be able to reach those in need. We urgently call
on all parties to conflict to ensure that humanitarian
workers, relief goods and equipment are able to
reach those in need of assistance. That includes the
freedom of movement of humanitarian workers and the
establishment of simple and effective procedures for

72/87

You may rest assured, Madam President, that
Canada will remain committed to working with the
international community to protect the world’s most
vulnerable and to ensure that those responsible for
violations are held accountable for their actions and
brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

The picture painted in the tenth report of the
Secretary-General shows that the current state of the
protection of civilians “does not give much cause for
optimism” (S/2013/689, para. 8). Civilians in many
parts of the world continue to suffer the tragic and
devastating consequences of armed conflict and are
regularly targeted during attacks and indiscriminate
reprisals committed in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The tragic events in the Central African
Republic are the most recent reminder of the heavy toll
paid by civilians, in particular women and children, in
the armed conflicts imposed on them. To avoid violence
and vengeful acts, civilians are often obliged to flee
or seek refuge in neighbouring countries, with all the
consequences that can have for the physical and mental
health of those vulnerable people.
We welcome the progress made by the international
community in protecting civilians who have been
held hostage by conflicts, and we are pleased to take

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7109

part in those efforts within the various peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations.

from becoming an instrument of any of the parties to
the conflict.

The deadly nature of conflicts and the sophistication
of the weapons used in them endangers not only
civilian populations but also humanitarian workers
and journalists, who are often caught in the crossfire
between the warring sides and prevented from carrying
out their noble mission of assisting civilians exposed
to armed conflict and make their plight known. In that
respect, I would like to reiterate our condemnation of
acts of aggression and intimidation perpetrated against
humanitarian personnel and to pay due tribute to the
courage of the men and women of the United Nations
who are carrying out their tasks in often very difficult
conditions, sometimes risking their very lives.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightly stresses
that humanitarian operations are often hindered by
host country restrictions on the freedom of movement
of humanitarian personnel and refugees seeking
assistance and protection. The presence of non-State
armed groups in refugee camps, in violation of the
fundamental principles enshrined in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, and the infiltration by armed
elements of those populations make the implementation
of any refugee protection strategy an illusion and is
a challenge that needs to be dealt with. The duty to
protect those vulnerable populations requires that they
be guarded from any act of violence or intimidation
and that their freedom of movement be guaranteed.
The protection of civilians requires, of course, greater
respect for international law, international humanitarian
law and refugee rights by all stakeholders. However,
while much progress has been made at the normative
level, much remains to be done on the ground and
in practice to ensure the effective implementation of
commitments undertaken in that field.

While the protection of civilians is one of the
major concerns of peacekeeping operations that have
a mandate to that end, the success of that humanitarian
task is dependent on coordination with the host country,
which has, as has been stated many times in this debate,
the primary responsibility to protect its own civilians.
Success also depends on the mission’s mandate being
in line with the resources at its disposal to prevent
possible atrocities against civilians and to guarantee
optimal protection for them in times of conflict.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict also
requires a comprehensive approach that reflects the
multidimensional legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. There must be a clear division of the mandates
and roles entrusted to the various stakeholders operating
in complex situations and effective coordination
between the stakeholders.
Moreover, the protection of civilians in the
framework of peacekeeping operations mandated
to that end requires a periodic assessment of the
implementation process for those strategies with a view
to identifying gaps and shortcomings and learning
positive lessons that can improve the implementation
of such strategies.
Finally, the protection of civilians must go
hand-in-hand with the fight against trafficking in
weapons and their proliferation and ensuring respect
for arms embargoes, when those are put in place by the
Security Council.
As also stated many times in this debate,
humanitarian work for the protection of civilians must
be clearly dissociated from political goals and protected

In conclusion, we should stress the importance of
the preventive aspect of the protection of civilians as
it enhances the capacities of the countries concerned
and the rule of law, guarantees good governance, lays
the basis for a culture of human rights and helps in the
implementation of early-warning mechanisms able to
detect pre-conflict situations and prevent them from
turning into open and deadly conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland,
Thailand and my own country, Slovenia, and on behalf
of the Republic of South Africa as an observer.
The Network is a cross-regional group of
States created in the context of the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and promoting human
security as a people-centered, comprehensive and
prevention-oriented approach for achieving peace,
development and human rights. The protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a core matter for the
Network.

14-2329673/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I would like to start this statement by expressing our
gratitude to the Lithuanian presidency for organizing
this debate and for the concept note (S/2014/74, annex),
and by thanking the briefers for their contributions to
this debate, which is the first one since the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report on the protection on
civilians in armed conflicts (S/2013/689), of November
2013.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, despite
the efforts undertaken and the existing legal framework,
the current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism. We remain concerned about
ongoing conflicts around the world, especially in the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. Civilian populations continue to account
for the majority of casualties in armed conflicts, and
that is why it is imperative to continue to discuss, on
a regular basis, mechanisms or ways to better ensure
the security and dignity of civilians affected by armed
conflicts.
In that respect, the Network welcomes the initiative
recently launched by the Secretary-General, entitled
“Rights up front”, which contains important actions
to strengthen the role and response of the United
Nations in this field. We hope that the multiplier effect
of the change in institutional culture alluded to by the
Secretary-General becomes a reality.
This debate provides an opportunity to look into the
core challenges to enhancing the protection of civilians.
The first challenge is compliance by all the parties to
a conflict, including non-State armed groups, with
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
law and rules must be respected in order to guarantee
the protection of civilians. Full, timely and unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance continues to be a
sine qua non requirement for the relief and protection
of affected populations. States must comply with
their obligation to allow and facilitate access for
humanitarian relief and the freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel.
The Network reiterates its call on all parties to an
armed conflict to refrain from using explosive weapons
with a wide impact area in populated areas. It stresses
the importance of establishing mechanisms to track
civilian casualties so as to understand the impact of
military operations on civilian populations and adjust
such action. An important step was taken in April 2013
with the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty and that
agreement’s prohibition of transfers of arms or items
74/87

12/02/2014

covered by it if the transferring State knows, at the
time of authorization, that the arms or items will be
used to commit serious crimes. We remain especially
concerned about the use of explosive weapons, in
particular improvised explosive devices, and stress
the need to enhance compliance with international
humanitarian law.
The second task is to enhance the role of
peacekeeping and other missions. The Network shares
the view expressed in the Secretary-General’s report that
mandating peacekeeping missions to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence is one of the
most significant actions taken by the Security Council.
In that regard, we underline the importance of providing
missions not only with clear and achievable mandates
but also with sufficient resources and capabilities to
fulfil those mandates. The Network views political
dialogue, physical protection and the establishment of
a protective environment as concrete and specific steps
for the effective implementation of mission mandates.
The third challenge is accountability. States have the
obligation to comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law and to investigate and prosecute
any serious crime committed within its borders. In that
regard, we condemn sexual and gender-based violence,
including the use of sexual violence as a military tactic.
Impunity is not an option. It encourages perpetrators to
continue their atrocious acts. The fight against impunity
should be a common effort, in which the affected State
delivers and ensures the conditions to bring about justice
and the international community provides technical
assistance and resources to such States. The Network
stresses the importance of commissions of inquiry and
fact-finding missions, which can substantiate alleged
violations, thus opening the way to a possible referral
to the International Criminal Court or cooperation with
the Court or similar mechanisms.
We mentioned that there is little room for optimism.
However, we would like to take this opportunity to
publicly acknowledge the efforts and commitment of
United Nations peacekeepers. The concrete actions,
such as those taken by peacekeeping missions with
protection-of-civilians mandates, are encouraging.
Therefore, as we have said, it is important that such
missions have the necessary resources and capacities
to protect the lives of civilians in armed conflicts
effectively and in a timely manner.
We consider it to be of the utmost importance
that the Council remain seized of the question on the
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilian in armed conflict and discuss the
topic biannually.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
organizing this debate and for preparing the concept
note (S/2014/74, annex) that guides it. I would also like
to thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their presentations.
Colombia values the opening of this forum
for consideration, which enables us to address the
importance of the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict through peacekeeping operations
and other relevant activities. Colombia believes it
appropriate to recall that the success of peacekeeping
operations is evident when, having laid the foundations
for lasting peace, empowered the national authorities
and integrated the protection of civilians as an
international duty and obligation, such operations are
no longer required.
We share the concern over the situation that
the civilian population faces in situations of armed
conflict in some parts of the world and over the
repeated non-compliance by parties to conflicts with
their obligation to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law. We agree that all
parties to a conflict should respect international law,
that the protection of civilians must be ensured and that
there must be accountability when the law is violated.
In that context, Colombia, as a troop-contributing
country, supports the role of peacekeeping operations
in such tasks and is convinced of the need for clarity
both in the concept and the operability when carrying
out protection of civilian activities. The Secretariat has
been working tirelessly on such tasks.
In order to ensure successful implementation, we
believe that it is essential to pay particular attention to
the planning and mandate-development phases, to the
allocation of adequate resources and to ensuring the
training of troops to the necessary standard.
In that regard, the Security Council should
strengthen its ability to gather accurate information

S/PV.7109

on the situation of civilians before a mandate is
prepared and to monitor progress in the field during
its implementation. To that end, The Security Council
will need to use indicators on the situation of civilians
in places where it plans to undertake peacekeeping
operations, request reports on developments in civilian
protection work and utilize tools such as the Arria
Formula and interactive dialogue for a more in-depth
analysis and the sharing of lessons learned.
My Government is aware of the positive role
that the various accountability mechanisms play in
strengthening the protection of civilians during armed
conflicts. Without closing the door to negotiation that
provides combatants with incentives to demobilize and
return to civilian life, for Colombia, the pursuit of peace
and reconciliation includes justice, reparation for the
victims, reconstruction of the truth and the guarantee
on non-recurrence. The implementation of United
Nations mandates with a protection-of-civilians aspect
must be accompanied by the political will of States and
their ability to meet their responsibilities towards the
civilian population.
The Colombian State notes the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict of 22 November 2013 (S/2013/689),
whose recommendations my country will consider in
line with their relevance.
My delegation also wishes to reiterate the importance
that United Nations agencies fully understand the work
of national Governments in the area of the protection
of civilians in prioritizing their work and informing
the Organization of specific situations. Verified,
objective, balanced and unbiased information includes
not only identifying the gaps and challenges but also
acknowledging the progress in each country.
The United Nations should promote compliance
with international humanitarian law by non-State
armed groups and carefully determine the mechanisms
to achieve that goal. In our view, each situation
is different and should be addressed by taking its
particular circumstances into account.
Finally, my Government understands and shares
the concern about humanitarian access. It believes
that international assistance in that area must follow
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence enshrined in General Assembly
resolution 46/182. Following those principles, while
guiding collective efforts to support national authorities,

14-2329675/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

acquire much greater significance when cooperation is
directed at countries that enjoy democratic institutions
and lawfully established Governments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I am pleased to see you
preside over the Security Council this month, Madam
President. I would also like to thank you for convening
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I also express my thanks to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their useful briefings today.
The protection of civilians is of paramount
importance to the Government of Afghanistan. The
Afghan people expected a long-awaited peace when
the Taliban regime came to an end following decades
of war, unprecedented destruction and loss of life. Yet
despite joint stabilization efforts towards peace and
security, the suffering of the Afghan people continues.
The security situation remains today precarious, and
incidents have in fact escalated in intensity since 2009.
Afghan civilians are targeted with guns and bombs
by enemies who measure success in terms of the blood
spilled and life lost. Women, children, Government
officials, journalists, religious leaders and judicial
authorities are at risk as they go about their daily lives,
shopping at a bazaar, visiting a friend or commuting to
work. They are attacked in villages, on public roads,
in restaurants, Government offices, courthouses and
mosques.
With total and utter disregard for civilian life,
the brutal terrorist campaign by the Taliban and
other extremist groups affect ordinary Afghans
most profoundly. The Taliban are responsible for
the overwhelming majority of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan, causing thousands of deaths in 2013 alone,
which represents a sharp increase from previous years.
The brutal campaign opened a murderous era in
Afghanistan’s history — devastating in terms both of its
acute impact on the Afghan people and of its savagery.
Terrorists’ tactics are a horrific manifestation of man’s

76/87

12/02/2014

inhumanity to man, of which graphic video footage
of beheadings posted on Taliban websites, the recent
heinous attack on a popular restaurant in Kabul and the
cold-blooded murders and violence against women and
children are but a few harrowing examples.
The Council condemned Taliban attacks in the
strongest terms six times last year, stressing that
terrorism in all its forms was criminal and unjustifiable
and underscoring the need to bring its perpetrators
to justice. It is clear that the Taliban show flagrant
disregard for international law as well as the basic
tenets and principles of Islam.
We note with deep concern an increase in the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) by armed insurgent groups in the past year. IEDs
remain the leading cause of civilian deaths and injuries,
accounting for 34 per cent of all civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. To address this menace, a national counterlED strategy was instituted by presidential decree in
2012. We are working to strengthen our counter-IED
capabilities and the related training programmes by the
International Security Assistance Force for the Afghan
National Security Forces — a further important step in
minimizing the danger posed by such weapons.
Tragically, ground engagements in counterterrorism and counter-insurgency operations have
resulted in the deaths and injuries of civilians. It is
unfortunate that Afghans have lost their lives during
operations by international and national forces that
aimed to protect them. In that regard, the Afghan
Government has repeatedly called on international
military forces to take all the necessary measures to
stop the loss of Afghan civilian life. Important steps
have been taken in that regard in recent years.
With Afghan forces now at the forefront of
protecting the Afghan people from terrorist attacks,
we see situations in which civilians are caught in the
crossfire of ground engagements with the enemy. One
life lost is one too many, and, with that sentiment in
mind, Afghan forces are strongly committed to the
protection of civilians. Stabilization efforts are guided
by their sense of responsibility, sobriety and duty to
their fellow Afghans.
It is clear that the surest way to protect the lives,
honour and dignity of citizens is to end the cycle of
violence that harms innocent civilians. In that regard,
achieving peace and security in Afghanistan requires
the following three key components: first, international

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

assistance throughout the next decade to support
the Afghan capacity to counter terrorist campaigns
against the Afghan people; secondly, the elimination
of terrorist sanctuaries that fuel the cycle of violence;
and, thirdly, vigorous pursuit of our Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process, intended to engage those
ready to renounce violence and contribute responsibly
to their homeland. Effective regional and international
cooperation is key to the successful outcome of the
process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): At the outset, let me
tell you, Madam President how pleased we are to
see Lithuania presiding over the Security Council. I
thank you for convening this open debate on an issue
that is of considerable importance and great concern
to many Member States. My delegation also joins
previous speakers in thanking the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UnderSecretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs and for
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for their briefings, which very informatively shed light
on the topic before us today.
We share the concerns raised in this Chamber
regarding the innocent civilians who, sadly, often
constitute an overwhelming majority of the victims
in armed conflict. In particular, women and children
continue to be the most vulnerable groups, subjected to
various forms of extreme violence, resulting in grave
humanitarian crises with huge population displacement
in various parts of the world.
It is encouraging that the Council has made
several important decisions relating to the protection
needs of vulnerable groups during armed conflicts. It
is also important that we recognize the humanitarian
challenges in post-conflict situations. The effective
implementation of protection tasks involves a broad
range of actors. Local authorities must be engaged in
mediation and resolution talks. It is equally important
that those authorities fully engage with the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors.
The unimpeded access of international aid actors,
including the ICRC, non-governmental organizations
working on demining and charities tending to
vulnerable and needy populations, is a matter of vital
importance and must be unconditionally guaranteed

S/PV.7109

and sustained. The parties to a conflict should ensure
that the most efficient means are available for reaching
people in need with humanitarian assistance and
protection, including in situations where thiat involves
humanitarian and/or monitoring operations that cross
lines of contact or international borders.
As a country that has suffered aggression and
imposed war, we fully recognize that protecting people
from mass atrocities and violence is an overarching
responsibility that must bring together all of the critical
functions of the United Nations and other international
organizations.
Today, we remain gravely concerned by the
humanitarian impact of the use of force. As a result of
this unacceptable policy and practice, the situations of
civilians living near borders and lines of contact are
being further compounded. During previous debates on
this subject, my delegation raised concerns regarding
the border impact of snipers on civilian populations
and facilities. Violent incidents affecting the lives of
civilians must cease immediately.//Armenia advocates
the need to end...
Armenia advocates the need to end all violence and
provocations, including the kidnapping of civilians. We
strongly believe that fundamental and lasting solutions
to conflicts can be achieved only through peaceful
means, based on the principles of international law and
within internationally agreed formats. We emphasize
once again that military force will not resolve conflicts
and only prolong the suffering and hardships endured
by people living in regions blighted by conflicts. Only
a peaceful negotiated settlement can allow an entire
region to move beyond the status quo towards a secure
and prosperous future.
It is important that the Council be focused on the
protection of civilians within the overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must
be built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the root
causes of a conflict under discussion in order to prevent
its renewal in the future and should provide reliable
and adequate security protection guarantees to the
populations concerned, thereby ensuring sustainable
peace and development.
Therefore, Armenia welcomes Lithuania’s initiative
to hold this debate, which offers a valuable opportunity
to evaluate the progress on the implementation on
previously adopted resolutions dealing with the issue of

14-2329677/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians and highlight the core challenges
and priorities for further united actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, let me
express my sincere congratulations to Lithuania on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Ladsous,
Ms. Pillay and Mr. Daccord for their respective
briefings.
Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict. In my statement, I would
like to focus on the most urgent and humanitarian
aspects of the issues highlighted in the concept note
(S/2014/74, annex) prepared by Lithuania.
The lives of countless civilians are in deadly peril in
such places as Syria, Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
Yemen. In contexts such as those, ensuring safe, timely
and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian goods and
equipment and access by humanitarian workers is of
the utmost necessity and is essential to the effectiveness
of the humanitarian assistance itself. However, in
those regions, the efforts of humanitarian workers to
reach people in need of assistance and protection are
extremely hampered.
The issue of humanitarian access is right in front
of us. According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/689), between May 2012 and August
2013, 134 humanitarian workers were killed, 172 were
wounded and 149 were abducted. The kidnapping of
humanitarian workers is reported to have quadrupled
over the past 10 years. Such attacks against humanitarian
workers is really deplorable and must be condemned in
the strongest possible terms.
It is indeed regrettable that Governments or
non-governmental military groups frequently obstruct,
delay or prevent United Nations humanitarian
operations in an arbitrary manner within the territories
they control. The serious impact of those cases on
civilians requires the continued and urgent attention of
the Security Council to act in a visible and concrete
way in order to protect humanitarian workers, ensure
humanitarian access and mitigate situations of civilians
in armed conflict.
78/87

12/02/2014

Another issue that requires the Security Council’s
immediate attention is the use of explosive weapons,
including improvised explosive devices, in populated
areas. According to the Secretary-General’s report, in
2012, more than 34,700 people were killed or injured by
explosive weapons; some 60 per cent of those casualties
were caused by improvised explosive devices. Who
would not be dismayed by those numbers? The Security
Council must make every effort to find possible ways
to decrease that lamentable number by looking into the
serious consideration of voices from the field where
civilians are faced with the real threat of those weapons.
While welcoming and recognizing the need to
discuss normative and institutional mechanisms to solve
those issues, let me stress once again that ongoing crises
on the ground around the world require the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to
take immediate actions and measures to improve the
situation in any possible way. Although the international
community has developed various mechanisms and
tools in order to protect civilians in armed conflict, it
is difficult in reality to successfully implement them.
We must not only establish mechanisms and tools, but
also analyse underlying factors that hamper the smooth
functioning of those mechanism and tools so that we
can increase their effectiveness.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I congratulate you,
Madam President, and the delegation of Lithuania on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
also thank you for organizing and presiding over this
debate on this very crucial topic. We thank UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Hervé
Ladsous, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Navi Pillay and Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross Yves
Daccord for their insightful briefings.
In contemporary armed conflicts, innocent
civilians often constitute an overwhelming majority of
victims and have at times been deliberately targeted.
The most vulnerable populations at risk include women
and children, who are often killed, raped and sexually
abused or forced to become soldiers. Survivors are often
displaced, taking refuge in camps where they are often
defenceless against armed attacks and harassment.

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of protecting civilians in armed conflict. We
would like therefore to commend the Security Council
for its continuous prioritization of its engagement on
this role. I wish to emphasize the following fundamental
points in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, it is essential to ensure a quick, effective and
concerted response, especially in situations of armed
conflict, in order to protect civilians, prevent atrocities,
restore law and order and provide humanitarian
assistance. Today’s armed conflicts often take place in
densely populated areas, with extensive civilian losses
and damage to civilian buildings and infrastructure as
a result. That means there is an urgent need to consider
whether the interpretation of the basic international
humanitarian law rules of distinction between military
targets and civilians and proportionality need to be
further strengthened.
We have unfortunately witnessed many instances
on the African continent where delayed action by State
authorities, the region or the Security Council have
resulted in a devastating loss of life and untold suffering
to populations. The African Union is working towards
the operationalization of African standby brigades to
be able to respond quickly and robustly in situations
of violent conflict. In that regard, we look forward to
support from the international community.
Secondly, there is a need to emphasize the
importance of mediation as a recourse in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, even after the outbreak of
conflict. As we know, protection broadly encompasses
activities aimed at obtaining full respect for the rights
of all individuals in accordance with international
law, a task that is difficult in armed conflicts. We
underscore the need for the parties to a conflict to
seek political solutions through dialogue, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement or the use of regional and
international arrangements in accordance with Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations.
We call upon the Security Council to give top
priority to conflict prevention and mediation under
Chapter VI of the Charter. For example, Uganda’s role
as mediator of the dialogue between the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Mouvement du 23 mars under the auspices of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
de-escalated the conflict in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and saved lives. My
delegation is convinced that exerting greater efforts

S/PV.7109

to peacefully resolve disputes will reduce threats to
peace and security. From that perspective, greater use
of mediation should be a part of the Council’s overall
response to the increased magnitude and complexity of
peacekeeping as conflicts become more multi-layered.
Thirdly, there is a need to enhance early-warning
and response mechanisms in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The United Nations has improved
its operational innovations in civilian protection,
which include practical steps and guidance on civilian
protection as well as highlighting best practices.
However, there is still more work to be done to ensure
the protection of civilians on the ground, with a focus
on preventive mechanisms to deter damage, destruction
and loss of life as a result of armed conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for regular
interaction, coordination and consultation among the
Security Council, regional and subregional organizations
and host States, with a view to devising more effective
strategies for protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Since regional organizations have a comparative
advantage through increased complementarities to
undertake efforts to ensure protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the benefits of such coordination are
enormous.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to congratulate the delegation of Lithuania
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish to express our great appreciation for the
convening of today’s debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. And I thank the Lithuanian delegation
for its concept note on today’s item (S/2014/74, annex),
in particular because 15 years have elapsed since the
Secretary-General presented his first report on the
subject to the Security Council (S/1999/957), which led
to the adoption of the first relevant resolution (resolution
1265 (1999)). We hope that regular deliberations within
the Council on the subject will allow us come up with
an objective, holistic vision of how best to protect
civilians, all the while avoiding politicizing the issue
and staying away from double standards.
Confronting the root causes of conflicts and
pushing for comprehensive and lasting political
settlements are the best guarantee for the protection of
civilians. The concept note is quite right when it says
that the vast majority of victims in armed conflicts are

14-2329679/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians. But it is necessary in that respect to draw
attention to an important truth, namely, that civilians in
very many conflict zones are victims primarily of rebel
movements that take up weapons in order to victimize
civilians, women and children, to the point where the
international community becomes indignant and seeks
to intervene in an armed conflict zone. The best example
in that regard — those who are responsible — are
the rebel movements that are undermining the peace
process in Darfur.
When we talk of the protection of civilians, it is
necessary to prioritize the success of peacekeeping
operations and political settlements whereby rebel
groups are pressured to join political processes
and enter into peaceful negotiations, as opposed to
resorting to the use of military force or attempts to
deceive international public opinion. Mr. Ladsous said
quite rightly this morning in English that peacekeeping
operations could not impose peace. Indeed, if there
is no peace to maintain, peacekeeping operations,
no matter what their capacities are, will not achieve
their goals in that respect. It is therefore necessary
to very swiftly implement development projects,
reconstruction projects, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration projects and quick-impact projects
so that internally displaced persons can return to their
homes and enjoy stability.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to support the Sudanese Government to
achieve peace in Darfur. We also call on the Council to
send a strong message to those who refuse to sign the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and to the rebels in
the South Kordofan and Blue Nile regions to lay down
their weapons and join the peace process.
In her statement, Ms. Amos spoke of the situation in
those two regions and mentioned aerial bombardments
by the Sudanese Air Force — remarks that I would like
to correct. I hope Ms. Amos can hear us: that was not
the case. The truth is that rebel movements in those two
zones continued to violate all the unilateral ceasefire
announcements issued by the Sudanese Government.
The last ceasefire was intended to take place between
February and November of last year, but the rebel
movements did not respect it, and civilians and United
Nations facilities, in particular in Kadugli, were
targeted by the rebel movements in question.
The principle of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a very noble goal to which we all aspire.
What troubles us are attempts to instrumentalize that
80/87

12/02/2014

objective with a view to very specific political ends.
For example, with respect to the principle of the
responsibility to protect, which we wish to endorse
from this podium, even if it appears in the Millennium
Declaration, it nevertheless remains open to very
different interpretations. It is in contradiction with a
principle enshrined in the Charter, namely, respect for
national sovereignty and States’ primary responsibility
for the protection of their civilians. We need to reiterate
in that regard that the right to protection for civilians in
armed conflict is an integral part of a comprehensive
interdependent regime of rights and duties affirmed by
the Millennium Declaration, such as combating poverty
and preventing conflict by dealing with root causes.
In conclusion, we hope that the Council will
continue to discuss this matter in an objective manner
so that we can protect civilians in all conflict zones.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kushneruk (Ukraine): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking the Lithuanian delegation
for organizing today’s open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts through United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant activities. We find it
to be timely and topical.
While taking note of the few positive developments
outlined in the Secretary-General’s latest report on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2013/689), the delegation of Ukraine remains
concerned with the fact that civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in current
conflicts. They are regularly targeted and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties
to conflict.
The protection of civilians is a mandated task
that requires coordinated actions in all spheres of
peacekeeping operations activities, including the United
Nations police component. While such protection is a
core element of international policing, it also requires
close alignment with the work of peacekeeping
operations in the strategy for protecting civilians.
United Nations police provide operational support
to host-State police on the protection of civilians
under imminent threat. In addition, United Nations
police assist in planning and conducting operations
and investigations and in training the host-State police
forces to perform crucial protection functions, which,

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

inter alia, include maintaining a secure environment in
camps of internally displaced persons.
The ongoing conflict in South Sudan has led to the
need for accommodations for thousands of civilians
in United Nations shelters. Police officers of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan were directly
involved in the protection of civilians in those camps
by maintaining public order and conducting physical
checks. With the third largest contingent of individual
police officers there, Ukraine reaffirms its commitment
to further support the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and is considering the possibility of increasing
the number of its police officers.
Ukraine strongly believes that host-State police
can also contribute to the protection of civilians by
preventing and overcoming direct physical violence,
in particular sexual abuse. The police of the host State
should receive special training to be able to perform
such duties.
I would like to emphasize that special attention
needs to be given to vulnerable groups in society,
including children, women and elder persons; national,
ethnic, religious and other minorities; and displaced
populations, when defining and implementing the
relevant activities in peacekeeping operations and when
identifying security needs.
Ukraine has always been an active supporter of
United Nations efforts aimed at protecting women and
girls in armed conflicts. Our Government strongly
supports all Security Council resolutions on women.
We welcome the commitments of the Group of Eight
on enhancing efforts to address impunity for sexual
violence in conflicts, including its endorsement of
the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence
in conflict. In September 2013, Ukraine signed the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
We consider demining operations to be another
important area related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Ukraine has extensive experience in
demining and possesses modern technologies in that
area. Our advanced logistics bases allow the training
of highly skilled specialists within a short period of
time. Ukrainian mine-clearance engineers are widely
recognized in the world, including in the Balkan region,
Africa and the Middle East. Our units operate under
the standards and operational procedures of the United

S/PV.7109

Nations, and we are ready to provide technical support
and to share our experience within United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
Turning again to South Sudan, I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to recent developments that have
revealed the absence of the means required to carry out
quick-response rescue operations of civilians in cases
of emergency. That proves that there is a pressing need
to take decisions on the rapid concentration of rescue
units, especially military and civil helicopters, in a
particular place to fulfil rescue operations.
Last December, three of our helicopters received
gunfire while rescuing civilians and United Nations
employees in South Sudan. Thanks to the pilots’
professionalism, there were no human casualties.
However, it had become evident that, in order to avoid,
or at least to significantly decrease, possible casualties
in the future, the United Nations must equip rescue
helicopters with additional protective features, such
as bulletproof bottoms, antiballistic and antimissile
protection, reinforced rescue hoists and on-board
fixtures for medical equipment. Night-vision goggles
should be available for night operations. For example,
we believe that the rescue helicopters mentioned could
have avoided gunfire if the team had performed their
operation at night using night-vision goggles.
We think that United Nations helicopters should be
versatile, multifunctional and rapidly convertible into
any version suitable to the flight task — passenger or
cargo transportation, medical or casualty evacuation
or search and rescue operations. A professional team
of rescuers and medical staff should be included in
the crew; plus an ambulance should be available to
transport injured people to the nearest medical facility.
We believe that such modifications to helicopters
would assist United Nations peacekeeping missions in
providing protection to civilians in armed conflicts in
a more efficient and safe manner. In November 2013,
Ukraine held a special briefing with a presentation
on the functionality of United Nations helicopters. In
March, we are planning to convene another presentation
focused on a United Nations multitask and convertible
helicopter capable of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): At the
outset, Madam President, I wish to thank you and the

14-2329681/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

delegation of Lithuania for convening today’s debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, an issue of
immense importance to the State of Palestine.
We also commend the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for the comprehensive briefings delivered today and for
their tireless efforts to promote the protection and wellbeing of civilians in armed conflict.
While significant efforts have been made to prevent
and respond to violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law in conflict situations, the
Secretary-General noted in his latest report that “[t]
he current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism” (S/2013/689, para.8) which
was compellingly confirmed by the briefers in today’s
debate.
The failure of States and parties to respect and
ensure respect of their legal obligations remains
widespread, and civilians continue to bear the burden of
war and violence and to suffer its brutal consequences
in a tragic manner.
One clear and persistent example of the failure to
respect, and to ensure respect for, the law is the case of
the Palestinian civilian population living under Israel’s
occupation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. For more than four decades,
any and all of the legal safeguards for the protection
to which civilians are entitled under international
humanitarian law have been deliberately ignored
by Israel, the occupying Power, leaving Palestinian
civilians devoid of protection of not only their physical
bodies and lives, but also their well-being and human
dignity. It is a situation that has inflicted upon them
massive suffering, trauma and hardship, for generation
after generation.
The protection provisions of international law,
including the Geneva Conventions — in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which includes provisions
explicitly aimed at ensuring the safety of civilians in
armed conflict, including specific provisions for civilians
under foreign occupation — the Additional Protocols to
the Conventions, the international covenants on human
Rights, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court and the relevant United Nations resolutions are
all clear and are applicable to the occupied Palestinian

82/87

12/02/2014

territory, including East Jerusalem. Nevertheless, not
a day has gone by in which our situation has not been
characterized as extremely volatile and in which grave
transgressions of international humanitarian law and
the protection provisions have been committed by the
occupying Power. That includes the period covered
by the Secretary-General’s report, which witnessed a
significant increase in Palestinian civilian causalities,
including among women, children and the elderly.
Besides the complete absence of protection for
those Palestinians who have been killed, including
by air strikes and explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, as in the Israeli military aggressions
against Gaza in 2008, in 2009 and in November 2012,
Palestinians also continue to be victims of appalling
human rights violations and crimes, suffering
physical and psychological harm, dispossession,
forced displacement, imprisonment and detention,
torture, exploitation, hunger, poverty, disease and
the destruction of their communities. Even the right
to peaceful protest has been lethally violated by the
occupying forces. International law clearly forbids such
brutality against civilians, and such actions, wilfully
perpetrated, constitute war crimes. The Palestinian
civilian population also remains vulnerable to rampant
settler terror and violence, which has intensified in the
recent period.
Moreover, in the Gaza Strip, the devastating impact
of the illegal Israeli blockade and the repercussions of
the destruction and displacement inflicted by sequential
acts Israeli military aggression have continued to
impact every human right and to disrupt every aspect
of civilian life, deepening the humanitarian crisis. The
blockade constitutes collective punishment of the entire
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, in grave breach
of the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Palestinians
living in Gaza not only need protection for their lives,
but also protection from such deliberately destructive
policies, which are disfiguring an entire society.
The international community’s failure to hold
Israel accountable for its violations and crimes has,
regrettably, reinforced that lawlessness, permitting it to
continue using military force and collective punishment
against the defenceless Palestinian people under its
occupation and, in essence, absolving it from its legal
obligations as an occupying Power. As the SecretaryGeneral states in his report,

14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

“The prevalence of impunity in many States
experiencing, or that have experienced, conflict
allows war crimes and serious human rights
violations to thrive, undermines the fabric of
societies and prevents the development of lasting
solutions, which contributes to instability.” (ibid,
para. 60)
Israel’s impunity in the context of its foreign
occupation of another people and their land has
prevailed for nearly five decades due to the inaction and
selectivity of the international community, including
the Security Council. It is high time for that to be
rectified.
The Security Council has the duty to determine
and undertake appropriate measures to protect civilian
populationx, and that unequivocally includes the
protection of the Palestinian people. To continue doing
nothing in the face of such crimes is unacceptable and
will only allow for the cycle of impunity to persist.
I would be remiss if I did not convey, yet again,
the grave concerns of the State of Palestine about the
critical humanitarian situation of Palestine refugees in
Syria, who also continue to suffer death and injury, the
destruction of their homes and shelters, dispossession
and massive displacement. The plight of the thousands
of refugees trapped the Yarmouk camp in particular is
inhumane. Urgent international attention is required to
alleviate their plight and that of all civilians suffering
in the conflict. The siege and starvation of innocent
civilians as a combat method is a grave breach of
international humanitarian law and cannot be permitted
or justified under any circumstance. We urgently appeal
for sustained, adequate and safe humanitarian access to
Yarmouk and to all civilians in need, in line with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law,
including the unimpeded delivery of emergency food
and medical assistance.
Furthermore in that regard, we reiterate our
appeals for the exertion of all possible efforts to ensure
the protection of the Palestine refugees and all civilians
in Syria in accordance with international humanitarian
law, until a political solution can be found to end the
tragic conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the hour, I shall make a brief statement. My

S/PV.7109

complete statement will be circulated in the Chamber
and posted on the website of the Spanish Mission.
I would like to begin my statement by congratulating
you, Madam President, on your presidency of the
Security Council, which you assumed just one month
after becoming a member of the Council. I also
commend the focus you have chosen for your presidency
in choosing the issues of the relationship between
the Council and regional bodies, the rule of law and
the protection of civilians. Indeed, today’s debate on
the protection of civilians is good proof of that. My
delegation believes that protection of civilians should
be integrated in the Council’s agenda, as today’s debate
clearly demonstrates.
We welcome the adoption, this morning, of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3.
The Spanish delegation fully associates itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
The President’s excellent concept note (S/2014/74,
annex) calls on us to clearly focus in this debate on the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates,
and that is what I shall do.
In the view of the delegation of Spain, it is crucial
to have clear and achievable mandates in order
subsequently to carry out an objective analysis of the
situation on the ground. My delegation believes that
peacekeeping operations must have sufficient and
adequate resources, bearing in mind that such resources
may often have to be adapted in the face of unforeseen
situations.
In addition, we must be fully aware of people’s
expectations occasioned by peacekeeping mandates. In
that context, I cannot fail to recall here in the Chamber
the situation taking place in South Sudan.
Moreover, we should decisively reinvigorate and
strengthen the follow-up and assessment mechanisms
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It is
crucial that we glean the lessons learned so that future
operations can be more effective.
In today’s debate, my delegation would like to call
attention to three very special situations concerning the
protection of civilians: first, the use of cluster bombs
and explosives in urban centres; secondly, the severe
impact of conflicts on the elderly, women and persons
with disabilities, but especially children; and, thirdly,
attacks against medical facilities and personnel and
humanitarian personnel.

14-2329683/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

That brings me to the situation in Syria, which I
cannot fail to mention. I share much of what has been
said today in the Chamber about the conflict in Syria,
particularly when it comes to the Council assuming its
responsibility and taking the measures necessary to
ensure that presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15, of
2 October 2013, is truly implemented. I also take this
opportunity to call upon all parties to conflict to end
attacks directly targeting humanitarian personnel.
My country fully supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/689). Nevertheless, I wish to highlight
two — first, the importance of unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance. That is essential in ensuring
adequate protection for civilians. The second is the
need for genuine accountability. That is one of the true
pillars of an effective legal system, and the only way to
effectively fight against impunity.
Appropriate training for armed forces is another
fundamental aspect in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In that context, I would highlight that
Spain warmly welcomed the adoption of resolution 2106
(2013), which underscores the importance of training
regarding gender-based violence and the deployment of
protection advisers.
In our opinion, another important element of
this debate is mediation and preventive diplomacy.
Spain is an active member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, with an important mediation initiative in
the Mediterranean region on which we would like to
collaborate with the Council.
In conclusion, Spain’s experience in the protection
of civilians is based on our country’s extensive
participation in peacekeeping operations. It has taught
us that we must place the protection of civilians at the
centre of our efforts in matters of peace and security
and make concerted progress on mechanisms and
concrete actions for the effective implementation of
such protection.
Rest assured that my country will continue to
actively participate in all efforts of the international
community to improve the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening

84/87

12/02/2014

this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted its
first resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (resolution 1265 (1999)), which, inter alia,
explicitly mandated a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to protect civilians. Indeed, since then a number
of important efforts have been undertaken to increase
the attention of the international community, develop
a normative basis and enhance the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, numerous challenges remain, and
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in armed conflicts. As the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the topic (S/2013/689)
acknowledges, the current state of the protection of
civilians leaves little room for optimism.
The increasing brutality of armed conflicts and
the changing nature of warfare nowadays give rise
to a need for greater measures for protection at the
national and international levels. More resolute and
targeted measures are required to end impunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, impunity contributes to instability, allows
war crimes and serious human rights violations to
proliferate, undermines the fabric of societies and
prevents the development of lasting solutions. When
national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability, the international community
should play a more proactive role in order to ensure
an appropriate response, including through the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals, international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions.
Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians forced to leave their homes as
a result of armed conflict. Azerbaijan supports the
continuing efforts to raise awareness of the problem of
internal displacement and the right of return.
My country’s familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay. The
forcible deportation of more than 200,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 1980s
was accompanied by killings, torture and other crimes.
Even children were not spared.
The period from 1991 until the establishment
of the ceasefire, in 1994, was marked by an increase
in the magnitude, intensity and consistency of the
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attacks on Azerbaijani civilians. In February 1992, the
Azerbaijani town of Khojaly was completely razed to
the ground, and its civilian population was subjected to
an unprecedented massacre by the invading Armenian
forces. The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators
of the crimes committed during the conflict continues
to impede progress in achieving the long-awaited peace
and reconciliation between the two countries.
Despite the formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks
against Azerbaijani civilians and civilian objects have
become more frequent and more violent in recent
months. Even the calls from the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and other members
of the international community to observe the Olympic
Truce during the Olympic Winter Games in Sochi did
not prevent the Armenian side from escalating the
situation along the front line.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians. They should not pay the price for the lack of
progress in the settlement process. In that context, it
is important that the Security Council, Member States
and regional organizations ensure that peace efforts,
inter alia, contribute to ensuring accountability,
including by encouraging the parties concerned to
envisage transitional justice and reparation clauses in
peace agreements. It is essential that such efforts and
peace agreements under no circumstances encourage
the acceptance of situations achieved by the unlawful
use of force and other serious violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing.
It is essential that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on the protection of civilians and
systematically reiterate its demand that all parties to
armed conflict comply fully with their obligations
under international law.
In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Lithuania in convening this open debate
and advancing this significant theme in the work of the
Security Council.
The President: I would like to thank all delegations
for their cooperation and understanding, given the
very impressive list of speakers. We had close to 70
delegations make statements, but we have managed to
finish perfectly on time, or at least finish the main part
of our debate.
I also understand that several delegations have
requested the floor to make further statements. It is my

S/PV.7109

intention to accept those requests. However, I would
kindly encourage each delegation to limit itself to one
additional statement.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Security Council who wishes to make a further
statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to exercise our right of reply
following the statement made by the representative of
Georgia.
We get the impression that the insinuations made
against Russia by the Georgian representative in the
Security Council without any context are very tiresome.
We have presented our position in this regard many
times, including in this Chamber. What is particularly
strange about the statement by the representative of
Georgia is that they were made following yesterday’s
news concerning the statement by the Georgian Prime
Minister of his readiness to hold direct dialogue with
Russia. It is time for Georgian diplomacy to open a
new chapter in its history and to refrain from tiresome
clichés.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs.
Furman
(Israel):
The
Palestinian
representative’s remarks earlier have no constructive
purpose and only serve to inflame hostilities against
Israel.
It is ironic that the Palestinian representative
would lecture the world on the protection of civilians
when the Palestinians are the ones using human beings
as human shields. They stockpile their arsenals of
weapons in the basements of homes, the playgrounds
of schools and the back rooms of hospitals. In so doing,
they commit a double war crime: first, by firing rockets
at innocent Israeli civilians; and, secondly, by firing
rockets from populated Palestinian areas and putting
their own civilians at risk. A recent report by the
Secretary-General reveals, that this year alone, dozens
of Palestinians, including 23 children, were killed
because of Palestinian-made explosives stored within
civilian homes. It seems as though the Palestinian
delegation is heavy on the criticism of Israel but very
light on the facts.
The Palestinian representative conveniently forgot
to mention the persecution and discrimination against
women, religious minorities and the lesbian, gay,

14-2329685/87

S/PV.7109

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

bisexual and transgender community in Gaza and the
West Bank. In Gaza, homosexuals who are not killed
are subjected to 10 years in prison, and access to justice
for women who are victims of domestic violence does
not exist. The most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral reveals that 24 women were killed in the name
of so-called “honour” between January and August
2013. According to the report, that number is most
likely underreported.
Out of respect for the Council’s valuable time, I
will not respond further to the baseless accusation of
the Palestinian representative, except to say that it is
unfortunate that she insists on politicizing this debate
while peace negotiations are under way.
Allow me to thank the Egyptian representative for
highlighting the issue of the protection of civilians.
As the Council knows, over the past year and a half,
his Government has made headlines for its treatment
of civilians. As he spoke so passionately on the topic
earlier today, I urge the Egyptians to go one step
further and publish a volume of Egypt’s best practices
in the protection of civilians. I have no doubt that it will
become an international best seller.

12/02/2014

“Present Armenia is, in fact, the historical land
of Azerbaijan. Therefore, in the future we will
return to our historical lands. Let young people and
children know it. We must live;we live and we will
live in this idea.”
That militaristic rhetoric of the country’s President
threatens the fragile peace in our region, engages
the future generation and nullifies the efforts of the
ongoing peace negotiation. It should be condemned. Yet
Armenia has always advocated the peaceful political
resolution of the conflict through negotiation within the
framework of the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
That alarming act by the Azerbaijan authorities
not only contradicts the humanitarian purpose of
international law and the relevant international
instruments but also calls into question the entire
human rights system.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

Since last year, Azerbaijan has been vastly
increasing its military budget and acquiring more
sophisticated weapons. The continuous attacks and
subversive activities of the Azerbaijani forces in the
area bordering Nagorny Karabakh can be seen as
reconnaissance operations and a general rehearsal for
war.

Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): It was not my delegation’s
intention to ask to make a further statement. But having
heard the unacceptable remarks of the representative of
Azerbaijan, it is hard to remain silent.

Such brutal and illegal actions by the Azerbaijani
side have resulted in Armenian servicemen losing their
lives. Several soldiers and a number of civilans were
wounded in just the past few weeks.

It is our strong belief that there is no alternative to
the peaceful resolution of any conflict. The resolution of
conflicts requires political will and determination. We
believe that people should be ready for peace, not war.
Unfortunately, until now, the Azerbaijani leadership
is doing exactly the opposite, while taking each and
every opportunity to increase its warmongering and
anti-Armenian hate speech on a daily basis.

We strongly condemn the deadly provocation by the
Azerbaijani side, which poses a real threat to regional
security. We expect the international community to
continue its call for a prompt reaction to such atrocities,
which have already undermined respect for justice,
human rights and human dignity.

Through that anti-Armenian history, Azerbaijan
tries to justify the constant calls for war by its highest
officials. The wounds of the last war against the
civilian population of Nagorny Karabakh have not yet
healed. Yet Azerbaijan is trying to launch a new war
by initiating an unhealthy arms race and by preaching
hatred against Armenia at the State level.
Very recently, a couple of weeks ago, the Azerbaijani
President stated,

86/87

In his statement, the representative of Azerbaijan
mentioned events in Khojaly, with the usual distortion
of the facts. That came as no surprise to us. The
Azerbaijani representative refers to the 1992 military
event, while, according to the then Azerbaijani
President, the responsibility for the slaughter of the
civilian population, including children of the city of
Khojaly, falls fully on the Azerbaijani Government and a
political opposition group. The whole world has learned
from the interview with the then Azerbaijani President
that the militia of the Azerbaijani National Front
actively obstructed and actually prevented the exodus
of the local population through the mountain passages,
14-23296

12/02/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

specifically left open by the Karabakh Armenians to
facilitate the flight of the civilian population.
The hope and intention of the Azerbaijani side was
to utilize civilian losses of such magnitude in order
to instigate a popular uprising against the country’s
President and to seize the reigns of power. We strongly
advise the Azerbaijani side to conduct an internal
investigation so as to reach the obvious conclusion that
the Khojaly event and its inhabitants were deliberately
sacrificed for political ends.
We believe that the time has come for Azerbaijan
to replace hollow allegations with constructive steps
aimed at creating a more conducive environment for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): The Chamber has
witnessed discussions about Georgia and Russia not
because of insinuations about Georgia, as was said,
but owing to the fact that 20 per cent of my country
is still under occupation. As for the clichés, let me say
that Georgia has been continuously demonstrating a
constructive approach and readiness for dialogue and
cooperation. Allow me to state that my Government has
established a special office under the Prime Minister of
Georgia for dialogue with Russia. We are constructively
involved in international talks in Geneva. Georgia has
unilaterally pledged not to use force. Last but not least,
the recent statement by the Georgian Prime Minister
on his readiness for dialogue and a meeting with the
Russian leadership and his Russian counterpart was,
for his part, in anticipation of the Russian President’s
reciprocation. We look forward to positive and
constructive steps ahead and the ongoing dialogue
through the international Geneva talks, and possible
bilateral ones, resolving the current impasse.
Let me again stress the positive steps that Georgia
has taken in our readiness to continue along that same
path.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The attempts by
Armenia to disguise its aggression, and thereby to assert
its innocence with regard to the crimes committed
against Azerbaijani civilians, are unlikely to be taken
seriously given the incontrovertible evidence, which
testifies to the diametrically opposite situation.

S/PV.7109

The arguments of the Armenian side are particularly
astonishing as they are voiced in the Security Council,
which in 1993 adopted four resolutions. Those resolutions
condemned the use of force against Azerbaijan and the
occupation of its territories by the Armenian forces,
reaffirmed respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan and the inviolability of its
international borders and demanded the immediate, full
and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces
from all occupied territories (resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993)). The resolutions also
made specific reference to violations of international
humanitarian law, including the displacement of a large
number of civilians in Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians
and the bombardment of inhabited areas.
While trying to accuse Azerbaijan of alleged
anti-Armenian propaganda and referring to ambiguous,
politically motivated and groundless interpretations of
the Khojaly massacre, the representative of Armenia at
the same time not only refrained from commenting on
the views expressed by the European Court of Human
Rights, authoritative international non-governmental
organizations and eyewitnesses of the tragedy. He also
neglected to clarify the revelations of his country’s
high-ranking officials and the direct participants in
the crime, who, in turn, unequivocally admitted their
responsibility for the extermination of the inhabitants
and defenders of Khojaly.
Armenia’s widespread, deliberate and systematic
policy of aggression and hatred is clearly reflected in
the famous interview of 15 December 2000 with the
then Defence Minister, now the incumbent President
of Armenia. Responding to the question as to whether
things could have happened differently and whether he
had any regrets about the deaths of thousands of people
as a result of the Armenian attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians, he said frankly, “I have absolutely no regrets,
since such upheavals are necessary even if thousands
have to die”.
No further comments are needed here to explain
the logic and the attitude of the Armenian leadership
towards the issue of civilian protection and the peaceful
settlement of the conflict.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

14-2329687/87
