S/PV.7531

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7531st meeting

Friday, 9 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30593 (E)
*1530593*

S/PV.7531

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Libya, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and Thailand to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/768, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 14 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2240 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

2/11

09/10/2015

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of the important
resolution 2240 (2015) today. Sadly, the issue it seeks
to address — the migration crisis — needs little
introduction to the Council. We already know it too
well from the harrowing images of the drowned, the
heartbreaking stories of loss, and the tragic death of
three-year old Aylan Kurdi and so many more.
The migration crisis is without doubt one of the
greatest challenges of our generation. Thousands have
died in recent months; thousands more continue to be
exploited as they risk their lives to find a safer future in
Europe. This cannot continue.
Since June, European Union (EU) forces in the
Mediterranean have worked tirelessly to help alleviate
the human tragedy on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. They have saved thousands of lives. But the
situation is worsening, so today the Security Council
has authorized the European Union military operation
in the southern Central Mediterranean to begin
interdictions against all migrant smugglers operating
on the high seas. These groups have no respect for
human life. They exploit those taking the perilous
journey across the Mediterranean. They overfill poorly
maintained boats ill-suited to such a difficult crossing,
and they abandon their passengers at the first sign of
trouble.
All EU member States contributing to the operation
now have the authority to interdict them and their
boats on the high seas. Any smugglers stopped will
be arrested and their boats will be seized. We must
not allow callous people-smugglers to profit from
others’ despair. Let me be clear. Any action will be
proportionate, in keeping with the limits authorized by
the resolution, and used solely against the smugglers
and empty boats. Any migrants encountered in the
course of the operation will be taken to Europe as part
of established procedures.
Sadly, action against the smugglers on the high
seas will not solve this crisis alone, but it will send a
message that people cannot profit from this evil trade
with impunity. It will save lives. But we must continue
to do more. That means deepening our partnership with
the Libyan Government and working together towards
the deployment of future phases of this operation. I
welcome the cooperation with the Libyan authorities
on the resolution, and I also warmly welcome the
political agreement on the Government of national

15-30593

09/10/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

unity announced by Bernardino León last night. We
look forward to working with that future Government
of Libya.
If we are to end this crisis in the longer term, we
all need to work collectively to bring an end to the
drivers of irregular migration. That is the surest way
to put an end to the untold numbers of people dying
in pursuit of a better future. This requires a response
beyond the smugglers. It means helping countries to
manage their migratory flows. It means addressing
the root causes of mass migration, including conflict
and poverty in Africa and the Middle East, as well as
tackling extremist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham.
Today’s resolution is a small part of the solution
to a huge challenge. As part of its comprehensive
approach to migration, the European Union will do
all it can to protect the rights of those who need our
protection and to help alleviate the suffering driving
people to desperation. The United Kingdom will
continue to play a leading role in those efforts as we
seek a comprehensive solution to one of the greatest
challenges of our generation.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Resolution
2240 (2015), which we have just adopted, authorizing
the European Union military operation in the southern
Central Mediterranean to fight human trafficking and
migrant smugglers on the high seas of the Mediterranean,
was the object of lengthy negotiations with a view to
obtaining a broad consensus on its content and scope.
We welcome the flexibility and understanding shown
by the United Kingdom, the initiator of the resolution,
in taking into account most of the legitimate concerns
expressed by African countries.
Aware of the gravity and dimensions of the
phenomenon of migration, Chad can only welcome
and support any initiative aimed at saving human lives
endangered by the recurring wrecks of overloaded
makeshift vessels transporting migrants. It was in
that spirit that Chad voted in favour of the resolution,
hoping that it will be used only to fight the criminal
network of human traffickers and smugglers without
harming migrants or undermining their rights, much
less the territorial integrity and sovereignty of African
countries.
In that regard, we stress the need for the naval
operation authorized by the resolution to be conducted
in accordance with the established framework and in full

S/PV.7531

respect for international law and the rights of migrants
and asylum seekers. Furthermore, we dare to hope that
the reference in the text to Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations authorizing the use of armed force
will not give rise to extensive interpretations, as has
unfortunately been the case in the past.
For some years now, the Mediterranean has
become a cemetery for thousands of essentially African
migrants, who leave their countries and take enormous
risks to reach Europe in search of a better life. The
many conflicts in the Middle East, in particular in
Syria, Iraq and Libya, have increased the magnitude
of the migration and have created a significant refugee
population. In this context, the smugglers and other
traffickers take advantage of the widespread chaos,
which they did not cause.
As a result, in our humble opinion, launching a
struggle against the smugglers on the high seas without
tackling the root causes of the migration and refugee
crisis would not be a viable solution, especially when
we know that most of these traffickers are on land. That
is why we believe that a comprehensive approach that
emphasizes the underlying causes of migration, which
are, among others, poverty, destitution, economic and
social crisis and armed conflicts, could help us to
consider appropriate and lasting solutions.
From that point of view, we hope that the fight
against the smuggling networks will be accompanied by
specific and simultaneous action aimed at development
in a spirit of solidarity with the countries of origin of
the migrants. Furthermore, special emphasis must be
placed on the urgency of reaching a peaceful settlement
to the conflict in Syria, Iraq and Libya, where recently
a large part of the migrants have come from.
Lastly, with respect to the scale of the migration
crisis, it is crucial that Europe combines its efforts
with all of its partners, namely the countries of origin
and transit of the migrants and refugees, as well as
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
the League of Arab States, with a view to meeting the
challenge through dynamic and effective cooperation.
The use of military force against smugglers on the
high seas alone will not be enough to put an end to the
flow of migrants and refugees towards Europe.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I am taking the floor
to explain my delegation’s vote on resolution 2240
(2015), which was just adopted and which Malaysia
also co-sponsored. We thank the United Kingdom for

15-305933/11

S/PV.7531

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/10/2015

facilitating consultations among Council members in
its capacity as a penholder for this initiative. We greatly
appreciate the flexibility of Council members during
the highly challenging, yet ultimately constructive and
fruitful, negotiations on the draft.

the present text may address immediate concerns on
the situations of migrants in the Mediterranean, we are
under no illusions that the root causes, particularly the
situations of conflict and violence that have led them
into such desperation, must be addressed without delay.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption of resolution
2240 (2015). It is a timely response by the Council
towards addressing the plight of migrants attempting
the dangerous Mediterranean crossing in a desperate
attempt to flee from conflict zones.

In this regard, Malaysia renews its commitment
to work alongside other Council members, as well as
with other partners and stakeholders in seeking to find
peaceful solutions to various conflicts in the Middle
East and North African region and beyond in our
collective effort to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

In a horrendous exploitation of the misery of
those migrants, unscrupulous human traffickers
and smugglers seek to profit from them by offering
passage across the Mediterranean while charging
exorbitant rates. The shear number of fatalities among
those attempting the Mediterranean crossing is a
humanitarian crisis in itself. The harrowing visuals
of migrants, particularly of the three-year-old Syrian
boy arriving by the Sea, is seared on our collective
conscious. This situation cannot be allowed to persist.
The text just adopted calls for action to stop the
human smugglers and traffickers through activities
such as the search and seizure of vessels suspected of
being involved in such activities. At the same time,
the resolution clearly outlines the parameters of such
actions to a degree of specificity that prioritizes the
preservation of life and the safety and security of
migrants in accordance with applicable international
standards. In short, the text delicately balances the need
for humanitarian protection of the victims of human
traffickers and smugglers with the legitimate safety
and security concerns, as well as with the sovereignty
and territorial integrity, of the concerned States.
Malaysia will play its part and is prepared to
receive 3,000 migrants fleeing the conflict in Syria, as
announced by Prime Minister of Malaysia Najib Razak
(see A/70/PV.22) in the general debate of the General
Assembly last week. We urge all countries in a position
to do so to consider taking similar steps.
The challenge posed by the network of people
smugglers and human traffickers is not confined to
only the Mediterranean. South-East Asia is also not
immune to such challenge. The implementation of these
resolutions provides many countries facing similar
troubling developments an opportunity to draw on the
European Union’s experiences and approaches with
a view to addressing similar threats and challenges
within their regional contexts. Having said that, while

4/11

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is deeply concerned about the
serious humanitarian emergency of refugees, internally
displaced persons and migrants who are the result
of the tragedy of war, political instability, poverty,
terrorism and the widespread violence that plagues
important regions of Africa and the Middle East and
who are desperately trying, at the risk of their own
lives, to reach safer destinations. Our people express
their deepest solidarity with these thousands of human
beings who have been stigmatized and vilified. We
also vigorously condemn the existence of the criminal
organizations that profit from migrant smuggling
and human trafficking, taking advantage of their
desperation to protect their physical integrity or escape
extreme poverty and hunger.
This terrible phenomenon has been exacerbated in
the past two years to the same extent that the political,
economic and military situation in the Middle East and
North Africa has continued to worsen as a result of
foreign interference, military intervention and war.
Venezuela, like other Latin American countries,
has traditionally welcomed thousands of refugees and
migrants who, in different periods, have sought safety,
peace and opportunity in our land. We are a zone of
peace and a people deeply supportive and respectful of
human rights. That is why we believe that the current
humanitarian crisis of refugees, who are desperately
trying to cross the Mediterranean, cannot be tackled
with a military approach with the pretext of combating
international organized crime. This serious problem
cannot be resolved by building walls or by taking
military action.
This humanitarian crisis cannot be summarized
without acknowledging that the refugees remain

15-30593

09/10/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

contained by the hundreds of thousands in the zone
of despair through the use of military action. This is
a humanitarian issue in which the continued flight
of hundreds of thousands of desperate refugees and
migrants, either from North Africa or the Middle East,
must be averted.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has decided to
abstain from voting on resolution 2240 (2015) on migrant
smuggling and human trafficking in the Mediterranean
Sea, which was adopted today by the Council, because
we believe that this serious problem is being addressed
in a completely wrongheaded way and that, far from
resolving the tragedy that is being experienced by these
human beings, it will instead deepen the problem by
addressing it from a military perspective and not from a
preventive and multidimensional perspective. Creating
the possibility of applying Chapter VII of the Charter
from which today’s resolution is derived — that is, the
use of military force to deal with the humanitarian
situation of migrants — is a serious mistake; in so
doing, the Security Council sets a dangerous precedent
by turning its back on the General Assembly, usurping
the Assembly’s authority and addressing issues that fall
within its competence.
Venezuela therefore rejects the notion of making
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers into a security
issue, as has been done on this occasion. The complexity
and multidimensional nature of this problem requires a
comprehensive approach that goes beyond the purely
military and security approach that some States
Members of this body seek to promote. We need to
examine the root causes that drive people to make
dangerous sea voyages and the reasons why some of
these people become victims of human trafficking and
migrant smuggling.
The resolution adopted authorizes the use of force,
which, in our view, is a disproportionate action that sets
a dangerous precedent for the treatment of the issue in
the future. We believe it is not through the use of force or
criminalizing the phenomenon that this human tragedy
will be resolved. It seems that, beyond the argument in
favour of fighting criminal gangs, the purpose of the
resolution is simply to prevent these human beings from
reaching a safer destination; in other words, it sets up
a policy of raising barriers, where, in the end, we will
have a world where the rich countries are surrounded
by walls that prevent them from seeing and feeling the
terrible reality of poor people battered by wars, most of

S/PV.7531

which have been supported and promoted by the power
centres in these rich countries.
The human rights of these citizens and their
humanitarian situation should prevail over material
considerations or a concept of security that endangers
the lives of innocent people who are essentially victims
of this drama, regardless of the causes that motivate
it. We must clearly state that one of the key causes
of the humanitarian tragedy of migrants that we are
seeing, which should be addressed in a broader and
more democratic debate within the General Assembly,
is the military interventions and wars in Iraq, Libya
and Syria, as well as the expansion of the phenomenon
of terrorism and the actions of non-State actors and
violent groups that have received training, funding
and weapons so that they can be used as instruments
of political destabilization to overthrow Governments
and respond to geopolitical considerations of the great
centres of power.
Moreover, the uncontrolled and growing flow of
small arms and light weapons, terrorist groups and the
chaos provoked in North Africa by the intervention in
Libya has exacerbated the political, economic and social
problems in countries in other regions of Africa, many
of them subject to sanctions, blockades and economic
hedges, where poverty is a chronic problem. All this
has done is increase the exodus of these African people
who are experiencing all kinds of tragedy in their
transit to the shores of the Mediterranean. Thus, the
resolution addresses only a tiny fraction of this complex
problem — the final installment of this sad story.
We would have liked to see this body participate
in a broader and more democratic discussion on this
issue, where actions could be coordinated at all levels
to alleviate the humanitarian situation. We would have
liked to see the African Union brought in as a key
player in dealing with this situation, as well as other
regional and subregional actors in the areas affected by
conflict. What the Security Council should do is put an
end to wars and terrorism. It should also demand that
the financing and arming of groups that has caused so
much damage to the peoples of the Middle East and
Africa be brought to an end.
Our country, Venezuela, has offered to take in
20,000 immigrants and refugees, and we hope that all
the countries that are able to will open their arms and
take in these human beings. We also hope that they stop
raising walls to keep reality out. We do not want to

15-305935/11

S/PV.7531

Maintenance of international peace and security

see — nobody wants to see — any more tragic pictures
of children drowned off the coast of a world that has
denied them their right to live in peace.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We supported resolution 2240 (2015) on
combatting illegal migration in the Mediterranean,
aware of the scale of the tragedy and the need for
measures to be taken to save human lives. Furthermore,
our delegation would like to point out that headway in
truly resolving the current crisis is unlikely without
addressing the root causes of migration through
tackling the crises in the Middle East and North Africa,
working closely with countries of origin and transit and
undertaking collective efforts at the international level
to establish an effective mechanism of response to the
problems of refugees and migrants.
We expect those who will be putting this resolution
into practice to strictly comply with the relevant norms
of international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and, as a priority,
ensuring the security of migrants. Any expansive
interpretation of the resolution is unacceptable. The
resolution is eminently straightforward and provides
for a number of absolutely clear requirements.
Measures on the high seas off the coast of Libya
that are sanctioned by the resolution, as the text clearly
states, should be consistent with the specific situation
and carried out with the goal of saving the lives of
migrants or the victims of human trafficking and only as
part of dealing with entities involved in the smuggling
of migrants and human trafficking on the high seas off
the coast of Libya. Moreover, a top priority is ensuring
the safety of people on board.
The resolution also notes the need for the humane
treatment of migrants, including asylum-seekers,
respecting their dignity and fully upholding their rights.
We welcome the resolution’s provision of a monitoring
mechanism for the measures implemented, including in
the form of reports of the Secretary-General. We intend
to closely monitor all actions to be taken with regard to
vessels in that region.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2240 (2015) on the question
of illegal migration in the Mediterranean region just
adopted by the Security Council. China understands
the gravity and urgency of this question and hopes
that the adoption of the resolution will contribute to an
appropriate resolution to it. We also hope that Member

6/11

09/10/2015

States will implement the resolution in a comprehensive
and accurate manner by scrupulously respecting the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned and giving top priority to
saving innocent lives and protecting human dignity in
strict compliance with the relevant rules of international
law.
The causes of illegal migration are complex. The
international community should take an integrated
approach, focusing on the eradication of extreme poverty,
social unrest and armed conflicts as the root causes. At
the same time, the will of the countries concerned must
be respected. Communication and coordination with
regional and subregional organizations are essential.
We welcome greater efforts to be made by the countries
concerned to that end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
fully supports and co-sponsored resolution 2240
(2015), which was adopted today as the fruit of close
cooperation between the four European members of
the Security Council and their other partners in the
Council. The resolution aims to give the member States
of the European Union the necessary legal guarantees
to enable them to successfully conduct the operations
provided for within the framework of phase 2-A of the
European Union military operation in the southern
Central Mediterranean, Operation Sophia, which has
been in place since 7 October and provides for inspection
and, where necessary, stop and search on the high seas
of vessels and boats used in the trafficking of migrants.
We have made sure that the text precisely defines the
circumstances in which the recourse to force would be
authorized to combat resistance by traffickers, and have
included robust guarantees that protect the rights of
migrants and refugees who might be passengers on such
vessels. We consider it more urgent than ever to craft a
comprehensive response to the migratory crisis in the
Mediterranean and the tragic situations it engenders,
with which we are all familiar. The resolution is part of
that response; others must follow.
We are convinced that the Council cannot remain
silent in the face of the present tragic situation in the
Mediterranean.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
voted in favour of resolution 2240 (2015) because it
provides for measures to address an exceptional and
extremely grave situation. Situations as appalling as
that of the refugees and migrants in the Mediterranean
demand that States act in accordance with international
15-30593

09/10/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

law and the human rights of refugees in order to
guarantee basic protection standards.
Human trafficking and trafficking in migrants
are punishable illegal acts and behaviours that should
be addressed within the framework of the relevant
international and humanitarian laws. This situation
should not give rise to the criminalization of persons
who find themselves in the category of migrants
and/or refugees. Chile firmly believes that the root
causes of such phenomena should be addressed by the
various organs of the United Nations system within
the framework of their respective jurisdictions, which
would contribute to reducing the precarious situation of
persons exploited by traffickers.
The Organization as a whole has a responsibility
to do its part to enable States to act in concert and
solidarity to respond to the humanitarian needs such
phenomena engender and to sanction behaviours that
undermine the dignity and rights of all human beings.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our understanding
that the resolution just adopted grants States or regional
organizations, under exceptional circumstances and for
a limited period of time, the right to intercept vessels
on the high seas, along the coast of Libya, only in
those cases in which there exist reasonable grounds to
suspect trafficking in migrants or human trafficking
and always within the legal framework of the norms
established by the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
voted in favour of resolution 2240 (2015) because
it reflects our position. We believe that it is very
important to help the Libyan Government to fight
organized crime and to protect vulnerable people and
refugees in view of the dangers caused by trafficking
in the Mediterranean. That phenomenon has already
caused thousands of deaths. However, Jordan would
like to emphasize several points.
First, thie resolution must not be misunderstood or
misinterpreted by States and parties as an authorization
to bypass the provisions of refugee conventions or
override the legal principles that govern the use of
force. Secondly, the seventh preambular paragraph of
the resolution should not be narrowly interpreted, in
particular when it comes to the definition of a refugee.
The protection of and respect for international refugee
law must be an integral part of this resolution, since
refugees represent a large number of those who are the

S/PV.7531

object of trafficking in the Mediterranean, from Syria
and other countries. I speak here from the perspective
of a State that knows this situation first-hand. Jordan,
despite its limited resources, has welcomed many
refugees, who now represent 20 per cent of our
population.
The resolution must not function as a shield for any
State or party that attempts to violate the provisions of
international law. We must assume responsibility for
any violations. In that regard, I would like to recall that
the use of force in accordance with operative paragraph
10 of the resolution must be limited in scope, because
the use of force against non-State players or individual
non-State actors in the context of human trafficking in
the Mediterranean does not violate the legal norms that
allow parties to resort to force. Here I refer to the ius ad
bellum approach.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Two
thousand nine hundred and eighty-eight: that is the
number of people who, according to the International
Organization for Migration, have died trying to make
the journey across the Mediterranean so far this year.
These are the deaths that we know about, and we also
know that the actual number is surely much, much
higher.
The resolution adopted by the Security Council
today aims to address one dimension of the refugee
and migration crisis by authorizing the member States
of the European Union to play a more robust role in
rescuing refugees and migrants aboard ships originating
from Libya and in going after the people who smuggle
them. That is important. Smugglers exploit the
desperate situation of people who are fleeing violence
and hardship. They routinely subject those they are
transporting to sexual violence, extortion and beatings,
and they smuggle them in horrific conditions, denying
them food and water and stacking them atop one
another, like cargo, in the sealed holds of boats. Many
die during the journey and some are found trapped
ordeceased behind hatches that have been locked from
the outside.
But the scale of the current crisis also requires us
to speak candidly to the challenges that we must still
address — and by we, I mean not only the Security
Council but the broader international community. I will
speak to just a few.
We must fill growing gaps in addressing the needs
of the people rescued as well as those of others who

15-305937/11

S/PV.7531

Maintenance of international peace and security

survive the perilous crossing. Those individuals are
arriving daily by the thousands in Europe — nearly
530,000 this year alone. The same is true of the
unprecedented number of refugees from the region,
including more than 4 million from Syria alone. who are
on average spending longer periods of time away from
their homes. In 1993, a little more than two decades
ago, refugees remained away from their homes for an
average of nine years. Today, that average is between
20 and 25 years and growing.
We strongly believe that States have the
responsibility to protect the human rights of everyone
in their territories, including migrants and refugees.
We must see to it that the needs of those people are met,
that their children can attend school, that their sick are
cared for and that their families are fed. And of course,
as others have noted, we must redouble our efforts to
end the conflicts and reduce the extreme poverty that
drives many individuals to leave their homes in the
first place. As we all know, for as long as the Assad
regime is dropping barrel bombs on neighbourhoods
or the Eritrean Government is repressing and forcibly
conscripting its citizens for indefinite periods of time
or the Sudanese Government-backed militias in Darfur
are razing villages, there will be Syrians, Eritreans and
Sudanese, and so many others to fill the boats leaving
Libya and its shores, among other routes, no matter how
perilous the journey.
The United States is committed to doing our part
in this effort, starting with giving more refuge to more
people fleeing those hardships, and providing additional
support to fill the growing gaps for people who have
already fled. Just in recent weeks, President Obama has
committed to going from admitting 70,000 refugees
this year to 85,000 next year and 100,000 the year
after that. He has also announced nearly $419 million
in additional relief to Syrian refugees and displaced
persons, which comes atop the more than $4.5 billion
we have already dedicated to that essential cause. But
even with that, we know that we have to find ways to do
more and we will.
In conclusion, I would encourage every
representative on the Council and every Permanent
Representative at the United Nations, for that matter,
to press his or her country to find concrete ways to do
its own part in responding to the crisis, which is far too
great for any country or any region to shoulder alone.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): We are glad
resolution 2240 (2015), which Lithuania co-sponsored,
8/11

09/10/2015

is finally adopted. When the European Union (EU) High
Representative, Ms. Federica Mogherini, addressed the
Council in May (see S/PV.7439), she conveyed the sense
of urgency to address the human suffering and crisis in
the Mediterranean. Predator smuggling and trafficking
networks feed on the human tragedies in Syria, Iraq,
Afghanistan and elsewhere. The money they squeeze
out of the people fleeing destruction falls into the hands
of arms traffickers, organized crime and terrorists,
thereby contributing to ever new cycles of violence and
death. We must absolutely stop this evolving industry
of human smuggling.
The resolution we have just adopted sends a strong
message to all those who seek to profit unscrupulously
and cynically from human suffering. It enables us
to tackle the networks of human smuggling more
expeditiously and effectively. It also enables us to
take life-saving actions that safeguard respect for the
dignity and human rights of the smuggling victims.
The EU naval operation is just one step of the many
that comprise the EU’s comprehensive and continuous
efforts to respond to the human smuggling crisis.
Ongoing cooperation on Africa and the Middle Eastern
and European countries is essential as is cooperation
with the countries of origin and transit, as well as the
countries of destination. In that context, we welcome
in particular Libya’s cooperation and engagement
on the matter as it works to redefine and reshape its
own future in a peaceful way. We are looking forward
to the forthcoming EU and African Union summit
in Malta, which will build on existing cooperation
processes between Europe and Africa in order to
improve assistance, strengthen cooperation on return
and readmission policies and address the exploitation
and trafficking of migrants.
While the smuggling crisis is often referred to as
a European migrant crisis, let us remember the root
causes that drive people out of their homes. Protracted
conflicts, the breakdown of governance and the rule of
law, oppressive regimes and rampant corruption, the
exclusion and abuse of minorities, extreme inequalities
and systematic gross violations of human rights all
contribute to displacement and refugee flows. Tackling
those root causes, which send people running out of their
homes, is therefore fundamental. Without addressing
the driving factors, we will be left to continue picking
up the pieces and dealing with the heavy consequences
of migrant flows and the cynical abuse of human
tragedy by unscrupulous profiteers, criminal gangs and
terrorists.
15-30593

09/10/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2240 (2015), which seeks to
address the menace of migrant smuggling and human
trafficking in the Mediterranean, which has developed
into a grave humanitarian crisis. As a State party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, Nigeria supports
legitimate measures to combat the trafficking in
persons.
The activities of the migrant smugglers and human
traffickers operating in the Mediterranean continue
to endanger human lives. Thousands of men, women
and children, as we have heard, have perished at sea
in their attempt to seek safety and refuge beyond their
borders. Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms the
utter disregard for human life demonstrated by the
smugglers and traffickers. In the same vein, we condemn
the maltreatment of migrants both in transit and in
destination States. That is a violation of international
humanitarian law and international refugee law. We
urge all States to ensure the humane and dignified
treatment of all migrants.
It is beyond any doubt that fighting transnational
organized crime requires international cooperation.
An important dimension of that cooperation is sharing
intelligence. That is pivotal to thwarting the criminal
smuggling and trafficking networks. Origin, transit and
destination States must collaborate on this and other
measures. Indeed, all hands must be on deck.
The adoption of the resolution sends a strong,
unequivocal message to the smuggling and trafficking
networks that the die is cast. Human trafficking will
no longer be the pattern for profits. If the resolution
is implemented conscientiously we hope that it will
ultimately serve as a model for other regions of the
world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to
the victims of human trafficking. This year alone,
nearly 3,000 people have lost their lives trying to
cross the Mediterranean simply to achieve a better
future. Operation Sophia, launched by the European
Union — which owes its name to the birth of a child
in a German boat after the rescue of her Somali
mother — summarizes the spirit of the undertaking
that brings us together today. Such vigilance and rescue

S/PV.7531

missions have the main purpose of saving lives and
fighting the trafficking in human beings.
The newly adopted resolution 2240 (2015) is an
initial step towards a qualitative leap at a time when
we must tackle those challenges. For some time, Spain
has been a witness to the unscrupulous exploitation to
which thousands of people have been subjected in the
Mediterranean. We have been pioneers in promoting a
comprehensive approach to respond to the phenomenon
of migration, based on an alliance among the countries
of origin, transit and destination. We enjoy excellent
cooperation with Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal,
Algeria and other African countries. We were one of
the promoters of the so-called Rabat Process, and later
of the Khartoum Process for East Africa. Within that
framework, Spain will demonstrate once again its full
commitment on the occasion of the upcoming summit
of the African Union and European Union to be held in
Malta in November.
I conclude by thanking all members of the Council
for their support in adopting the resolution, particularly
our neighbours from the African continent — Angola,
Chad and Nigeria — with which we will continue to
work in the coming months in addressing this challenge.
We also trust that we will receive confirmation of the
excellent news coming from Morocco that Libya will
soon have a Government of national accord. That would
be the best possible contribution to peace and security
in the region.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Representative of
Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank the Council for
affording me the opportunity to speak in this important
meeting.
I also extend my thanks to the delegation of the
United Kingdom, and to Ambassador Rycroft personally,
for their efforts and cooperation during the drafting
of resolution 2240 (2015), which was just adopted by
the Council. It is a resolution that meets the wishes of
the European Union (EU) and takes into account the
concerns of Libya and the African continent. More
importantly, the resolution is an important step towards

15-305939/11

S/PV.7531

Maintenance of international peace and security

saving lives and reducing the dangers to which migrants
are exposed. It is a step that we hope will be followed
by further steps to deal with the crisis of migrants in
the Eastern Mediterranean.
We recognize the grave threat to international peace
and security posed by the smuggling and trafficking
of migrants, and we appreciate the European Union’s
concern for the dangers to which those migrants are
exposed. We also recognize the huge financial burden
borne by certain countries of the European Union as a
result of disorganized migration. However, we believe
that some efforts to tackle the crisis could lead to an
increase in the number of migrants and help smugglers
to collect more money, if the Libyan Government is
unable to extend its authority to its entire territory and
is not receiving the necessary assistance to control its
borders.
We are all aware that illegal migration cannot be
tackled solely with security measures. It cannot be dealt
with only in the countries of origin or the countries of
destination. It must be dealt with by tackling its root
causes, such as armed conflicts, economic crises and
poverty. That requires a concerted effort on the part of
the international community to assist the Governments
concerned in establishing social peace and promoting
development and prosperity. We look forward to the
European Union playing an important role in that
regard, based on consultations with the African Union
and the countries concerned. However, we are not just
tackling illegal migration as a whole. We are dealing
with only one aspect of illegal migration, which is
reflected in an unprecedented increase in the number
of refugees being smuggled from Africa to Europe
through the Mediterranean, as well as the catastrophic
rise in the number of migrants who lose their lives by
drowning at sea.
I do not believe that anyone would stand against
an international effort to put an end to that loss of
life in the Mediterranean Sea or that humanitarian
tragedy, provided that it is done in full respect for the
principles of international law, and, in particular, the
principle of respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. Libya, as a
country that is seriously affected by this issue, does not
object to the deployment of a European Maritime Force
in the Mediterranean off the Libyan coast aimed at
saving illegal migrants or, even, at targeting smugglers
and their boats in international waters, when necessary.
However, we would like that to be done in coordination

10/11

09/10/2015

and cooperation with the European Union and the
countries concerned, particularly when it involves
military operations in the exclusive economic zones of
those countries. In that regard, we would like to warn
against any misuse of this resolution or of the European
Union’s operations for the purposes of conducting
illegal fishing and the plundering of fish stocks in
waters under Libyan control.
Libya believes that, if migrants know that the
risk they face of drowning at sea has been removed or
reduced, the numbers of those migrants and the number
of migrants who enter Libya through its practically open
borders will increase. Libya is having great difficulty
in accommodating thousands of migrants and in fully
respecting their rights and dignity. Libyan authorities
are, at the same time, busy fighting terrorism and
seeking to extend the authority of the State to its entire
territory, with extremely limited resources. Libya
faces continued obstacles in providing the necessary
weapons to its army. That is a problem that we wish
to resolve immediately. Undoubtedly, members of the
Council realize that the chaos in the capital, Tripoli,
owing to the absence of any political authority
controlling the militias in control of the sites where the
boats begin their illegal journeys, is the main engine of
the unprecedented increase in the number of migrants.
That calls for the international community to support
any upcoming agreement among Libyans to establish a
Government of National Accord.
Stability in Libya will mean that somewhere
between 2 and 3 million migrant workers will find
decent work in Libya, and that, in turn, will reduce
the number of migrants across the Mediterranean.
The European Union has played an important role
in supporting political dialogue in Libya. We highly
value that role, and we trust that the dialogue currently
underway in Skhirat in Morocco will succeed and
lead to the establishment of a Government of National
Accord, so that we can deal with the myriad of serious
problems, such as illegal migration. The Libyan House
of Representatives and the Government have chosen a
path of flexibility and tolerance in dealing with disputes
amongst Libyans. They have fully cooperated with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernadino
León, in efforts to establish a Government of National
Accord and have agreed on the necessary measures to
restore security and put an end to the chaotic situation
that we witness.

15-30593

09/10/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The House of Representatives has made difficult
concessions so as to appease those who did not
accept the results of the elections, and we are pleased
that yesterday, at Skhirat, it was announced that an
agreement among the parties had been reached on
the name of a President for a Government of National
Accord and on a statement on the constitution of that
Government. At a time when we salute the courage of
all those who have worked with the interest of Libya
in mind, we hope that the new agreement will also
gain the approval of the House of Representatives, the
support of the Libyan people and all political groups
and armed groups in every village and town in Libya,
so that when the Government has been fully established
and endorsed by the House of Representatives, it will

S/PV.7531

be able to restore the institutions of the State in the
capital and extend the authority of the State to its
entire territory. That, undoubtedly, represents the only
guarantee for improving the quality of life of the Libyan
people and putting an end to illegal migration or, at least,
significantly reducing it across the Mediterranean. In
conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the Libyan
authorities will remain ready to cooperate, as much as
we possibly can, with any international effort aimed at
reducing the suffering of illegal migrants.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

15-3059311/11
