UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/26
4 May 1995
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3531st meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 May 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the continuation of
hostilities in the Republic of Croatia.
"The Security Council reaffirms in this context its statement of
1 May 1995 (S/PRST/1995/23) in all its aspects, and demands that the
parties comply with the requirements set out therein immediately and in
full.
"The Security Council condemns the incursions into the zone of
separation by the forces of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in
Sectors North and South, and by both sides in Sector East. It demands that
the forces in question withdraw immediately.
"The Security Council also condemns the bombardment of Zagreb and
other centres of civilian population by the forces of the local Serb
authorities and demands that they cease immediately.
"The Security Council further condemns acts of harassment and
intimidation against United Nations personnel and reminds the parties of
their obligations to respect such personnel at all times and to ensure
their safety, security and freedom of movement.
"The Security Council calls on the parties to cooperate fully with
UNCRO, UNHCR and the ICRC in protecting and assisting the local civilian
population and any displaced persons. The Council is deeply concerned by
reports that the human rights of the Serb population of Western Slavonia
are being violated. It demands that the Government of the Republic of
Croatia respect fully the rights of the Serb population concerned, in
conformity with internationally recognized standards.

95-13587 (E)

040595

/...

S/PRST/1995/26
English
Page 2

"The Security Council insists that the authority of UNCRO be
re-established and respected in Sector West and other areas affected by the
hostilities.
"The Security Council demands that the parties act in accordance with
the proposals put to them by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, that they cease all hostilities immediately, and that they
cooperate fully with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and with UNCRO.
"The Security Council further calls upon the parties to enter without
delay into the discussions in Geneva to which they have been invited by the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter and
will be ready to consider further steps as necessary."

-----
