S/2021/149

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 10 February 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon (Special Tribunal) expires on
28 February 2021. Article 21, paragraph 2, of the annex to Security Council resolution
1757 (2007) provides that if the activities of the Special Tribunal have not been
completed by the end of its current mandate “the Agreement shall be extended […]
for a further period(s) to be determined by the Secretary -General in consultation with
the Government [of Lebanon] and the Security Council”.
In her letter to me of 20 November 2020, Judge Ivana Hrdličková, President of
the Special Tribunal, indicated that the work of the Special Tribunal would not be
completed by the end of its current mandate on 28 February 2021, and that an
extension of the mandate for a further period of two years would allow the Special
Tribunal to significantly advance its work towards completion.
As the activities of the Special Tribunal have not yet been completed, and in the
light of the consultations with the Government of Lebanon and the members of the
Security Council, as well as the precarious financial situation of the Special Tribunal,
I intend to extend the mandate of the Special Tribunal from 1 March 2021 for a further
period of two years, or until the completion of the cases before the Special Tribunal,
if sooner, or the exhaustion of available funds, if sooner.
Within the above-indicated two-year mandate period, it is anticipated that the
Special Tribunal will progressively draw down its activities as the judicial work
before the different Chambers is completed. In this regard, I intend to undertake
consultations on residual functions that may be required to be performed following
the completion of the current judicial work of the Special Tribunal as soon as possible.
Furthermore, despite intense fundraising efforts, the financial situation of the
Special Tribunal remains uncertain. Pursuant to article 5 of the annex to Security
Council resolution 1757 (2007), 51 per cent of the expenses of the Special Tribunal
shall be borne by voluntary contributions from States, and 49 per cent by the
Government of Lebanon. While the Government of Lebanon has confirmed its
support to the Special Tribunal in line with the standing policy of previous
Governments of Lebanon in the last decade, the level and timing of its contribution
for 2021 is currently uncertain in view of the dire socioeconomic and financial
situation in the country.
Moreover, the Management Committee of the Special Tribunal has informed the
Secretariat that none of the donors would be in a position to cover any shortfall that
would be left if the Government of Lebanon were to be unable to meet its assessed

21-02139 (E)

180221

*2102139*

S/2021/149

contribution for 2021, and that several donors were currently unable to commit to
making contributions at the same level as they had in previous years.
On the basis of the information that I have received, I understand that, without
additional funding, the Special Tribunal may not be able to carry out its mandate
beyond the first quarter of 2021.
Pursuant to article 5, paragraph 2, of the annex to Security Council resolution
1757 (2007), should voluntary contributions be insufficient for the Special Tribunal
to implement its mandate, the Secretary-General and the Security Council shall
explore alternate means of financing the Special Tribunal. In accordance with this
provision, on 15 December 2020, I launched an urgent appeal to all Member States
and the international community to financially support the continuation of the judicial
proceedings that still remain before the Special Tribunal. Unfortunately, the appeal
did not generate any new commitments of funds.
To bring the ongoing judicial proceedings of the Special Tribunal to an abrupt
close in these circumstances would be unprecedented. A premature closure would
have a significant impact on international justice efforts and would send a negative
message to the people of Lebanon and to victims of terrorism worldwide. Immediate
steps therefore need to be taken to make up for the anticipated shortfall.
In the light of the foregoing, and following consultations with the Government
of Lebanon and the members of the Security Council, I wish to inform the Council of
my intention to request a subvention from the General Assembly for 2021 in the
amount of approximately $25 million, a figure that is intended to cover the anticipated
shortfall in contributions from Lebanon, as well as from the usual donors of the
Special Tribunal. A subvention would be a temporary measure to address the current
acute financial situation, while the Special Tribunal continues to seek additional
voluntary funds.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council at the earliest opportunity.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-02139
