S/2009/525

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 8 October 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005),
1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I have the honour to convey the attached
letter dated 28 September 2009, which I received from Javier Solana, High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and Secretary-General
of the Council of the European Union (see annex), transmitting the nineteenth report
on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 June to 31 August 2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

09-55043 (E) 131009

*0955043*

S/2009/525

Annex
Letter dated 28 September 2009 from the High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy and Secretary-General
of the Council of the European Union addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004),
1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I attach the nineteenth
quarterly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 June to 31 August
2009. I should be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

09-55043

S/2009/525

Enclosure
Report of the High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy and Secretary-General of the Council of the
European Union on the activities of the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
I.

Introduction
1.

This report covers the period from 1 June to 31 August 2009.

2.
The Security Council in its resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006),
1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008) requested that Member States, acting through or in
cooperation with the European Union, report to the Council on the activities of
EUFOR, through the appropriate channels and at least at three-monthly intervals.
This document is the nineteenth such report.
II.

Political background
3.
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council met in Sarajevo on
29 and 30 June to assess progress on the five objectives and two conditions which
have been set for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. At the
meeting, the Steering Board expressed its strong concern with the level of progress
in addressing reforms and the “5+2 agenda”. The Steering Board was also concerned
about the overall negative political climate in the country, including frequent
challenges to the constitutional order.
4.
Owing to the failure of the relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
ensure adequate progress in addressing the State property objective, the High
Representative on 12 August took a decision by which the Office of the High
Representative will provide technical assistance in compiling the State property
inventory and auditing its results. The inventory compiled by the Office of the High
Representative will serve as the basis for discussions leading to an
intergovernmental agreement.
5.
As part of a package of laws required for visa liberalization, the Law on the
control of movement of weapons and military equipment was adopted by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly in urgent procedure on 15 June. The law
entered into force on 15 July.
6.
On 23 July, the Council of Ministers adopted amendments to the Law on the
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Law on the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which would extend by three years the mandate for international
judges and prosecutors working on war crimes cases. The amendments, at the
request of the State Court, also provide an ad litem extension for international
judges working on first instance cases beyond the end of 2009. However, the Prime
Minister of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, and other representatives of his party
stated in the media that SNSD would vote against the extension of the mandates for
all international judges, including those working on war crimes cases. The draft
legislation was sent to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly in
August.
7.
Following a meeting of Milorad Dodik (SNSD), Sulejman Tihic (SDA) and
Dragan Covic (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) hosted by the Presidency of the

09-55043

3

S/2009/525

European Union Council and the United States in Dubrovnik, a wider group of
political leaders convened in Sarajevo on 16 July, in the presence of the High
Representative. The political leaders discussed visa liberalization and committed
themselves to working urgently on resolving the remaining issues in this field in
order to reduce the gap between Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries in the
region. They also discussed the fulfilment of the five objectives and two conditions
required for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. No concrete
agreement was reached at the meeting.
8.
During the reporting period, the High Representative used Bonn powers four
times. On 8 June he dismissed two senior police officials for anti-Dayton behaviour.
On 20 June he annulled the Conclusions of the National Assembly of Republika
Srpska on transfer of competencies from the entity to the State level, considering
them anti-Dayton and anti-constitutional. On 29 July, as Mostar was still without a
Mayor or budget months after the elections, he imposed a temporary budget for
Mostar until 30 September. In addition to this, on 6 June the Brcko Supervisor
issued a supervisory order banning certain private security companies based in
Republika Srpska from acquiring contracts in the district for a period of five years.
9.
On 15 July, the European Commission adopted a proposal to enable visa-free
travel for citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Serbia, with effect from 1 January 2010, with the proviso that the latter two
countries meet the remaining benchmarks by that date. The proposal will require
approval by the Council of the European Union, following consultations with the
European Parliament. Bosnia and Herzegovina (as well as Albania and Kosovo) did
not receive a positive assessment, because it still needs to fulfil a number of
outstanding requirements from the visa liberalization road map, including the
introduction of biometric passports, a reinforced framework for the fight against
organized crime and corruption, and improved border and migration management.
III.

Security situation and EUFOR activities
10. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained calm and
stable throughout the reporting period. Although nationalistic rhetoric continued, it
had no impact on the safe and secure environment. The economic downturn
continued to affect Bosnia and Herzegovina, and led to a number of strikes. All of
these were professionally and capably handled by Bosnia and Herzegovina law
enforcement agencies, and had no impact on the overall security situation. The
annual Srebrenica commemoration in July was conducted without significant
incident. EUFOR continued to monitor the overall security situation.
11. The force of some 2,200 troops is concentrated in Sarajevo, with liaison and
observation teams deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. EUFOR continued
to conduct operations in line with its mandate: providing deterrence; ensuring
continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities specified in the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, Annexes 1A and 2; and contributing to the
maintenance of the safe and secure environment. EUFOR also continued to support
the Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies in fighting organized crime
in close cooperation with the European Union Police Mission and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the search for persons indicted for war
crimes. In response to requests from the Tribunal, and with the support of NATO

4

09-55043

S/2009/525

and local police, EUFOR carried out search operations against support networks of
persons indicted for war crimes.
12. There was progress during the reporting period in the area of joint military
affairs. EUFOR continued to support inspections by the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina of their ammunition and weapon storage sites; the management of
those sites in order to enhance the self-sustainability of the latter’s capabilities; and
the planning for the disposal of Armed Forces surplus weapons and ammunition.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence disposal plan awaits approval by
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. As noted above, the Law on civilian
movement control (control of the movement of weapons and military equipment by
Bosnia and Herzegovina contractors) came into force on 15 July. EUFOR has
prepared a road map for the handover of this final joint military affairs task to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security and commenced specialist
administrative training of Ministry personnel. A memorandum of understanding is to
be signed shortly by EUFOR and the Ministry of Security, following which
responsibility will formally be transferred to the Ministry. As with other joint
military affairs tasks already transferred to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities,
EUFOR will monitor, mentor and advise on implementation.
13. During the reporting period, EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to conduct combined training in line with the 2009 training
calendar. Senior officers participated in EUFOR map exercises, and units up to
company level in EUFOR tactical exercises.
14. As previously reported, on 18 May 2009 the Council of the European Union
approved, for planning purposes, the concept of operations for a possible evolution
of Operation ALTHEA towards a non-executive capacity-building and training
operation; reconfirmed that it would keep this planning work under regular review
so that a decision on the future of the operation could be taken once the necessary
conditions had been met; and reiterated that approval of the concept did not
prejudge a political decision on the possible evolution of the operation, which would
need to take political developments, including the future role of the European Union
Special Representative, into account. During the reporting period operational
planning for a possible evolution continued. No decisions have been taken.
IV.

Outlook
15. The security situation is expected to remain stable despite the prospects of
continuing political tension.

09-55043

5
