United Nations

S/PV.5938

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5938th meeting
Friday, 18 July 2008, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bui The Giang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Skračić
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. De Vengoechea
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2008/454)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-42878 (E)

*0842878*

S/PV.5938

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2008/454)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of India, Japan and Nepal in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In
accordance
with
the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal and head of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal
for United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process (S/2008/454).

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Martin: On 28 May, six days after I last
briefed the Council, Nepal’s newly elected Constituent
Assembly held its first meeting. It voted to implement
a federal democratic republic, and within the allotted
period the former king left the palace, without incident,
to remain peacefully in Nepal.
Tomorrow the Assembly is scheduled to elect
Nepal’s first president and to proceed to name a prime
minister, who will form a new government. In his
12 May report (S/2008/313), the Secretary-General had
said that he did not anticipate a further extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN), but that once the government was formed, I,
as his Special Representative, together with the
Resident Coordinator, would enter into discussions
with it regarding whatever assistance it may request
from the United Nations for the completion and
consolidation of the peace process and for the longterm development of Nepal. Obviously, discussion with
a new government has not been able to take place, but
in the meantime the Council has before it a request
based on a consensus among the main parties for an
extension of the mandate of UNMIN. The clarification
of that request sought by the Secretary-General has
now been received through the Permanent
Representative of Nepal.
Allow me to begin by summarizing the outcome
and the unfinished business of the negotiations that
have delayed the formation of a new government. The
interim constitution provided for the decision regarding
a republic to be made by the first meeting of the
Assembly, but it was silent on arrangements for the
functions of head of State during the drafting of a new
constitution. It provided for a prime minister to be
selected by political consensus or, failing that, by a
two-thirds majority and, similarly, to be subject to
removal by a two-thirds majority vote. The Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN (M)), which had
campaigned for its own leader to become executive
president and whose members constitute over one-third
of the Assembly, was persuaded in the post-election
negotiations to agree to the amendment of the interim
constitution to provide for a president and vicepresident, with the prime minister remaining executive

08-42878

S/PV.5938

head of government, and to allow for the prime
minister to be elected or ousted by a simple majority.

potentially serious consequences for the support base
of a new government.

Those were aspects of a broad-ranging agreement
signed on 25 June by leaders of the Seven-Party
Alliance, which constituted the basis for proceeding to
the formation of a new government, and I will refer
later to other aspects of the agreement. After the
agreement was signed, however, the Assembly was
unable to proceed immediately to adopt the required
amendments to the interim constitution, as the newly
elected Madhesi parties, which had not been party to
the aforementioned negotiations but form the fourthlargest bloc in the Assembly, demanded that
undertakings given to them in a February agreement
with the interim government should also be entrenched
in constitutional amendments. Their interpretation of
the February agreement includes the acceptance of the
highly controversial demand for the Tarai plains of
southern Nepal to become an autonomous Madhesi
province within the future federal State. For twelve
days, they prevented the Assembly from carrying out
business. Only last Sunday, 13 July, were the
amendments to the interim constitution voted by the
Assembly, with members of Madhesi parties
boycotting but no longer obstructing the proceedings.

A significant attribute of the presidency is that
the president will be commander-in-chief of the Nepal
army, acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
The responsibilities within government for the security
sector and for decisions regarding the future of the
Maoist army have been an important element in the
negotiations and one of particular relevance for the
continuing role requested of the United Nations. The
constitutional amendments introduce the position of
leader of the opposition, who will be a member of the
constitutional council, which considers appointments
to constitutional bodies. But the Nepali Congress,
which has publicly contemplated remaining in
opposition, insisted that the leader of the opposition
should also be a member of the National Security
Council. That was voted down by the Maoists and the
UML.

With the conclusion of the 25 June agreement,
Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala of the Nepali
Congress announced his resignation, although until that
can be submitted to the new president, he has remained
at the head of the caretaker cabinet, in which ministers
from the other two main parties, the Communist Party
of Nepal (Unified Marxist Leninist) (UML) and the
CPN(M) have ceased to participate. The most
contentious and unresolved issue has been the sharing
of posts and power among the parties. The Maoists
have been acknowledged by the other parties to have
the right, as the largest party in the Assembly, to name
the prime minister. But both the Nepali Congress and
the UML have publicly laid claim to the presidency,
with the Nepali Congress stating that it will otherwise
not participate in a new coalition Government. The
Maoists continue to appeal for all major parties to
participate in a Maoist-led Government, but have not
accepted the preferred presidential nominees of either
the Nepali Congress or the UML, and have now
nominated a Madhesi, who is not from any of the major
parties. Efforts to achieve consensus appear to have
broken down ahead of tomorrow’s vote, with

08-42878

It was, however, agreed and provided by the
constitutional amendments that members of political
parties not included in the Government should be
represented in the special committee to be established
under article 146 of the interim constitution to
supervise, integrate and rehabilitate the combatants of
the Maoist army. That special committee will thus be
quite large, and the 25 June agreement envisages that it
may require a technical committee of experts
functioning under its auspices.
The inter-party negotiations displayed wide
differences of view among the parties regarding the
future of the combatants, which were not resolved,
although the process by which the special committee
would carry out its task was elaborated somewhat. It is
to collect information regarding the circumstances of
those combatants registered and verified by UNMIN.
The verified combatants will be offered a choice
between an economic package and other unspecified
alternatives for rehabilitation. Those who choose
integration will be deemed eligible for possible
integration with security bodies “after fulfilling the
standard requirements”. In response to concern that if
the Maoist leadership heads the new government, it
should not also continue to control a political army, the
Maoist army will be under the supervision, control and
direction of the multi-party special committee until
integration and rehabilitation is complete. From the
outset of integration and rehabilitation, Maoist
combatants will have no involvement with any political

3

S/PV.5938

organization, and those who have had dual political
and military responsibilities will have to choose one or
the other.
The 25 June agreement requires that the
integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist combatants
shall be carried out within six months, and in this
context provided that a request would be made for
UNMIN to continue monitoring the management of
arms and armies for six more months. The Government
thus wrote formally to the Secretary-General on 8 July
requesting such ongoing monitoring and assistance in
implementing that aspect of the 25 June agreement.
The letter was received as the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2008/454) was in the final stages of
drafting, and the Secretary-General noted that it lacked
the clarity required for him to recommend a continuing
United Nations presence in the form of a special
political mission and instructed me to seek further
clarification. Shortly before leaving Kathmandu, I met
with each of the leaders of the three largest parties: the
Prime Minister, who is President of the Nepali
Congress; the Chairman of the CPN(M), who it is
expected would be prime minister of a Maoist-led
government; and the General Secretary of the UML.
Each of them confirmed that they wished UNMIN to
continue as a special political mission headed by a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
order to assist in taking the peace process forward to
its logical conclusion. They noted the importance in the
period ahead of not only continued monitoring of arms
and armies, but also assistance in implementing the
agreement on the management of arms and army
personnel in accordance with the multi-party
understanding of 25 June. That of course in no way
detracts from the fact that the process remains and will
remain a fully Nepalese-owned process.
Consistent with that and as already noted, the
wishes of Nepal’s Government and leading political
parties have also been clarified to the SecretaryGeneral by the Permanent Representative of Nepal. I
am thus now authorized to convey to the Council the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mandate
of UNMIN should be extended, as requested by Nepal,
for a period of six months.
Shortly before leaving Nepal, I participated at
ceremonies marking the closure of each of the five
regional UNMIN offices — with some sadness,
because I believe that their presence and the frequent
visits of their personnel to the districts have had a

4

significant mitigating effect on local conflicts, which
are yet to be addressed by effective local governance or
peace committees. As the Secretary-General’s report
noted, the Electoral Assistance Office closed at the end
of May and the Office of Civil Affairs is now
terminating with the closure of regional offices and the
end of the current mandate.
Our plans envisage that, if the Council extends
UNMIN’s mandate, the Special Representative will
continue to be supported by the Political Affairs
Section while the Arms Monitoring Office will
continue at approximately half its previous
establishment of 186 arms monitors. I am advised that
this is viable, for a time, but I hope that early decisions
by the special committee supervising the Maoists
combatants can reduce, for example, the burden of
around-the-clock monitoring of eight weapon storage
areas.
Meanwhile, UNMIN has been working closely
with the United Nations country team to ensure the
transfer of functions and experience at the end of this
mandate period or, as early as possible within the
period of any extension.
I must be frank in expressing my concern about
how rapidly the new government will be able to move
forward in implementing the 25 June agreement, which
depends greatly on the degree of multi-party
cooperation that survives the current disagreements
over the sharing of posts. The agreement requires that
the special committee will be formed and start work
within 15 days of the formation of the Council of
Ministers. Past experience suggests that an agreement
on the full Council of Ministers may itself take some
time after the election of the prime minister. The
agreement then envisages a period of six months for
the special committee to reach and implement
decisions regarding integration and rehabilitation and
provide that “the country will not bear any
responsibility for verified combatants who have not
been reintegrated or rehabilitated after six months”.
At the same time, it will be recalled that the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement requires an action
plan for the “democratization” of the Nepal army to
include determining its appropriate size, training the
army in the values of democracy and human rights,
ensuring its democratic structure and building its
national and inclusive character.

08-42878

S/PV.5938

One contentious aspect of the recent negotiations
with the Madhesi parties was the precise nature of the
commitment to greater inclusion of Madhesis in the
Nepal army, which, in the constitutional amendment,
has taken the form of a guarantee of the entry of all
historically marginalized groups to the army on the
basis of equality and inclusiveness.
The debate about the responsibility of for the
Nepal army under new constitutional arrangements has
drawn attention to the fact that, following the abolition
of the monarchy, which in the past had exercised de
facto control of the army, Nepal lacks the machinery
for the effective accountability of the army to an
elected government.
Two recent mutinies of lower-ranks against
officers of the Nepal police and the armed police force
have also highlighted the potential volatility of the
security sector in the new political and social climate.
Ideally, decisions about the future of the Maoist
combatants should be taken in the context of broader
decisions about the security sector.
However, these issues will require attention far
beyond the next six months, in which the future of the
Maoist combatants is to be decided. In this context, the
Council will want to review progress, in order to
ensure that good use is being made of the limited
further presence of UNMIN being requested.
The Secretary-General thus recommends a review
after three months, which would focus on further
downsizing and other steps towards the end of the
mandate, in the context of the new government’s
progress in deciding the future of the Maoist
combatants. The Council will no doubt expect this to
include a report that the minors and others excluded by
UNMIN’s verification have belatedly been discharged,
with appropriate support to their reintegration.
This is by no means the only challenge facing
Nepal before it can be said to be enjoying conditions of
sustainable peace essential for the economic and social
progress its people expect and deserve. I said to the
Council in May that the lack of progress in delivering
on compensation for victims of the conflict,
investigation of disappearances, and return of property
and displaced persons to their homes remains a source
of deep grievances. The 25 June agreement makes
fresh promises in these respects, including the
establishment of commissions long ago required by the

08-42878

Comprehensive
agreements.

Peace

Agreement

and

other

The CPN(M) pledges in the agreement that the
paramilitary functioning of its Young Communist
League will be completely terminated and that it will
fully comply with the laws of the land, while no
mechanisms are to function in parallel to the
government. The dangers of the vacuum of effective
State authority at the local level have become
increasingly evident during this period of protracted
national-level
negotiations.
The
constitutional
amendments now provide that until local elections are
able to be held, interim bodies will be formed at the
district, municipality and village levels, with the
participation and consensus of those political parties
active at the local level.
Meanwhile, the disruption and boycott of the
Constituent Assembly by the Madhesi parties and the
strikes and demonstrations by those opposing their
demands have shown how difficult may be the path to
decisions regarding the form of federalism appropriate
to Nepal.
Some Nepalis say that their peace process cannot
be regarded as complete until a new constitution has
been adopted and the first elections held accordingly;
all are agreed that it is not complete while there are
two armies in the country. It is to assist Nepal in
reaching beyond that still dangerous condition that its
main political actors all believe that a limited further
presence of UNMIN is necessary and the SecretaryGeneral supports their request.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Special Representative and
also His Excellency the Ambassador of Nepal. It is
very good to have him here and we welcome the
constructive relationship that the Government of Nepal
and the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
have created between them.
My country very much welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on UNMIN. We do welcome
UNMIN’s continuing positive role in Nepal’s peace
process, and that includes the preparations for the
historic elections of 10 April. These, in turn, cleared
the way for the first meeting of the Constituent
Assembly on 28 May and the subsequent declaration of
Nepal as a federal republic and we were able to hear
from the Special Representative a little bit more about
the political context, which was very helpful.

5

S/PV.5938

Nepal’s elections created the most diverse and
representative assembly in the country’s history. The
result is a huge credit to Nepal and also a huge
opportunity — a real chance to strengthen Nepal’s
democratic institutions and address the issues that
fuelled the conflict.

Nepal’s peace process at the Government of Nepal’s
request during the next six months. It is important that
the Mission continues to be responsive to the
requirements of both the governments of Nepal and
this Council and is able to reduce its presence further,
as soon as it is appropriate.

However, as the report makes clear and as we
heard from the Special Representative, challenges, of
course, remain. Despite elections and prolonged
negotiations between the parties, it has not been
possible to reach agreement on the formation of a new
government. The announcement of the election for a
new president on 19 July represents progress, but there
does seem a continuing lack of trust and consensus
between the parties.

We welcome the letter and the subsequent
clarification that the Permanent Representative of
Nepal has been able to provide. We fully support the
extension of UNMIN’s mandate for a further six
months and we hope negotiations on the draft
resolution to achieve this can be concluded quickly, so
that we can adopt it early next week.

Any further delay in forming the government
risks undermining the people of Nepal’s confidence in
the democratic process and we hope, therefore, that we
can all recognize the importance of encouraging the
parties to work together, to respect the mandate given
to them following the elections and to establish a
government that can start to tackle the important
challenges facing Nepal. We stand ready, for our part,
to support that new government.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
future of former combatants continue to be an issue of
special concern. A constant theme of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNMIN has been the need to take
early action to resolve this issue, and it is disappointing
that, so far, the parties have been unable to reach
agreement on this important question.
We therefore believe that swift and full
implementation of the 25 June agreement is a priority.
This will require the reconstitution of the special
committee provided for in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. It will also mean that, in accordance with
article 146 of the Interim Constitution, the inclusion of
representatives of the Assembly’s political parties. The
United Kingdom agrees that UNMIN will be wellplaced to support this work through the monitoring of
arms and armed personnel and through the work of a
special political mission and, more generally, the
Special Representative.
My Government welcomes the proposed
reconfiguration of UNMIN. This will significantly
reduce staff levels, but it will also ensure the retention
of the core capacity in monitoring analysis and
political engagement to allow UNMIN to support

6

We also agree with the Secretary-General that
there should be no need for UNMIN to continue its
arms monitoring function beyond the next phase of its
mandate. It is in the interest of neither Nepal nor the
United Nations for UNMIN to remain any longer than
is necessary. It is also clear that the precise timetable
for UNMIN’s withdrawal will depend to some extent
on the willingness of the political parties to create the
conditions for that withdrawal. That means, in
particular, through implementation of the 25 June
Agreement. The Security Council must, in our view,
make clear its expectations of the parties in that regard.
I should like to conclude by offering our thanks
to Ian Martin and his team. We welcome his decision to
remain to see UNMIN through the next and final phase
of the process. UNMIN has played an important role in
supporting the peace process, and we look to the
Government of Nepal to make full use of the Mission’s
expertise over the next six months.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by welcoming the presence of Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, and of the Permanent Representative of Nepal. I
should also like to thank the Special Representative for
his comprehensive overview of the current situation in
Nepal and of the assistance that the United Nations has
given, is giving and can continue to give to the ongoing
peace process.
Nepal has recently experienced many historic
moments — a series of what I would call “firsts”. In
April, the Nepalese elected a Constituent Assembly for
the first time. On 28 May, the Assembly met for the
first time and decided to change the form of the State
by making Nepal a federal republic. Tomorrow, Nepal
will appoint its first president.

08-42878

S/PV.5938

The Nepalese can be proud of the peace that they
have built. In no peace process has the word
“ownership” been so meaningful because, while Nepal
has certainly benefited from the support of the United
Nations and the international community, it has also
been the driving force behind its own peace process.
In particular, Belgium wishes to congratulate
Nepal on the proportion of women elected to the
Constituent Assembly, who represent more than a third
of those elected. That performance puts Nepal in
fourteenth place on a list of 135 countries. Since the
Constituent Assembly is mandated to chart the
country’s future, it is essential that women, who
represent more than 50 per cent of the population, be
equally involved.
While stressing progress, we should not close our
eyes to the challenges ahead, to which we believe it is
our duty to draw the attention of the Nepalese
authorities. The Secretary-General highlights the fact
that the human rights situation remains very
worrisome. We share that concern. A lasting peace
cannot be based on extrajudicial executions or on
impunity for past acts of violence. In particular, we
encourage the new Government to provide for
transitional justice mechanisms.
The issue of weapons and armies must not remain
the “poor relation” of the peace process. We
congratulate the parties on the 25 June Agreement and,
in particular, on the provisions related to the strategy
for discharge from the cantonments. It is essential that
those provisions be implemented as soon as a
Government has been formed. Here, we should also
like to stress the urgent case of minors who have not
yet been demobilized.
The issue that particularly concerns us today is
that of UNMIN’s future. At the request of the parties,
the United Nations assisted the peace process during its
crucial phase. Now we must see how the Organization
can best continue that assistance, in response to the
request of the Government of Nepal.
We sincerely encourage the parties to implement
the 25 June Agreement — particularly those provisions
relating to the cantonments — swiftly and in good
faith. It is in that spirit that we can support a six-month
renewal of UNMIN’s mandate.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to offer our greetings to the Permanent

08-42878

Representative of Nepal, whose presence in the
Security Council is welcomed by Costa Rica.
We listened to Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, who
updated us on the situation in Nepal and provided an
analysis of what the Secretary-General and he consider
to be that country’s main achievements, challenges and
problems in the light of the new situation following the
elections for the Constituent Assembly, the declaration
of its new status as a federal and democratic republic,
and the announcement that, as we hope, a president
will be elected tomorrow. We thank Mr. Martin for his
presence and for his contributions to that process and
this debate.
Given all that, and with regard to the case of
Nepal, we should consider the challenges and problems
of societies that have undergone such profound
changes. On the one hand, it is commendable that the
Nepalese have chosen to establish a democratic
republic as their form of Government. On the other, it
is imperative to bear in mind that such a Government
does not take shape spontaneously or easily — quite
the contrary. All too often, when peoples have been
subjected to totalitarian forms of Government, they
find that, once they have gained the freedom to
establish institutions that respect the will of the
majority, peaceful dissent, pluralism and basic human
rights, divisions of class, culture, aspirations and
experience forcefully emerge. In addition, new
obstacles — sometimes unforeseen and unimagined —
emerge in the building of a democracy.
In such circumstances, what is required is firm
and illustrious leadership, endowed with vision and a
sense of history, to help guide the people in a
constructive manner and to prevent petty, egoistic
interests or demagoguery removed from reality from
prevailing. This is the time to learn to compromise,
while fighting by legitimate means for the interests of
those who are being represented. It is precisely the
time for the force of arms to give fully way to reason.
Nepal has begun to build its democracy, and the
United Nations must continue playing an important
role in that process. That is why Costa Rica has
supported the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for an additional
six-month period. During that period, we hope that the
political parties and their leaders, assisted by civil
society in its diverse forms, will begin to address in a

7

S/PV.5938

democratic manner the problems related to the needed
strengthening of the police forces, both with regard to
the crucial technical aspects of providing security for
the population, and with regard to human rights and the
rule of law. Incidents such as those in which certain
police sectors were involved after the elections must
not recur.
For Costa Rica, the involvement of children in
armed conflicts is unacceptable. We know that, in
Nepal as in other countries that have experienced
serious and bloody conflict, it is a reality that cannot be
hidden. Nevertheless, we call for the swift
demobilization of those individuals and for their social
reintegration, given their status as minors. To that end,
they must be offered education, health care and
opportunities so that they can realize their potential as
human beings. Impunity too is unacceptable for Costa
Rica. Therefore, we believe that Nepal should establish
transitional justice mechanisms that will guarantee
respect for the rights both of victims and of the
accused. There will be no lasting peace without justice.
It is unacceptable for those who carried out acts of
extrajudicial justice, whichever group they belong to,
not to be tried appropriately.
The issue of human rights is fundamental. It is
part of the foundation upon which the United Nations
is built. We know that the National Human Rights
Commission of Nepal and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in that
country have been working together. We hope to see
that collaboration strengthened and yielding the
anticipated results.
As we see it, the extension of UNMIN’s mandate
has one central aim: disarmament, including the
management of the arms of personnel in cantonments
and the integration of such personnel into the Nepal
Army or other activities beneficial to them and to the
country, thus completing the reconciliation and
peacemaking process in accordance with the content of
paragraph 64 of the Secretary-General’s report.
That should be UNMIN’s main undertaking
during this phase, while other United Nations offices
and entities, as well as the Nepalese Government and
civil society, should focus on other aspects and tasks
that are indispensable to peaceful, democratic
reconstruction. Activities related to arms, peacemaking
and reconciliation constitute the main added value that
UNMIN can provide during this delicate period.

8

Costa Rica understands that peace, human rights
and socio-economic development are the three pillars
of the raison d’être of the United Nations. That is no
coincidence. It is the logical conclusion after observing
the history of humankind. Nepal has now broached a
new phase of peace and the further strengthening and
protection of human rights, at a time when the global
economy is in not in the best of situations. The rapid
surge in the prices of oil and basic foodstuffs has had
an impact on broad sectors of the population, in
particular in least developed countries. That further
complicates the tasks that lie ahead of the people and
leadership of Nepal. In turn, it requires great wisdom
and solidarity, and we trust that they will exhibit both
of those.
Finally, we would like to indicate that Costa Rica
has stressed the need to establish a clear date or
benchmark for the conclusion of the Mission. That
emphasis has several purposes, including, first, to
remind ourselves, the United Nations, that missions
cannot be extended indefinitely. Secondly, the
Nepalese, who have retained control and ownership of
the process, should exercise this fully as of a particular
moment. At the same time, they should have all the
time they need to prepare for that; the same applies to
the troop-contributing countries and all those
participating in the Mission.
Furthermore, in this specific case, this will also
send a signal to the Nepalese leaders that time is
marching on and that they must therefore redouble
their efforts to reach agreement and undertake action.
Especially with regard to the demobilization or transfer
of combatants, leaders cannot shirk that difficult and
delicate task, even though it entails costs of several
kinds. It would thus be better to proceed while UNMIN
is present on the ground in order to draw on all the
assistance that the Mission can provide — albeit within
a defined time limit. It is not about trying to rush
matters or attempting to do things before it is possible.
Rather, it is about expediting action and acting
accordingly.
The people of Nepal are putting an end to years
of armed confrontation and are on a new path towards
prosperity. Costa Rica wishes them well in that
endeavour and reiterates its staunch support, in areas
where we can be of assistance, so that the success
gained to date can be further built upon.

08-42878

S/PV.5938

Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I thank him and the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for their hard work over
the past year and a half.
As a neighbouring country of Nepal, China takes
great pleasure in seeing the continuous positive
progress in the peace process in Nepal. On 10 April,
Nepal successfully conducted the election of its
Constituent Assembly. On 28 May, the Constituent
Assembly held its first meeting and declared the
establishment of a federal democratic republic and the
posts of President and Vice-President, and decided that
it would draft a new constitution within two years. At
present, various parties are engaged in positive and
active consultation on the formation of the new
government. Tomorrow, moreover, Nepal will hold its
presidential election.
China has a positive view of those important
developments and appreciates the tireless efforts of the
parties and the people of Nepal. We expect and believe
that the people and the Government of Nepal have the
ability and the wisdom to continue to settle outstanding
issues in the peace process through dialogue and
consultation and to achieve long-term peace, stability
and development in accordance with the established
plan.
China appreciates the strong support provided by
UNMIN in the election of the Constituent Assembly of
Nepal. At present, Nepal is at a critical transitional
period. Recently, Nepal made a request to the
Secretary-General in the hope that UNMIN would be
reduced in size, that its mandate would be extended for
six months and that it would continue to facilitate the
monitoring of the management of arms and armed
personnel.
China supports the extension of UNMIN’s
mandate at the request of Nepal, with the prerequisite
of a clear mandate. We encourage UNMIN to continue
the work of monitoring arms and armed personnel so as
to create a good security environment for a smooth
post-election transition in Nepal.
It is necessary to point out that in the end that the
peace process in Nepal should be led by the Nepalese
people and that issues related to peaceful
reconstruction should likewise be settled by relying on
the wisdom of the people themselves.

08-42878

We believe that, with the support of the
international community, a new Nepal will be able to
return once again to the path of peace and
development.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Ian Martin for his
valuable briefing on the situation in Nepal. I wish also
to welcome the presence at today’s meeting of the
Permanent Representative of Nepal.
We note that, following the election of the
Constituent Assembly of Nepal on 10 April, the peace
process seems to be following its normal course. While
we can observe some disruption, that is only to be
expected, because Nepal is going through a period of
political change. We have taken note of the first
meeting of the Assembly, which took place on 28 May,
which adopted important measures, including in
particular the proclamation of a federal democratic
republic in Nepal.
As part of the progress made, we welcome the
25 June signing by the political parties of the important
Agreement to amend the Constitution and take the
peace process forward. We believe that the
commitment undertaken by the parties to the
Agreement to establish five commissions to address
national peace and rehabilitation, State restructuring,
an investigation into disappeared persons, land reform
and the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission represents an important step forward. In
the context of Nepal, it is above all crucial to have a
participatory and inclusive process that includes all
social and political actors. Obviously, that includes the
Maoist faction.
There are many encouraging signs reflecting the
determination of the political class to choose dialogue,
which is the only alternative for a real settlement in
Nepal. We hope that the determination to find common
ground will soon lead to the establishment of a
consensus Government — as provided for by the
Interim Constitution — whose priorities will include
tackling the country’s numerous development and
reconstruction challenges. That requires that stability
be ensured. We must therefore remain very vigilant
about the issue of security, as there have been some
violations of human rights, a surge in crime and the
emergence of new armed groups. Those are indications
that, despite the progress made, the situation remains

9

S/PV.5938

fragile. In any case, steps must be taken to strengthen
policing activities and transitional justice mechanisms.

of the Nepalese people may be characterized by
democracy and economic development.

Likewise, the lengthy period of political
instability in large part explains the country’s economic
fragility, which is compounded by the economic crisis.
Efforts to strengthen peace in Nepal must also include
the adoption of an appropriate economic recovery
programme based on poverty reduction. Moreover, the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Nepal 2008-2010, which is now in effect, should be
strengthened and supported by the international
community. To that end, we welcome the steps taken to
develop a peacebuilding support strategy. It is above
all critical that we address the problem of
unemployment, reintegrate young people and
rehabilitate basic services.

Thirdly, the United States also strongly
encourages the new Government to address, to the
extent possible, the concerns of historically
disadvantaged groups, including in the Terai, so that all
parties and groups committed to a new democratic
Nepal will share equally in the process of nationbuilding.

Given the useful work it is doing in the service of
the Nepalese people, we welcome the efforts and
commitment of the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
Although there are still challenges for the Mission to
overcome — including monitoring the management of
weapons and forces, administering the cantonments
and demining activities — Nepalese officials have
indicated that they would like the Mission’s mandate
extended. We support that request. We also favour
continued discussions between the Secretary-General
and Nepalese officials to determine a new
configuration for the Mission.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Martin for his briefing. We are
pleased to support the Government of Nepal’s request
for an extension of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN) at a reduced level so that it can
complete remaining elements of its mandate in
carrying out the peace process. Today, I would like to
make four points.
First, the United States strongly supports the
United Nations Mission in Nepal, commends the work
of Special Representative Martin and his staff and
looks forward to working with him to complete the
remaining portions of the UNMIN mandate, especially
with regard to the management of arms and armed
personnel.
Secondly, the United States urges all of Nepal’s
political parties to maintain their resolve to settle their
differences through peaceful dialogue so that the future

10

Finally, the United States has committed itself to
providing nearly $10 million in assistance in support of
Nepal’s transition to democracy in areas such as
security sector reform, conflict resolution, civil society,
supporting legal institutions and political parties. We
urge other donors to offer maximum support to ensure
that Nepal makes a successful transition.
We look forward to the continued work of
UNMIN and to the reports of the Secretary-General in
that regard. We remain committed to helping ensure
that UNMIN successfully carries out its full mandate.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in that country, for his comprehensive
briefing and for introducing the latest report
(S/2008/454) on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process. We
also welcome the Ambassador of Nepal to the meeting
this morning.
Since the adoption of resolution 1740 (2007) and
the subsequent establishment of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), the Nepalese people have
made significant strides towards restoring peace and
democracy in their country. South Africa commends
those efforts. We welcome in particular the successful
holding and conclusion of the elections to the
Constituent Assembly on 10 April. The elections,
which saw a large number of women elected, reflected
the diversity of Nepal’s population.
Now that the electoral process has been
successfully completed, the next step is the formation
of the Government and the relevant institutions of that
country. We have no doubt that the Nepalese people
will also be successful in that venture. We are
confident that the relevant parties in Nepal will, in due
course, complete that process. We hope that the
international community will support the new

08-42878

S/PV.5938

Government of Nepal in its efforts to address the
challenges ahead.
My delegation is encouraged by the progress
made in the peace process in Nepal since the formation
of the Constituent Assembly. As noted in paragraph 4
of the report of the Secretary-General, the
establishment of a republic in Nepal took place in a
generally peaceful environment. Notwithstanding that
progress, the report of the Secretary-General
acknowledges that significant challenges remain in the
country, including reaching an agreement on the basis
for the formation of a new Government, the completion
of the peace process and the country’s long-term
development. In that connection, we encourage all
parties in Nepal to continue to work together in a spirit
of cooperation and to pursue dialogue in order to
address those challenges.
My delegation underlines the importance of
national ownership and the responsibility of Nepalese
stakeholders in addressing the challenges facing their
country. In that regard, we call upon all parties in
Nepal to uphold previous agreements and ensure that
the country is restored to the path towards sustainable
peace, stability and prosperity.
With regard to the role of UNMIN, my delegation
applauds the entire staff of the Mission for their
dedication and invaluable role in support of the
Government and the people of Nepal. We commend in
particular UNMIN’s work on arms monitoring, mine
action, electoral support, gender and social inclusion,
and child protection.
Finally, with respect to the request of the
Government of Nepal for the continuation of UNMIN,
on a smaller scale, to engage in the remainder of its
mandate tasks for a period of another six months,
South Africa stands ready to support that request. We
hope that this mandate extension will enable UNMIN
to complete the remaining activities, in particular the
ongoing work on monitoring the management of arms
and army personnel. We also encourage the new
Government of Nepal to utilize UNMIN’s expertise as
it carries out its own priorities aimed at benefiting all
the Nepalese people.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ian Martin, for his briefing, and would
like to express our appreciation for the work that he
has accomplished since he was appointed.

08-42878

The general development of the situation over the
past several months has indeed been positive. We
welcome in particular the very satisfactory conditions
in which the elections were held. This was a success
for the Nepalese people, and also a success for the
United Nations, which played an essential role in
re-establishing democracy.
Nevertheless, we must remain vigilant. The delay
in forming a new Government — which we understand
will take place soon — shows that the political process
remains complex and fragile. Building peace and
democracy in Nepal constitutes a long-term process
which has only just started. The new Government will
rapidly have to tackle numerous challenges.
In these circumstances, we are of the view that
the Security Council should respond positively to the
Nepalese authorities’ request for an extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) for a further six months. In this regard, my
delegation would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having prepared a draft resolution in this regard, which
we support.
By continuing its work in monitoring the
management of arms and armies over this period — a
task on which the Mission should focus — UNMIN
will give the new authorities time to find a lasting
solution to pending problems linked to the
implementation of the peace process. The meaning of
UNMIN’s continued presence, however, must be clear:
it would be a temporary arrangement which cannot and
must not replace the search for a lasting solution to
the problem of the future of the former Maoist
combatants — quite the contrary. The Nepalese parties
have sought United Nations support for the peace
process and, for their part, they must shoulder their
responsibilities in order to advance this process. The
Secretary-General’s midterm report will be an
opportunity for the Security Council to assess the
progress that has been made.
In this regard, I would like to express our deep
concern at the complete lack of progress made in the
discharge of children from Maoist cantonments.
Nothing can justify this absence of progress, and the
Security Council must remain vigilant and firm in
dealing with this particularly unacceptable situation
which has gone on for far too long.
At the end of UNMIN’s mandate, the
international community will of course remain

11

S/PV.5938

committed to the Nepalese people. The future
government will have to identify its needs in this area
and, in particular, to assess the appropriateness of
possibly maintaining more streamlined United Nations
presence in support of the political process.
In any event, Nepal can count on the solidarity of
the European Union, which is the largest donor of
development assistance to this country. The European
Union has been strongly engaged in support of the
peace process and, in particular, has deployed a large
election observation mission consisting of some 100
short- and long-term observers. The Union will
continue to actively support democracy-building and
economic and social development in Nepal.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
his briefing, and in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2008/454).
After years of internal conflict, Nepal deserves
peace, stability and prosperity. Momentum in realizing
this hope is now evolving in Nepal. We congratulate
the people and the Government of Nepal on the
successful conclusion of the Constituent Assembly
election and on the progress made towards a
democratic, representative process and the creation of a
federal democratic republic.
That accomplishment is indeed a historic triumph
for the people of Nepal, and we are looking forward to
the successful holding of the presidential election
tomorrow. The role of the Nepalese Electoral
Commission in the Constituent Assembly election is
commendable. The Commission has served as an
important catalyst in the promotion of electoral
democracy in the country. My delegation also
recognizes the 25 June 2008 signing by the SevenParty Alliance of an agreement which provides for the
time-bound solution of some key issues in the peace
process.
Those achievements should serve as a stepping
stone for further tangible progress on other critical
goals as stipulated in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We therefore believe that all
concerned parties in Nepal should remain committed to
the peace process and exercise the utmost restraint with
regard to actions that could undermine the peace
process.

12

The conclusion of the Constituent Assembly
election is only the beginning of the hard work of
hammering out a democratic process and the formation
of a representative government. In the post-election
period, there remain critical matters that the future
government of Nepal will have to tackle.
As the Secretary-General observed in his report,
completion of the peace process remains a challenge.
Management of arms and arms personnel still needs to
be completed; this is one of the main pillars of the
CPA. Former combatants have yet to be integrated and
rehabilitated. That will require not only sufficient
funding but also institutional and administrative
measures. In this regard, my delegation attaches great
importance to the formation of a special committee
mandated to verify combatants and to integrate and
rehabilitate them.
Robust democracy in Nepal will come about if
support is truly popular and includes all segments of
Nepalese society across political lines and ethnicity. In
this regard, we welcome the representation of a variety
of ethnic groups that had previously been underrepresented in the Assembly.
With regard to the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), my delegation commends the
Mission, under the leadership of Mr. Martin, for the
technical assistance and advisory services it provided
to the Nepalese authorities before and during the
election. With the successful conclusion of the
election, my delegation welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for a phased, gradual
drawdown and withdrawal of UNMIN staff. As to the
future of UNMIN, we take note of the Government of
Nepal’s letter of 8 July 2008 which, inter alia, requests
an extension of the remainder of UNMIN’s mandate for
an additional six months.
Indonesia believes that since UNMIN’s
deployment was requested by Nepal, its future should
naturally be decided by the people and the Government
of that country. For its part, the Council should stand
ready to respond to the wishes of the Nepalese people
unanimously and decisively, as it did when UNMIN
was established in January 2007. Indonesia thus
supports the request of the Government of Nepal and
the recommendation of the Secretary-General, as just
conveyed by Mr. Ian Martin, for the extension of the
mandate of UNMIN for a period of six months.
Continuing on a smaller scale, UNMIN could focus on

08-42878

S/PV.5938

the ongoing work of monitoring the management of
arms and armed personnel, and assisting Nepal in
moving the peace process towards its conclusion.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, for his detailed briefing about the latest
developments in the situation in Nepal. In recent times,
the political situation in that country has undergone
some important, positive changes that we welcome. We
are convinced that they will have an important positive
impact on the course of the peace process.
The holding of free democratic elections was
followed by a peaceful transition from a monarchic to a
republican form of Government. The election of the
president of the country is to be held on 19 July. We
hope that that is going to be another important
milestone in the development of the peace process.
We expect that the 25 June agreement between
the political parties of the country will have
meaningful importance for efforts to move forward the
democratic process. The signing of that agreement was
possible thanks to the willingness of the main political
forces to engage in constructive joint work. We hope
that a similar spirit of cooperation and compromise
will be demonstrated by the Nepalese parties in their
approach to resolving other matters in carrying out the
tasks of the peace process.
After the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
the main part of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) mandate was successfully completed. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the head of
the Mission, Mr. Martin, and all of his colleagues, for
their fruitful and highly professional work in carrying
out their mandate. We support the request of Nepal to
extend the Mission in Nepal for six further months in a
downsized form, and we agree with the Mission’s
mandate to monitor the implementation of measures
taken in respect of the arms and armed personnel of the
parties and to assist the parties in implementing their
agreement on the management of the arms of the
parties.
The report of the Secretary-General reaffirms the
fact that the presence of the Mission has great potential
to give Nepal assistance in the area that they have
delineated. We endorse the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the gradual, stage-bystage downsizing of the strength of the Mission. On the

08-42878

whole, we take an optimistic view of the prospects for
further progress in the peace process in Nepal, the
main responsibility for which continues to be borne by
the leaders and people of that country.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): First and foremost, I would like to echo
those who have thanked Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information presented in his briefing. We are grateful
to him for his efforts and the efforts deployed by the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN).
We would also like to congratulate the Nepalese
people on the first session of the Constituent Assembly,
held on 20 May, and the decision to abolish the
monarchy, in a peaceful manner, in favour of a
democratic federal republic in Nepal. We believe that
that constitutes a milestone in Nepal’s history. We are
pleased to see the Seven-Party Alliance, which came
into being on 27 May and has helped eradicate a
number of obstacles impeding the establishment of a
new government. We hope that the parties will be able
to reach agreement shortly on the distribution of the
various portfolios and that the new government will be
set up as soon as possible.
In spite of the partial successes achieved by the
Nepalese people, further impetus should be given to
the peace agreements reached between the Nepalese
parties. We are concerned by the information contained
in the Secretary-General’s report concerning the
deteriorating security situation in certain regions, in
particular the upsurge in crime carried out by armed
groups, abductions, blackmail, the emergence of new
armed groups and renewed protest campaigns and
demands by certain marginalized groups. All of that
stands in the way of the political process. We therefore
invite the new government, which we hope will assume
its functions as soon as possible, to further strengthen
State institutions on the basis of the rule of law.
We also hope to see the security situation
improve, an end put to impunity and the rights of
marginalized groups protected in accordance with the
new constitution in order to bolster national
reconciliation. Furthermore, we believe that the
establishment of a single national army with a single
commander-in-chief and the ongoing efforts for the
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants are
key factors for stability and peace for the State, as they

13

S/PV.5938

will contribute towards development and prosperity for
the Nepalese people.
At this juncture, the provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement must be fully
respected, as must the provisions of other recent
agreements, in particular with regard to the
reintegration of combatants, their rehabilitation, the
management of arms, the demobilization of minors and
the response to the concerns of marginalized groups.
That must all be done in close cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations, in accordance
with paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General’s report.
We set great store by the work carried out by the
Nepal Country Team and support its strategy, which is
based on providing development aid to Nepal in order
to build peace through the reform of the State, ensuring
its recovery and preventing the emergence of conflict,
thus assisting in the process of national reconciliation.
That will largely hinge upon the resolve of the
Nepalese people themselves.
Finally, we approve the recommendations issued
by the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMIN in accordance with the request made by the
Nepalese Government, and underscore the importance
of maintaining a United Nations presence in support of
the political process and its actions to support the
peace process.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
thanking Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing and expressing
my delegation’s appreciation and congratulations for
his successful leadership of the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN) during what has proved to be a
pivotal and genuinely transformative period for Nepal.
In many ways, Nepal has emerged as a new
society. The Nepalese people and their political
representatives, who have demonstrated an admirable
ability for cooperation and consensus, deserve our
congratulations for the successful holding of elections
in April and the subsequent forming of the Constituent
Assembly, leading to the peaceful establishment of a
republic.
However, the peace process, which began in 2006
with the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, is not over yet. The elections were a
crucial stage in the peace process, a milestone rather
than a destination and the peace process is still
evolving.

14

In this context, we salute the 25 June agreement
between the political parties to amend the constitution
and move the peace process forward. It is now crucial
that all parties in Nepal sustain their commitment to an
inclusive and constructive political process during this
transition period. The participation of traditionally
marginalized groups and civil society is no less
important.
It is my delegation’s hope to see the swift
formation of a new democratically-elected government
that will focus without delay on the outstanding
commitments arising out of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and also on the immediate challenges that
have a direct impact on the well-being of the Nepalese
population, such as food shortages and the rise in fuel
prices.
Through the UNMIN mandate, the United
Nations has given an important contribution to this
historic process of Nepal’s return to peace, stability
and democracy. The outcome represents a major
success for Nepal, the United Nations and the Security
Council. We agree that now is the time to adapt the
United Nations presence to the new reality and to take
note of the request of the interim Government of
Nepal, contained in its letter of 8 July, for a six-month
continuation of UNMIN, at a smaller scale, to engage
itself in the remainder of the mandate.
While the management of arms and armed
personnel remain the focus of UNMIN’s mandate, we
would like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on the need to achieve a transition to a
durable and permanent solution. While the national
ownership of this process is not in question, we concur
with the Secretary-General’s assessment that, at this
point, monitoring of arms and armed personnel should
continue to be provided within the framework of a
special political mission that can continue to offer the
necessary support for the completion of the peace
process.
As we are focusing on UNMIN’s exit strategy, we
are mindful that the report has rightly identified
remaining challenges of the post-election period that
require sustained effort and attention. Notably, these
would be the discharge of minors, the integration of
Maoist combatants and the democratization of the
army.
While we believe that it will be up to the new
government to address these issues as a matter of

08-42878

S/PV.5938

priority, my delegation believes that we should avoid
the impression that UNMIN’s gradual disengagement
somehow implies that these aspects of the peace
process are no longer relevant and can be disregarded.
In conclusion, we believe that the Nepalese
people deserve our continued support in consolidating
peace, democracy and development and that the United
Nations country team is well-placed to play a central
role.
Mr. De Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to thank
you and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and leader of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), Ian Martin for his report. The
delegation of Panama is deeply grateful to Mr. Martin
and to all the UNMIN staff for the laudable work that
they have accomplished over the last 18 months of the
Mission’s mandate.
The holding of elections and the establishment of
a Constituent Assembly are nothing less than historic
acts for Nepal and we believe that UNMIN played an
essential role in these events.
We note that the delegation of Nepal will be
taking the floor in this debate after Council members
have spoken. As we have said on earlier occasions, by
way of principle, we believe that the States that are
directly involved in the issues being addressed by the
Security Council should always, when possible, be able
to make their statements before Council members take
the floor.
As is indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the majority of UNMIN’s mandate has already been
implemented. Those provisions of 1740 (2007) that
remain to be fulfilled, particularly the monitoring of
arms and armed personnel, in support of the peace
agreement between the parties, should underpin
UNMIN’s new mandate, as was expressed by the
Government of Nepal.
For that reason, in the resolution to be adopted by
the Council, it is crucial that we maintain the character
of this mission as a mission with specific, time-bound
aims. The chief responsibility for successfully
concluding the peace and democratization process will
then fall to the Nepalese, with the United Nations
playing a support role, which, although on a smaller
scale, remains an important one.

08-42878

The responsibility to be shouldered by the new
elected leaders in Nepal is immense and the obstacles
to be overcome are enormous. Reforming the security
sector, for example, is a critical undertaking. The
existence of two armies is inherently destabilizing and
the past refusal of the parties to the conflict to discuss
their future has exacerbated the situation.
As we did in our own country at the start of the
1990s, Panama encourages both the Maoist army and
the Nepal army to also voluntarily disarm. Once this
has been achieved, Panama would support the
establishment of a civilian police force that would
include, when viable, members of both groups.
Additionally, the establishment of a civilian
police force should be part of a package of
rehabilitation and compensation for those who leave
the army once and for all. The integration of the Maoist
combatants into a more democratic Nepalese army
would only further increase the size of the military
structure in a country with scarce resources and facing
minimal external threats.
The protection of human rights would be wellserved by the implementation of the rule of law, and
the ending the culture of impunity in Nepal is also an
issue that deserves the immediate attention of the new
Government.
In view of all these challenges, we are concerned
that the Nepalese parties, facing a new political
landscape have been unable — or unwilling — to
maintain the party unity to which they committed
before the elections. This reticence appears to be part
of a short-term partisan strategy of political jockeying
for the post-electoral period, to the detriment of the
peace process and the long-term future of the country.
Building lasting peace in Nepal will require all
parties to accept the electoral results and the political
landscape that emerges, and for the parties to work
together in a spirit of cooperation and responsibility
within a new majority-led government. Lack of
cooperation will jeopardize the major national
achievements that now lie within reach of the people,
causing disillusionment among the Nepalese people
and distrust of their leaders.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
warmly thank Mr. Martin for his clear and
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Nepal. I
would like to express our strongest appreciation for the

15

S/PV.5938

historical successes achieved in Nepal under his tenure
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
with the final goal being the peaceful establishment of
a federal democratic republic.

reach a durable and permanent solution to the
underlying issues. Therefore, we are ready to support
the draft resolution prepared by the United Kingdom
delegation, which we thank for its efforts.

The commitment to democracy of the Nepalese
people and parties should obviously be praised first
and foremost, but we should also pay tribute to the able
guidance that Mr. Martin has ensured in his functions.

We also appreciate the plans for substantive
downsizing of the Mission. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize that the phasing out of the civil affairs
component should be matched by a corresponding
reinforcement of the programmes implemented in the
same areas by the United Nations country team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We welcome UNMIN’s efforts to ensure a smooth
transition of expertise and projects in that field.

We have learned, with some concern, from the
report of the Secretary-General that the post-election
period in Nepal faces several difficulties, notably, an
increase in criminality in armed groups and a lack of
progress in the human rights situation. Probably the
most worrying finding is lack of full trust among the
parties to the peace process, which has, so far,
prevented the creation of a new and inclusive
government reflecting the outcome of the elections.
The 25 June agreement has to be welcomed, but
the report notes that the agreement leaves some key
issues unresolved. For instance, we share the concern
of the Secretary-General for the lack of progress in the
discharge of minors from the Maoist combatant
contingents. In this regard, I would like to stress that
the successful holding of the April elections, as
historical as that was, should be followed by concrete
and timely actions to address the underlying challenges
that still affect the Nepalese people.
Regarding these challenges, viable solutions can
only come from the Nepalese themselves. At the same
time, we believe that the assistance of the international
community will continue to be required for complex
processes such as security sector reform, inclusion of
women and traditionally marginalized groups in
peacebuilding efforts, and accountability mechanisms
for past crimes.
Against this background, we have taken note of
the Nepalese request for a six-month extension of the
current work of the United Nations in the monitoring
of arms and armed personnel. In this regard, we
support the idea of maintaining a United Nations
presence to shore up the post-election process within
the terms of the reasonable recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
We appreciate the Nepalese support for the idea
that the extension should be granted in the form of a
special political mission, so that the United Nations
can continue to work with the Nepalese authorities to

16

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Viet Nam.
I wish to join other Council members in thanking
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/454) and
Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing.
We would like to congratulate Nepal and its
people on the recent positive political developments
following the convening on 28 May of the Constituent
Assembly, especially the active engagement of major
Nepalese parties in political dialogues that resulted in
the Agreement reached on 25 June 2008 to take the
political process forward. In that connection, we call
on all parties concerned to make full use of this
momentum to advance the peace process in the
country, most immediately the presidential elections to
be held tomorrow.
Experience has shown that, besides threats to
social security as a legacy of war, countries emerging
from a prolonged civil conflict have to cope with
developmental challenges, damaged infrastructure and
weak institutional capacities. We share the common
understanding that there remain challenges to peace
and development in Nepal — for example, the building
of new governance institutions, not to mention the
recent rise in fuel prices, the food shortages and,
hence, the increasing poverty in the country.
Given those challenges and the multifaceted need
for Nepal to sustain its post-conflict endeavours, it is
necessary to take an integrated approach, which
requires not only political will and security measures,
but also social and economic development programmes
at all levels. The international community and donors
also have a very important role to play, in response to
the request of the Nepalese Government.

08-42878

S/PV.5938

In that context, we welcome the efforts by the
United Nations country team to put in effect the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Nepal
during the period 2008-2010, during the next phase of
which priority will be given to the successful
implementation of concrete development actions that
can bring about changes in the daily lives of the
Nepalese people.
We also would like to commend the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), its leader, Mr. Ian
Martin, and his staff for the work that it has done so far
within its mandate, especially the electoral monitoring
and technical assistance that it has provided to the
Election Commission, thus contributing significantly to
the success of Nepal’s Constituent Assembly elections,
held in April.
In accordance with our position that, since
UNMIN was established at the request of the Nepalese
Government, any decision on its mandate should be
made with due consideration of Nepal’s proposal, we
therefore
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation, based on the letter dated 8 July 2008
from the Nepalese Mission, to extend UNMIN’s
mandate for six months as a special political Mission
focused on monitoring arms and armed personnel, in
order to complete the peace process in Nepal. We take
this opportunity to thank the United Kingdom mission
for preparing the draft resolution on UNMIN’s
mandate, and we look forward to its timely adoption.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Viet Nam’s
unswerving support for peace and development in
Nepal. We are strongly convinced that, with their
ownership and self-determination, the authorities and
the people of Nepal will continue to accomplish further
achievements in consolidating peace and promoting
socio-economic growth throughout the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Once again, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on Viet Nam’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I thank you for enabling me to participate in the
discussion related to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2008/454) on extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission to Nepal (UNMIN) in
accordance with Nepal’s request.

08-42878

I would like to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Mr. Ian Martin, the officials of
UNMIN and the Department of Political Affairs for
their continuous support for meeting Nepal’s request to
benefit the peace process in Nepal. As Special
Representative Martin has already informed members,
Nepal has completed several important milestones in
its peace process, which is nearing its logical
conclusion.
With the successful holding of the Constituent
Assembly elections and the declaration of Nepal as a
federal democratic republic, a new political
transformation has begun with a view to achieving a
lasting and durable peace in the country. We are likely
to see the first president of the Republic of Nepal
elected tomorrow. We will soon have a new
government, which will most likely be led by the
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), which has won
the highest number of seats in the Constituent
Assembly.
UNMIN has made important contributions to this
process. When the Security Council created the
Mission in January 2007 at our request, its mandate
included monitoring the ceasefire, monitoring and
assisting with the elections and monitoring the
management of arms and armed personnel. Some of
those tasks have already been accomplished. However,
we have yet to conclude our arrangements on the
management of arms and arms personnel, including the
future of the combatants in the cantonments, which are
being monitored by UNMIN.
Therefore, the Government decided to request, in
a letter dated 8 July 2008 from the Permanent Mission
of Nepal, the continuation of UNMIN’s mandate for
another six months beyond 23 July 2008, on a smaller
scale so that it can carry out the remainder of its tasks,
which relate mostly to the ongoing work of monitoring
the management of arms and armed personnel, in line
with the agreement among the political parties, and
assisting the implementation of the agreement on this
matter in accordance with their understanding.
In his report on this subject, the SecretaryGeneral stated that he had sought clarification from the
Government of Nepal regarding whether he should
recommend an extension of the special political
mission and also regarding the continuation of the
Mission’s political leadership. On behalf of the
Government of Nepal, I have provided our clarification

17

S/PV.5938

to the Office of the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs. I will read out the
clarification that we gave to the Secretary-General
regarding the extension of UNMIN’s mandate in
accordance with our request. There is a slight
reordering of the sequence of the points, which I have
shared informally with members.
“The Government’s letter sent on 8 July
represents the combined position of the major
political parties, including the Communist Party
of Nepal (Maoist), which is most likely to lead
the next government. Even after the formation of
the next government, there is virtually no
possibility of amending the letter and its contents,
which was agreed after intensive political
discussion among the political parties.
“By way of clarification, the letter dated
8 July from the Permanent Mission of Nepal on
the matter clearly states that the Government
would like ‘to request from the United Nations
the continuation of UNMIN on a smaller scale’,
which means an extension of the special political
mission as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1740 (2007). The mission will have to
‘engage itself for the remainder of the mandate’,
which ‘relates to the ongoing work of monitoring
the management of arms and armed personnel in
line with the agreement among the political
parties and of assisting in implementing the
agreement’. That is obvious, because the rest of
the mandate laid out in resolution 1740 (2007)
has already been accomplished.
“In view of the further evolution of the
situation in the country towards the successive
consolidation of the peace process, and the
understanding among the political parties that this
process should be taken forward to its logical
conclusion, as stated in the aforementioned letter,
the Government of Nepal would like to assume
that the political leadership of the mission will be
continued at the level of the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
retaining adequate political and administrative
staff for the purpose, along with the arms
monitors.
“The Government of Nepal agrees with the
rest of the staffing and transition arrangements

18

that the Secretary-General proposed in relation to
the downsizing of the mission.
“A temporary extension for a month will not
be helpful in any way in the transition to the
formation of a new government or in the ongoing
discussion on matters related to the management
of arms and arms personnel among the major
political actors.
“The above clarification has also been
conveyed to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his meetings with the
political leadership after the Secretary-General
sought clarification on the matter. Therefore, the
Government of Nepal is in favour of extending
the mission as per its request in its letter of 8 July
for next six months.”
I am pleased to learn that the Secretary-General
has now accepted our explanation and authorized his
Special Representative to recommend to the Council an
extension of UNMIN for another six months, as per our
request. I am confident that the Council will lend its
support to our request. Listening to the statements
made here today, I am confident that our request will
be taken into account, as per the recommendation of
the Secretary-General.
I am grateful for the sentiments and words of
support and encouragement that all speakers expressed
in their statements. We have taken note of some of the
most important and constructive comments and
observations. I take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, and every member of the Council for
your continued support and encouragement for the
peace process and for your readiness to meet our
request in all circumstances.
Since this will be my last opportunity to do so in
this format, since I do not expect another extension, I
would like to personally thank every ambassador and
representative for their readiness to support Nepal even
when they had so many other important matters to
handle.
Last but not least, I would like to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for undertaking the
onerous effort of coordinating the draft resolution in
this regard. I am confident that it will be adopted soon.
I would also like to thank the Ambassadors of India
and Japan for their readiness to express support in their
statements.

08-42878

S/PV.5938

The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, I thank you, Sir,
for scheduling this discussion on the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and for enabling our
delegation to express its views on this matter.
The extent and depth of the India-Nepal bilateral
relationship cannot be overemphasized. It is based on
ties of history, culture, language, ethnicity, kinship and
geography. We enjoy the closest political ties, with
close relationships between our political parties and
equally close economic and commercial relations.
India is also partnering Nepal’s development in sectors
ranging from energy to agriculture.
Since our two countries share an open border,
with open access to each other’s markets and
privileged access for the citizens of the other country,
no country has more to gain from peace, stability and
development in Nepal than India. It is for that reason
that we have remained closely involved, not only in
Nepal, but also in India and at all multilateral forums,
through a decade of difficulties as an armed conflict
raged, and subsequently as Nepal’s leaders and people
brought the conflict to a halt and began a peace process
to bring closure to that conflict.
Just as the conflict was indigenous, so too is the
peace process. All credit should go to the people of
Nepal and to the wise and statesmanlike efforts of
Nepalese political parties and leaders for bringing
about a peace process.
India has strongly supported the peace process in
Nepal, the ownership of which is entirely indigenous.
We have warmly welcomed every positive step taken
by Nepalese stakeholders in a complex and sensitive
process, without outside assistance or advice. Against
all odds and despite cynicism, the Nepalese people not
only maintained the cohesion of the Seven-Party
Alliance, but also proceeded to implement their
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Despite delays, Nepalese authorities conducted an
extremely successful Constituent Assembly election in
April, which was truly a historic moment. Despite
facing complex challenges in its peace process, Nepal
and its leaders have indigenously addressed each of
those. As a close and friendly neighbour, India stands
ready to assist in any manner that the leaders and
people of Nepal may ask of us.

08-42878

India has fully supported the United Nations
efforts to assist Nepal, at the request of the host
Government. We have been in close contact with
UNMIN at all levels, including in New Delhi. Our
support was never limited to words; we also provided
material support at the crucial phase when UNMIN was
being established.
Taking into account the current situation on the
ground, we fully support Nepal’s request, made
formally on 8 July, to extend the mandate of UNMIN
for a further six months. The letter makes it abundantly
clear that some of the mandates relating to the Mission,
as laid down in resolution 1740 (2007), have already
been accomplished. The request for an extension of six
months therefore pertains to the remainder of the
original mandate — a clear statement with nothing
implied and nothing to be interpreted or clarified. We
also note that the request is made on the basis of a
consensus between key Nepalese political parties,
including the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist),
which has a plurality in the Constituent Assembly. That
consensus is also reflected in the 25 June Seven-Party
Agreement and is therefore fundamental to the
continuation of political processes in Nepal.
From that standpoint, it is difficult to accept parts
of the Secretary-General’s latest report. Bearing in
mind that it is at Nepal’s request for assistance on
specific aspects of its peace process that UNMIN
exists, it seems inappropriate for the Secretary-General
to advise the Council to extend the mandate for one
month unless Nepal’s request is clarified. In other
words, unless Nepal’s request is in line with what
UNMIN wants it to say, the request is not good
enough. That could imply that UNMIN would be
asking the new Government — whose constituents
expressed their views in the 8 July letter — to
reinterpret the 25 June Agreement. In doing so,
UNMIN could find itself in the unfortunate position of
having its role become a matter of contention rather
than being seen as a positive contributor to the peace
process. It may also be seen to imply that the report is
suggesting that political formations that are to form the
Government are liable to change their minds. Not only
does that run counter to the trend of Nepali political
parties abiding by previous commitments, but it is also
an extraordinary claim to make, even by implication.
I carefully listened to the excellent statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Nepal and,
as he made clear, several aspects of the original

19

S/PV.5938

mandate have been completed. The request is for
something on a smaller scale. The clarification of the
letter of 8 July essentially reiterates, in a sense, the
earlier document, and it is significant that the peace
process as a whole does not find mention in that
clarification.
Furthermore, the report also suggests in
paragraph 64 that UNMIN has “been made aware” of a
broad consensus within Nepal that continuation of a
United Nations political presence is important to the
completion of the peace process. While we would
welcome being made similarly aware, what should
have weight is not a subjective impression — including
through an oral exchange — that the United Nations
may have gained, but what the people’s elected
representatives convey in writing.
To our knowledge, UNMIN’s support has not
been sought in taking decisions on issues related to the
peace process. Indeed, the greatest strength of the
peace process is that it has consistently been
nationally-owned, directed and implemented. The
Nepalese request for United Nations support was with
regard to the implementation of aspects of Nepal’s
peace process — as speakers before me have noted —
which required an internationally-accepted monitor.
Those included advising the national Election
Commission in the conduct of elections and monitoring
the management of arms and the forces of the two
contending armies. And yet, in paragraph 68, it is
asserted that the “key requirement now is not the
continuation of monitoring arrangements so much as
the transition to a durable and permanent solution”.
While that may or may not be so, it certainly cannot be
automatically assumed that the durability and
permanence of arrangements to address the problem of
two armed forces depends on the active involvement of
the United Nations.
I am constrained to point out that we have noted a
consistent effort to expand the definition of what Nepal
seeks in terms of support to include a role in the Nepali
peace process, irrespective of the desire of Nepalese
interlocutors. To insist on playing a role that the host
nation is reluctant to provide is to risk jeopardizing the
work of UNMIN thus far. That should be avoided at all
costs, as it could undermine the United Nations
investment in Nepal — not the other way around.
In that context, the Council must also seriously
consider whether to permit a liberal interpretation of

20

the principle of the sanctity of a State’s requests for
specific assistance. We often hear the counter-argument
that it is for the Council to decide on what action is
appropriate in each case, but not when parallels are
drawn between Nepal and other issues on the agenda of
the Council. Let us not forget that Nepal approached
the United Nations for assistance of its own free will,
not because the situation in that country was a threat to
international peace and security.
We therefore urge the Council to accept the
Nepalese request, as contained in its letter of 8 July
2008, in letter and spirit. To put it directly, the
continuation of UNMIN on a smaller scale to engage in
the remainder of the mandate for a period of six
months is what Nepal has sought. It is precisely what
Nepal should get — no more, no less.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to thank Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), for his dedicated work and his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
I would like first to congratulate the people and
Government of Nepal on their efforts in conducting the
successful election for the Constituent Assembly in
April. Credit for that success goes to the people
themselves, but UNMIN and the international
community also played a very helpful and
indispensable role. Japan joined other partners in
sending
24
electoral
observers
and
two
parliamentarians to support that historic election and to
serve as witnesses to the new democratic governance
process in Nepal.
At the first session of the Constituent Assembly,
Nepal declared itself a federal democratic republic. We
commend all the parties who respected the will of the
people and carried out the transition in a peaceful
manner. The parties are now engaged in consultations
to formulate a new Government. That process of
political dialogue among all parties reflects the sound
state of the nation’s new democracy.
We are also pleased to note that the political
dialogue among the parties is proceeding peacefully.
The people have proven their wisdom by
demonstrating that political differences can be
addressed through dialogue without resorting to

08-42878

S/PV.5938

violence. We strongly urge all the Nepalese people to
maintain that strong momentum towards democratic
governance and to refrain from any type of violence.
We also highly appreciate the good offices efforts
made by Special Representative Martin, who, working
within his mandate, has spared no effort to move the
political process forward during this process.
We understand that Nepal needs some more time
to consider the future of the soldiers in cantonment,
which is a cornerstone to consolidating durable peace.
As this is a critical time in achieving lasting peace and
stability in the country, Japan supports the extension of
the mandate of UNMIN for six months, in line with the
request of the Government of Nepal. The arms
monitors, including those from Japan, have ably
carried out their duties. I am convinced that arms
monitoring will be effectively conducted under the
extended mandate. At the same time, the United
Nations cannot continue to monitor arms and soldiers

08-42878

indefinitely. We therefore strongly urge the parties to
come to an agreement on the future status of their army
as soon as possible, while the United Nations Mission
continues to monitor the activities for a limited
extended period.
As a peace-fostering nation, Japan is firmly
committed to supporting Nepal’s peacebuilding efforts
to consolidate peace and democracy. Mr. Osamu Uno,
Japan’s Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, visited
Nepal two days ago to convey Japan’s commitment. As
part of our support, in cooperation with UNICEF, we
will address the issue of child soldiers and promote the
development of socio-economic infrastructure and the
reduction of poverty throughout the country.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21
