173

V. Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its forty-second session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/214. Long-term financin, and future of the
United Nations Institute for Training and
Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/177 of 17 December 1984, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive study on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, its activities in training and
research, its funding and its future role, keeping in mind
related activities within the United Nations system and
the relevant provisions of the Statute of the Institute, 132 in
order to determine the most effective manner of discharging those functions, and to submit his report together with
the comments of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research thereon, to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session,
Recalling also its resolutions 37/ 142 of 17 December
1982 and 38/177 of 19 December 1983, in which it called
upon the Secretary-General to submit a report on longterm financing arrangements for the Institute which would
place its financing on a more predictable, assured and continuous basis,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General' 33
and the statement made on 8 November 1985 by the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, 134
Noting with regret that, so far, no agreement has been
reached on the future role and, in particular, the long-term
funding of the Institute,
Noting also with regret that the 1985 United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities, 125 was
unable to provide the General Fund of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research with the level of
resources required to maintain the Institute as a viable
entity during 1986,
Acknowledging with regret that voluntary contributions
to the Institute have so far been insufficient to guarantee
the level of resources needed to maintain it as a viable
entity, and that it has not been possible to reach agreement
on any of the three options for long-term financing
arrangements for the Institute recommended by the Board
of Trustees, namely, the setting up of a reserve fund, the
adoption of a replenishment system or the establishment
of an endowment fund, 135
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Reaffirms the continuing relevance of the mandate
entrusted to the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, namely, to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations, and takes note of the view of the Secretary-General that this mandate continues to be essential to
the functioning of the Organization today;
3. Takes note of the administrative, staffing and organizational arrangements outlined in the report of the Secretary-General on the future work of the Institute;
4. Stresses the need to take a final decision on the longterm financing and future of the Institute at the latest at
132 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second Session.
Annexes, agenda ,tern 4S, document N6875, annex III.

133 N40/788.
134 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Second
Committee, 29th meeting, paras. 13-15.
135 N39/148, para. 8.

the forty-first session of the General Assembly and, to this
end, requests the Secretary-General to prepare comprehensive specific plans for the future of the Institute based on
two options contained in his report: 136
(a) To close down the Institute, including the possibility of re-allocating the functions of the Institute to other
agencies and bodies throughout the United Nations system
where those functions could be undertaken in an efficient
and cost-effective manner;
(b) To restructure the Institute, including the possibility of transferring to the Institute appropriate ongoing and
planned training and research functions of other agencies
and bodies throughout the United Nations system;
such plans should include a detailed assessment of the
financial implications of the two options, including a
blueprint for a specific scheme for the long-term and stable
funding of the Institute, which could be tried on an experimental basis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to keep in mind,
while preparing the plans requested in paragraph 4 above,
the need for specific suggestions for the improvement of
administrative arrangements to ensure cost-effectiveness;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to consult, as
appropriate, with all States and the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
before finalizing the plans, which should be submitted to
the General Assembly not later than l September 1986;
7. Urges all States that have not yet contributed to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research to do
so, and calls upon all countries, especially those donor
countries that are not contributing at a level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their voluntary contributions in order to meet the needs of the Institute.
120th plenary meeting
/7 December 1985

40/215. Assistance to Democratic Yemen
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 391184 of l 7 December 1984
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/6 of 28
April 1982 and 1982/59 of 30 July 1982 concerning the
extensive devastation caused by the heavy floods in Democratic Yemen,
Recalling also resolution 107 (IX) of 11 May 1982 of the
Economic Commission for Western Asia, 137 in which the
Commission called for the urgent establishment of a programme for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
flood-stricken areas of Democratic Yemen,
Having considered the report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
extent and nature of the damage caused by the floods, 138
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Democratic Yemen, 139
Recognizing that Democratic Yemen, as one of the least
developed countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the affected
areas,
Recognizing also the efforts made by Democratic
Yemen to alleviate the suffering of the victims of the
floods,
136 A/40/788, para. 5.
13 7 See Official Records of the 1-:conomic and Social Council. /982, Supplement No. 12 (E/1982/22). chap I
138See E/ECWNl56
1 JO A/40,435.

General ASHmbly-Fortieth Session

174

l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken regarding assistance to Democratic Yemen;
2. Expresses its gratitude to those States and international, regional and intergovernmental organizations that
have provided assistance to Democratic Yemen;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
mob~lize the necessary resources for an effective, comprehensive programme of financial, technical and material
assistance to Democratic Yemen in order to help to mitigate the damage inflicted on it and implement its rehabilitation and reconstruction plans;
4. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
through bilateral or multilateral channels to the reconstruction and development process in Democratic Yemen;
5. Invites the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to
Democratic Yemen and to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of
assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue their assistance to the development requirements of Democratic Yemen;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation
in Democratic Yemen under review and to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.

120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/216. Assistance to Equatorial Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/105 of 5 December 1980
36/204 of 17 December 1981, 37/133 of 17 Decembe;
1982 and 38/224 of 20 December 1983,
Recalling also its resolution 39/ 181 of 17 December
1984, in which it earnestly called upon all Member States
and international and regional organizations and other
intergovernmental organizations, as well as international
financial and development institutions and appropriate
pro~mme~ of the United Nations system, especially the
United Nations Development Programme and the United
Na!ion~ Institute for Training and Research, to establish,
mamtam and expand their programmes of assistance to
Equatorial Guinea, particularly in the areas of public
administration and public finance in which a general transformation is required as a result of Equatorial Guinea's
entry into the Central African Customs and Economic
Union and the Bank of Central African States,
Recalling further that Equatorial Guinea is one of the
least developed countries,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 140 submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 39/181,
140 A/40/430.

Noting that Equatorial Guinea, despite the efforts made
by its Government and people, continues to be beset by
serious economic and financial difficulties,
Recognizing the essential role of short-term, mediumterm and long-term international assistance in support of
the efforts of the Government of Equatorial Guinea in the
task of reconstruction and development of the country,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its thanks to the international community
for its interest in and assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
3. Also expresses its thanks for the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to organize and mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of assistance to
Equatorial Guinea;
4. Reiterates its appeal to all Member States to continue to respond generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, so as to meet the needs indicated in the programme presented in 1982 at the International Conference
of Donors for the Economic Reactivation and Development of Equatorial Guinea held at Geneva in April 1982;
5. Invites all Member States and international and
regional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations, as well as international financial and development institutions, to participate in the round-table meeting of donors to be held in Equatorial Guinea in 1986 for
the evaluation of the 1982-1984 three-year programme
presented at the International Conference of Donors for
the Economic Reactivation and Development of Equatorial Guinea;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To intensify his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(b) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and competent international financial institutions and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1986, of the status of assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(c) To submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session a report on the economic situation of Equatorial
Guinea and the progress made in implementing the present resolution;
7. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to ensure that the round-table
conference to be held in Equatorial Guinea in 1986
receives the widest possible publicity among the bilateral
and multilateral donors.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/217. Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African
Republic
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/87 of 5 December 1980 in
which it affirmed the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its efforts for reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country and invited the international community to provide sufficient resources to carry out the programme of assistance to the Central African Republic,
Recalling also its resolutions 36/206 of 17 December
1981, 37/145 of 17 December 1982, 38/211 of 20 Decem-
