S/PV.9370

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9370th meeting

Monday, 10 July 2023, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20015 (E)
*2320015*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

month I welcomed the first commercial flights in
seven years between Sana’a and Saudi Arabia, carrying
Yemeni Hajj pilgrims. Fuel also continues to flow
steadily through Al-Hudaydah’s ports.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jaap Slootmaker, Vice-Minister of Infrastructure
and Water Management of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. David Gressly, United Nations
Resident Coordinator for Yemen.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me this opportunity to brief the Council on
the latest developments in Yemen and on my efforts to
mediate an agreement on a way forward between the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah.
Despite the expiry of the truce, Yemen and its
people continue to feel the benefits of the longest
period of relative calm since the beginning of the
conflict. According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363),
the truce contributed to a 40 per cent drop in grave
violations against children such as killing, maiming
and recruitment to armed formations. While that is a
meaningful achievement, more progress is needed. Just
last week, a mortar attack injured five children in the
district of Hays, south of Al-Hudaydah. I join the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
in condemning the incident and calling on all parties
to uphold their obligations under international law
and prevent and end violations against children. Other
benefits continue to this day. The commercial flights
between Sana’a and Amman have continued, and this
2/19

10/07/2023

Most importantly, this period of relative calm has
opened the door for serious discussions with Yemeni
actors on a way forward for ending the conflict. The
discussions are ongoing, but if we are to sustainably end
the war those talks have to reach a serious breakthrough.
I am grateful for the continued efforts of actors in the
region, especially the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the Sultanate of Oman, in support of those discussions.
We have also seen the parties engage constructively
in other confidence-building measures. My Office
recently convened the parties in Amman to discuss
further detainee releases, building on the successful
large-scale release of detainees in March in partnership
with the International Committee of the Red Cross. I
am grateful to the Government of Jordan for hosting
those and other meetings in Amman, and for continuing
to support the work of my Office. For more than a year,
therefore, we have seen some important and positive
steps that have de-escalated the violence and helped to
improve the lives of Yemenis. However, the situation on
the ground remains fragile and challenging.
With regard to the military situation, although
fighting has decreased markedly since the start of the
truce, the front lines are not silent. Armed clashes have
taken place in Al-Dhale’e, Taiz, Al-Hudaydah, Marib
and Shabwah. I am also concerned by reports of troop
movements, including near Marib, and a recent parade
of fighters in Ibb. Those continued sparks of violence,
alongside public threats to return to large-scale fighting,
increase fears and tensions. I call on the parties to cease
provocative military actions and rhetoric that raise the
spectre of further escalation.
Moreover, the parties continue to battle on a
different front — the economy. The struggle to control
revenue-generating ports, trade routes, the banking
sector, currency and natural-resource wealth has become
inseparable from the political and military conflict.
The value of the Yemeni riyal against the United States
dollar in Aden has fallen by more than 25 per cent in the
past 12 months. As always, it is Yemeni citizens who
pay the highest price for the economic divisions and
deterioration in the country.
Freedom of movement also remains a huge
challenge. Conflict-related road closures force
thousands of Yemenis to take unsafe routes every
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

day and have raised the cost of transporting goods
by upwards of 100 per cent. Landmines, unexploded
ordnance and climate-change-related extreme weather
events compound the impact of freedom-of-movement
restrictions on civilians. In addition, despite recent
positive efforts, there is a pressing need to further expand
the availability of flights to and from Sana’a airport.
For women and girls, the restrictions on the freedom
of movement have become even more pronounced
over the course of the conflict. The requirement that
women and girls travelling have to be accompanied by
a male relative has expanded significantly in the past
year, especially in Ansar Allah-controlled areas, and
armed groups at checkpoints in various parts of the
country have also often imposed the same requirement.
Such restrictions prevent women from accessing their
basic needs, engaging in economic opportunities and
participating in politics and peacemaking efforts.
We cannot afford to seek a seasonal peace. The
parties have to take further bold steps towards a
sustainable and just peace. That means ending the
conflict in a way that promises accountable national and
local governance, economic and environmental justice
and guarantees of equal citizenship for all Yemenis,
regardless of gender, faith, background or race. Even if
the way forward to that future is challenging, it is welllit. There are three key elements here.
First, the parties should immediately end their
military provocations and prepare for and agree to a
sustainable nationwide ceasefire. My Office recently
held constructive discussions with delegates of the
Government of Yemen to the Military Coordination
Committee on the protection of civilians, including
women’s security, and plans to implement a ceasefire.
That followed an earlier meeting in May with the Joint
Forces Command of the Coalition about technical
preparations for a ceasefire.
Secondly, the parties should immediately
de-escalate economically and address near- and longerterm economic priorities. They should ensure regular
public-sector salary payments nationwide and reverse
antagonistic economic policies, which deepen the divide
between them and further fragment the country. They
should also enhance economic and other links among
Yemenis in different parts of the country, including
by opening roads and building on previous efforts to
further expand the availability of flights — including
domestic flights — to and from Sana’a airport. My
Office is in constant communication with Yemeni

S/PV.9370

political actors, businesses, civil society and others to
explore sustainable solutions.
Thirdly, the parties need to make progress
on agreeing on a clear path towards restarting an
intra-Yemeni political process under the auspices of the
United Nations. That process needs to start urgently if
the gains made since the truce are to be consolidated and
further fragmentation prevented. To find sustainable
solutions to the near-term challenges, Yemenis need to
address broader issues at the heart of the conflict. For
example, we are now seeing how current discussions
on salary payments are becoming linked to issues of
revenue management and ultimately to longer-term
questions of the shape of the State. Only Yemenis can
debate and decide on such weighty and fundamental
questions of sovereignty, national and local governance,
revenue management and security arrangements. The
United Nations-mediated process will be led and owned
by Yemenis and will involve and reflect the priorities of
a plurality of Yemenis, including women and men from
across Yemen’s governorates.
I want to note here that Yemenis have deep
capacities to draw on in any political negotiation. There
is a rich history of dialogue, innovation and compromise
in Yemen, including at the national level. And at the
local level, Yemenis are proving their solidarity and
ability to resolve problems every day. They are opening
roads, releasing detainees and negotiating access amid
significant barriers to movement. In some governorates
the local authorities have actually stepped up service
delivery, despite the challenges of the conflict. In
others, private-sector actors have stepped in to provide
crucial social services such as health and education. We
need to build on those efforts to support post-conflict
governance and peacebuilding.
Everyone in the Council wields influence. I ask
members to use that influence to encourage the parties
to stop escalatory actions and work along the path that
I have outlined here today.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: I welcome the update provided by
Hans Grundberg and echo his call for the parties to
maintain the momentum gained so far. We cannot
allow this opportunity to pass unseized. I am very
pleased that David Gressly joined us today to provide
an update on the FSO SAFER salvage operation. I

23-200153/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

would like to commend him for his exceptional efforts.
Under his leadership, and in close coordination with
our colleagues at the United Nations Development
Programme, remarkable progress has been made to
avert an environmental and humanitarian disaster.
As I have stressed in my previous briefings,
humanitarian needs in Yemen will remain high for
the foreseeable future. This year, the humanitarian
community is seeking to reach 17.3 million people out
of a staggering 21.6 million people in need of assistance.
Migrants, asylum seekers and refugees are among
the most vulnerable of these, and their numbers are
growing. The International Organization for Migration
reports that, in the first half of 2023, the number of
migrants arriving in Yemen — more than 77,000
people — increased sharply and approached levels from
before the coronavirus disease pandemic. At that rate,
the number of arrivals is expected to double compared
to last year. While not the largest vulnerable group
in Yemen in terms of their numbers, they face severe
protection risks. Migrants usually arrive in Yemen
en route to better opportunities elsewhere. But once
in Yemen, they often face exploitation and violence,
including extortion, abduction and physical abuse. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) reports that asylum-seekers and
refugees use the same routes, arrive in mixed flows with
migrants and face similar threats. Women and girls are
particularly at risk. The International Organization for
Migration reports increased demand for responses to
gender-based violence, as physical and sexual violence
against migrant women and girls is routine.
Overall, the humanitarian community estimates
that 300,000 migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees
need humanitarian assistance this year. But those
groups face limited, if any, access to health or social
services, owing to a lack of documentation and alreadystrained public resources. I call on the relevant parties
to fulfil their obligations in order to meet the essential
needs, such as health, food, water and shelter, of all
civilians under their control.
As my previous briefings have made clear,
internally displaced people also face a precarious reality
in Yemen. Recently, in the part of Tuhayta’ district
controlled by the Government of Yemen, approximately
6,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Al Hayma
village, together with approximately 4,000 host
community residents, have faced heightened insecurity
in recent months, owing to their proximity to the front
4/19

10/07/2023

lines. In May, an 8-year-old boy was killed, and his
sister injured by a mortar. Since my last briefing (see
S/PV.9282), and following productive engagement with
the relevant authorities and the affected residents, the
humanitarian community has now begun preparations
to support the IDPs and other residents who wish to
relocate from that area in hopes of a more stable and
safer future for their families.
One of the main factors driving the immense level
of humanitarian needs in Yemen is the deteriorating
economic situation. Only by stabilizing the economy
can we reduce the staggering number of people in
need. In that regard, the long-overdue resumption of
oil exports from government-held areas is critical,
including for paying public sector salaries. The
continued obstruction to the transport of commercial
goods from government- to Houthi-controlled areas
must also be addressed. Commercial goods should be
able to flow throughout the country without hindrance.
Beyond that, more must be done to generate incomes
and improve people’s purchasing power, as well as to
ensure the provision of basic services. In the summer
heat, enabling the continued provision of electricity is
particularly important. The United Nations is working
with our donors and partners to address the underlying
drivers of need and improve the economic situation, in
line with the United Nations economic framework. We
are doing that by working through the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus to improve the targeting of
development and humanitarian initiatives. As part of
that work, the United Nations is, for example, enhancing
its presence in the divided city of Taiz to work with
local authorities and communities to increase access to
safe drinking water on both sides of the city and bolster
socioeconomic development. In addition, through the
Yemen Partners Group, the United Nations and donors
are identifying opportunities for more coordinated
sustainable initiatives across the country that will
complement humanitarian action.
As we continue our work, our operations face
ongoing and significant access constraints. In areas
under the control of the Houthi de facto authorities,
restrictions on the movement of female national
staff continue to impede our ability to carry out vital
projects for women and girls. We also encounter delays
in receiving authorization to carry out assessments and
attempts to interfere in tendering processes. In areas
controlled by the Government of Yemen, authorities
have begun processing work permits for international
aid staff after some delays. I encourage the authorities
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

to continue with that positive trend. We continue our
advocacy with the relevant authorities to expand our
operational space so that people in Yemen are better
able to receive the assistance that they urgently need. I
once again call on the parties to fulfil their obligation
to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian relief.
Turning to funding, halfway through the year,
our 2023 humanitarian response plan is funded at
just 29 per cent. The grim consequence of that is that
some activities are forced to scale back. The World
Food Programme’s malnutrition treatment activities
are operating at 40 per cent of the needs, and, in the
absence of new contributions, by September it may be
forced to cut as many as 5 million people from food
assistance. The lack of funding for safe shelter and
other protection services limits our ability to support
the migrant women and girls who I mentioned earlier.
And gaps in funding for cash assistance risk leaving
1.3 million refugees and IDPs receiving assistance
from UNHCR unable to cover their basic needs. Sadly,
there are many examples.
On top of those challenges, staff security continues
to be a significant concern. Five United Nations staff
members abducted in Abyan in February 2022 remain
missing. In Sana’a, two United Nations staff members
have been detained since November 2021. We call for
their immediate release, and for the protection of all
humanitarian staff.
Yemen is poised for change. As the political
process progresses, we must remain vigilant and active
on the humanitarian front. With better funding and
more access, we can expand our reach and improve the
protection of civilians, but we also need to see support
for measures to improve Yemen’s economy. We count
on the Security Council for its continued support.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I give the floor to Mr. Gressly.
Mr. Gressly: I would like to start today with a
progress report on the United Nations operation to
prevent a catastrophic oil spill from the decaying
FSO SAFER.
Since the salvage ship Ndeavor arrived at the
FSO SAFER site on 30 May, SMIT Salvage, the
Boskalis subsidiary contracted by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), has done everything
possible to stabilize the decaying FSO SAFER and

S/PV.9370

prepare it for the removal of more than 1 million barrels
of oil.
Just some of the work that I have witnessed over
the past five weeks includes the inspection of each
part of the vessel and thorough structural assessments
of the hull, confirming that, despite decay, the hull
thickness levels are more than sufficient to withstand
forces generated during the oil transfer. That means
that the vessel can be moored alongside the Nautica
for a cleaner, faster transfer of the oil. It also includes
the pumping of inert gas into the oil cargo tanks to
significantly reduce the risk of fire or explosion and
continual testing to ensure the atmosphere remains at
a safe level; the preparation of portable transfer pumps
and the rigging of hoses and valves and the repairs of
the FSO SAFER’s manifold through which the oil will
flow during the operation; and the pre-positioning of
equipment required for the transfer of the oil but also
oil spill response equipment if necessary.
SMIT Salvage has certified to UNDP that the
oil transfer can proceed, with the level of risk within
an acceptable range. Thus, the FSO SAFER is fully
stabilized for the ship-to-ship transfer of the oil. The
upcoming oil transfer still presents a residual risk, but
the United Nations and its partners have put in place a
crisis management team, based in Al-Hudaydah, and
assembled the expertise and equipment required to
respond if there is an incident.
Shortly after the Ndeavor’s arrival, the authorities
here in Sana’a wrote to me to affirm their full support of
the operation, including a waiver of all fees associated
with it.
The Safer Exploration and Production Operations
Company’s skeleton crew currently aboard the FSO
SAFER is working closely with the salvage team. In line
with the 5 March 2022 memorandum of understanding,
the Safer Technical Committee, based in Al-Hudaydah,
continues to effectively facilitate the operation. The
Committee provides access, security and technical
support and has maintained a high level of coordination
and cooperation with the United Nations team in
Al-Hudaydah and the salvage team. Even when there
were miscommunications or misunderstandings, which
are inevitable in a sensitive security environment such
as this, the Committee acted quickly to de-escalate and
resolve them.
I am pleased to report to the Council that the
authorities in Sana’a provided authorization today for

23-200155/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

the oil transfer from the FSO SAFER to the replacement
vessel. I want to acknowledge the overall cooperation
received so far from the Committee and the authorities
in Sana’a in the implementation of the project.
The replacement vessel, the Nautica, is preparing
to sail from Djibouti. It will moor alongside the FSO
SAFER and should begin taking on the oil by early next
week. Once the transfer starts, it will take approximately
two weeks to complete.
The completion of the ship-to-ship transfer of the oil
will be a moment when the whole world can heave a sigh
of relief. The worst-case humanitarian, environmental
and economic catastrophe from a massive oil spill will
have been prevented. But it will not be the end of the
operation. The next critical step after the oil transfer
will include the delivery and instalment of a catenary
anchor leg mooring (CALM), otherwise known as a
CALM buoy, to which the replacement vessel will safely
be installed. The CALM buoy needs to be in place by
September of this year, as currents and winds become
more dangerous as we enter the month of October.
I also want to recognize and thank the Government
of Yemen for its full support to this operation.
In February 2022, the internationally recognized
Government confirmed to me in Aden its support for
the plan. It pledged $5 million towards the operation,
making it the sixth largest donor to this operation. The
political and financial support have been critical to the
success of the project, and I really want to thank the
Government of Yemen for its support for the political,
financial and technical support we have receive through
the planning and implementation of this project.
The Security Council has remained seized of
the situation of the FSO SAFER tanker over several
years. The attention and unity of the Council on that
issue has helped propel us to where we are today.
With a current estimated budget of $143 million, of
which the United Nations has raised $118 million from
generous Member States, including eight members
around this table; the private sector; and the general
public, which has contributed $300,000 through a
crowdfunding campaign.
The broad coalition working to prevent the
catastrophe includes environmental groups such as
Greenpeace and, here in Yemen, Holm Akhdar, showing
once again the breadth of the coalition. The SecretaryGeneral has placed great importance on resolving the
issue of the FSO SAFER tanker and has directed the
6/19

10/07/2023

United Nations system to fully support the project.
UNDP has worked tirelessly to secure and manage the
wide range of maritime expertise needed to conduct
the complex and high-risk operation, not to mention
the 320-meter replacement vessel. The International
Maritime
Organization,
the
United
Nations
Environment Programme, UNESCO and the World
Food Programme have provided invaluable expertise.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs provided $20 million in bridging finance from
the Central Emergency Response Fund, which gave
UNDP sufficient liquidity to start the operation that is
now under way. On the ground, the project has received
operational support from the United Nations Mission to
support the Hudaydah Agreement, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security and other members
of the United Nations country team, including the
United Nations Population Fund.
I would like to recognize the top five donors for
their role in advocating for the FSO SAFER operation
and also in assisting us with mobilizing resources from
both Member States and the private sector. They include
Saudi Arabia, the Netherlands, Germany, the United
States and the United Kingdom. We are thankful to all
23 Member States, plus the European Union, for their
generous funding, but we still need another $25 million,
in large part to repay the $20 million that we have
borrowed from the Central Emergency Relief Fund.
With the Council’s continued support, I am confident
that the project to put an end to that environmental,
humanitarian and economic threat will be a success.
The President: I thank Mr. Gressly for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy,
Assistant Secretary-General and the United Nations
Resident Coordinator for their briefings.
As we heard from the Assistant Secretary-General,
we are closer than ever to resolving the threat posed
by the FSO SAFER oil tanker, thanks to the efforts of
the United Nations, public and private donors, and the
constructive engagement of all parties. It is critical
now that we support the United Nations to swiftly
overcome obstacles and start the oil transfer. Until this
is complete, the threat to the environment, global trade
and the delivery of life-saving aid to Yemen remains.
As we heard, the United Nations still needs
$25 million to safely secure the oil and complete the
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

job. Let us not forget that the funding gap includes a
United Nations loan, which was crucial to getting us
this far. Until the loan is repaid, the United Nations is
compromised in its ability to respond to current and
future crises. We have come so far. But we now need to
ensure that the operation begins and that we find these
remaining funds.
Our concerns about the humanitarian situation and
access persist. I also want to stress my concerns with
regard to the Houthis’ anti-vaccination policy. This is a
serious threat to public health, placing children at risk
of illness and death. The United Kingdom urges the
relevant authorities to unblock the situation and allow
for urgent vaccination campaigns.
Finally, I would like to draw attention to the
ongoing detention by the Houthis of 13 members of the
Baha’i community. Although we are encouraged by the
release of four individuals, the United Kingdom calls on
the Houthis to uphold the freedom of religion or belief
and release the remaining detainees, especially those
in need of urgent medical care. It is essential that all
Yemeni parties exercise these principles of inclusivity
and fairness, as they look to move towards a more
sustainable peace in Yemen.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and my country, Ghana.
We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg, Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and Mr. David Gressly
for their briefings and welcome the participation of
the representatives of the Republic of Yemen and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands at this meeting.
The A3 remains cautiously optimistic about
the prospects for peace in Yemen. We are pleased
by the parties’ appreciation of the benefits of the
elements of the expired truce that they still generally
observe. Paramount among the peace dividends has
been the significant reduction in civilian casualties
accompanying the general decrease in military
hostilities in the country. Such a rare period of relative
calm has created an enabling environment for other
benefits of the truce to take root.

S/PV.9370

As part of the benefits, commercial flights between
Sana’a and Amman have increased. For the first time
in nearly seven years, there was a direct flight from
Sana’a to Jeddah carrying Yemeni Muslim pilgrims
to participate in this year’s Hajj in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. While such movements between cities
in different countries are daily occurrences in most
parts of the world, in Yemen it represents a significant
milestone worth celebrating. Such developments
offer the people of Yemen a glimpse of the limitless
opportunities that await them should they choose the
path of peace over conflict.
On this note, the A3 commends Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and his team for their continuing push
to find a lasting solution to the conflict in Yemen and
assures them of its support for their efforts.
The holding of the eighth meeting of the Supervisory
Committee on the implementation of the Detainees’
Exchange Agreement in Amman, Jordan, last month,
is another positive development. As was the case in
March, when nearly 900 conflict-related detainees were
released, we remain hopeful of the eventual release of
all remaining detainees.
The need to preserve the current relative calm
while negotiations continue in an effort to find a more
durable solution to the conflict is ever more important.
As the United Nations working in concert with regional
Powers strives for a breakthrough in the ongoing
negotiations, we urge the parties to refrain from
engaging in escalatory actions that may disturb the
relative peace being enjoyed by the people of Yemen.
It is for this reason that the A3 condemns in the
strongest terms recent military hostilities along the front
lines. Such provocations risk reversing the marginal
progress so far made and must not be countenanced.
The parties are once again reminded to prioritize the
interests of the people of Yemen and demonstrate
their full commitment to the peace process by taking
concrete steps to improve the fragile security situation
in the country.
Regional efforts remain key in the search for a
lasting solution to the Yemeni conflict. Such efforts
complement the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
this regard, we acknowledge the pivotal role played by
Oman and Saudi Arabia in attempting to resolve the
Yemeni crisis, and we assure them of our support.

23-200157/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
dire, with a majority of the population still requiring
assistance. At the same time, due to funding shortfalls,
aid agencies are contemplating cutting back on relief
supplies. If urgent steps are not taken to provide
needed resources, the suffering of those who depend
on the assistance will be exacerbated. The A3 calls
for increased international support to fund the Yemen
humanitarian response plan, which sadly is currently
70 per cent underfunded.
Unfortunately, the humanitarian crisis is
compounded by a declining economic condition. The
worsening economy continues to reduce the purchasing
power of many Yemenis, as prices of basic necessities
are pushed beyond their reach. The situation is further
severely affected by adverse actions taken by the
Houthis, including their stranglehold on the ability of
the Government of Yemen to export oil. The restriction
curtails the Government’s capacity to fully honour
its financial obligations. The Security Council must
explore ways to bring the economic blockade to an end
to ease the suffering of the Yemeni people.
In addition, it is regrettable that access constraints
continue to persist, notwithstanding constant appeals
for them to be lifted to ensure smooth delivery of relief
items and services. Actions that impede humanitarian
access, including restrictions on the movements of
female staff, not only violate international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, but they
also deny or limit delivery of critical humanitarian
assistance to segments of Yemeni society. In this
regard, we renew our appeal to the parties, especially
the Houthis, to grant unimpeded access for the delivery
of humanitarian aid to all those in need.
The risk posed by landmines and explosive
remnants of war in Yemen must be tackled head on to
bring down the number of casualties associated with
the menace and increase economic productivity, as a
semblance of normalcy returns to the country. Besides
ensuring civilian safety, increased mine-clearance
efforts will help free up affected agricultural lands
for food production and contribute to the economic
recovery of the country. The A3 renews its call for
effective international and local collaboration to deal
with the issue comprehensively.
Regarding the FSO SAFER tanker, we are pleased
that the transfer of oil from the decaying vessel has
begun and is progressing smoothly. At this stage the
cooperation of all stakeholders is essential to ensuring
8/19

10/07/2023

a safe, quick and uninterrupted salvage operation.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the various roles played by all
stakeholders, which have brought us this far, and to
renew our appeal to the international community
to help bridge the outstanding funding gap of about
$25 million to ensure an uninterrupted operation, as we
heard earlier.
Finally, the A3 holds the view that the best solution
to the conflict remains a Yemeni-led and -owned
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations. In that regard, the renewal of the truce,
followed by a nationwide ceasefire, is a sine qua non
for the process to commence. The parties must work
diligently to achieve that.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Hans Grundberg, Joyce Msuya and David Gressly for
their briefings.
As the Special Envoy said, the situation on the
ground is still fragile and we must remain vigilant. We
need to see the negotiations, which have been ongoing
for months, make progress and result in an agreement.
We call on the parties, particularly the Houthis, to make
the effort necessary to achieve a lasting nationwide
ceasefire. That is an essential step in putting an end
to the state of “neither war nor peace” and launching
a political process under the auspices of the United
Nations. In that regard, France welcomes the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, which plays a useful role on
the ground.
France calls on the Houthis to refrain from
any action that could harm Yemen’s already highly
fragmented economy, especially by blocking imports
of gas from Marib or putting pressure on the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen, which is essential in enabling imports of basic
goods to continue. It is vital for Yemen to be able to
build a strong economy capable of providing public
services to all Yemenis and to allow the private sector to
operate without interference or intimidation. Yemenis
must be able to access their salaries in the north and the
south. France and the European Union are aware of the
importance of the Mechanism for the stability of the
country and the region and will continue to support it.
On the diplomatic front, France reiterates its
full support for the work of the Special Envoy and
commends his efforts to reach a peace plan. We also
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

welcome the diplomatic efforts of various regional
stakeholders, in particular Oman and Saudi Arabia.
Only a comprehensive and inclusive political solution
that takes into account the concerns and interests of all
Yemenis can bring the conflict to an end. And Yemeni
women politicians must be involved in the current
discussions, starting now.
We heard in today’s briefings that the humanitarian
situation remains worrisome. The Yemeni population is
suffering from growing food insecurity at a time when
the funding for the humanitarian response is lacking.
The working and safety conditions of humanitarian
actors continue to deteriorate. We again call on the
Houthis to end the restrictions imposed on such
workers, especially those targeting female humanitarian
workers. The protection of Yemeni children is also a
priority. As the Special Envoy mentioned, we welcomed
the reduction in children’s recruitment in 2022, but
serious violations have continued nevertheless. We
call on the Houthis to implement the commitments
they have made to the United Nations. They must
stop recruiting children to send them into combat and
indoctrinating them in their so-called summer camps.
France also calls for the immediate release of the 13
Bahais detained by the Houthis. We reiterate that we
are as committed to freedom of religion or belief as to
all other fundamental freedoms.
Lastly, with regard to the FSO SAFER tanker, we
welcome the encouraging news we heard today from
the Resident Coordinator with regard to the progress
of the rescue operation and the arrival of the Nautica
rescue tanker. As several French companies have done,
we call on Member States and the private sector to
redouble their efforts to bridge the budget gap.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Resident Coordinator Gressly for their briefings.
We welcomed the unanimous renewal earlier of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement and commend the United
Kingdom, as penholder, for its diligent work. The
show of unity by the Council sends an unmistakable
message of support to the Yemeni people in their efforts
to escape a devastating conflict and work to build a
peaceful and dignified life. We are happy to see that in
general the benefits of the truce are holding. The start
of direct flights between Sana’a and Saudi Arabia for
the Hajj pilgrims and the continuation of other flights
in and out of Sana’a are encouraging and positive steps.

S/PV.9370

We welcome the engagement of the parties under the
Supervisory Committee on the Implementation of
the Prisoners and Detainees Exchange Agreement to
gradually release conflict-related detainees, based
on the all-for-all principle. That precious momentum
should be fully maintained if we are to work towards
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire and an inclusive
and peaceful political solution. We call on all the
relevant actors not to waste this window of hope with
timid steps or half-measures. Rather than hesitating,
they should show determination and work in line with
the recommendations of the Special Envoy. It is time
to go beyond mere symbolic measures with a post-war
mindset and a shared vision for a future in which there
are no losers.
While we welcome all positive steps, we continue
to be concerned about the volatile security situation in
the country. The recent Houthi attack on Al-Dhale’e,
which killed six soldiers, testifies to the fragility of
the situation, which could derail the ongoing efforts.
We continue to be concerned about reports of Houthis
blocking the flow of oil and essential goods from south
to north, which is worsening the humanitarian crisis.
We deplore and condemn all restrictions on female relief
workers and on freedom of movement in general. And
we call for full accountability for the gross violations
of the rights of children that have been extensively
documented in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363).
We deplore the mistreatment of religious minorities
in the country and urge the Houthis to immediately
release the Bahai abductees. We reiterate our call for the
unconditional and immediate release of the staff of the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
and other civilians who have been abducted by armed
groups or forcibly disappeared, as well as of Yemenis
employed by the United States and the United Nations.
We echo the concern expressed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs about the dire
humanitarian situation of migrants, asylum seekers,
refugees and internal displaced persons in Yemen
and acknowledge the vital role of the international
humanitarian response in addressing it. Peace is on
the horizon and peace is possible. But as we have
rightly been reminded, the prospects for it are fragile.
The devastating consequences of the war for Yemeni
civilians and the ongoing deep humanitarian crisis and
economic hardship are the most effective reminder
we have of the need for the parties to accelerate their
efforts towards sustained peace.

23-200159/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

Let me conclude by applauding the work of
Mr. Gressly and the United Nations for commencing
the operation on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We fully
support all the international efforts to arrive at a
successful solution to that key issue.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator Joyce Msuya and
Resident Coordinator David Gressly for their briefings.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Yemen and the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to today’s meeting.
My delegation once again congratulates the
Special Envoy and his team on their efforts to reach
political agreements that can enable an end to the
conflict, the attainment of lasting peace and a start
on the path to national reconciliation. It is crucial
to uphold the commitments made under the truce,
which has enabled the continuation of successful
steps such as the release of prisoners, a milestone in
confidence-building measures. We hope that in the
short term, progress can be made in a second phase of
the release of prisoners within the framework of the
Detainees’ Exchange Agreement and with the support
of the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. We therefore encourage the parties
to seize the moment to reach an inclusive agreement
that will enable a definitive ceasefire and a lasting
peace. That is the only way forward to enable Yemen to
focus all its efforts on its political, economic and social
recovery. Given the fragile situation, there is no room
for further delay.
My delegation is concerned that in the face of the
needs of more than 20 million Yemenis who require
protection and aid to survive, obstacles are still being
imposed on the entry of humanitarian assistance and
the work of female personnel is being hindered in the
areas of the country that are most in need. Humanitarian
personnel must be guaranteed free access in order
to support the country’s nearly 4.5 million displaced
people and the growing number of food-insecure
Yemenis. We condemn the detaining of humanitarian
personnel and hope for their immediate release.
We call for continued progress in the clearance
of anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of
war, which prevent the voluntary return of displaced
persons and the opportunity to use the affected land for
productive activities to restore the economy.
10/19

10/07/2023

My delegation reaffirms the need to strengthen the
implementation of the 2014 action plan and the 2018
road map to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
minors, and the actions undertaken to raise awareness
and train the parties on the protection of children
in conflict.
We hope that the implementation of resolution 2691
(2023), adopted by the Security Council this morning
(see S/PV.9369), will make it possible to carry out the
vital work of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement. We commend the donors
for their contributions and recognize the work of the
parties involved in resolving the situation of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker.
Finally, we hope that all stages of the negotiation
and peacekeeping process will include the meaningful
participation of women and the creation of safe spaces
within which they can discuss their priorities and
perspectives for building an inclusive future.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Resident Coordinator Gressly for their briefings today.
Yemen is at a pivotal point in this protracted conflict.
The truce from last year continues to deliver benefits
for the Yemeni people, and we welcome the steps made
by the parties to build an environment for constructive
dialogue. We also welcome the acts of reconciliation
between the parties in recent months, including the
first direct flights between Yemen and Saudi Arabia
in nearly seven years. We urge the parties to keep up
the positive momentum and to engage constructively in
peace talks to bring about a formalized and permanent
ceasefire. The parties to the conflict have an obligation
to build on the progress made to date and to take
decisive steps towards a peaceful and comprehensive
solution. An inclusive Yemeni-led and -owned political
process, under United Nations auspices, is the only way
to bring lasting peace to Yemen.
Malta remains gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation, with 21 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance. Yemen remains one of the
most food-insecure countries in the world, with nearly
17 million people — half the population — estimated
to suffer food insecurity. Financial contributions
are urgently needed for Yemen’s 2023 humanitarian
response plan, which remains chronically underfunded
more than halfway through the year. That shortfall is
increasingly threatening the delivery of life-saving aid
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and livelihood assistance. The international community
must scale up its response to help the millions of people
who are displaced across Yemen, including migrants
and refugees. Tens of thousands of migrants have
crossed into Yemen in the first half of 2023 and suffer
widespread violence and exploitation while perpetrators
act with impunity.
Chronic access impediments for humanitarian
workers remain a key driver for suffering across
Yemen. Restrictions of movement for Yemeni women
aid workers have severely disrupted the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, particularly for women and
girls, and we reiterate our call for the immediate lifting
of the mahram requirements. We also support the
recommendation made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to
ensure that specialized gender-based violence services
are made available.
Bureaucratic and administrative constraints
also continue to hamper and delay humanitarian
operations across Yemen. All the parties to the conflict
must facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian relief, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. We also call for
the immediate release of detained United Nations and
non-governmental organization staff and those recently
abducted from the Baha’i community.
We remain concerned about the reports of the
recruitment, killing and maiming of children in Yemen,
as well as the military’s use of schools and hospitals.
We reiterate our call on all the parties to the conflict
to swiftly implement the relevant United Nations
action plans to ensure the safety of children in all parts
of Yemen.
Let us take this opportunity to welcome the strong
progress made in the plan on resolving the major threat
posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We commend
Resident Coordinator Gressly and United Nations
colleagues on their tireless work to prevent a catastrophic
environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster.
We echo our United Nations colleagues in calling for
further donations in funding for the FSO SAFER oil
tanker plan to eliminate that threat once and for all.
Finally, we were pleased today to see the unanimous
adoption of the resolution renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (resolution 2691 (2023)). Malta commends
our United Nations colleagues in Al-Hudaydah, who

S/PV.9370

perform critical work to bring peace and stability to
the governorate and to maintain the civilian nature
of Al-Hudaydah’s ports, which is essential for the
humanitarian response.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Resident Coordinator in Yemen Gressly for
their briefings.
First of all, Japan welcomes the extension of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) mandate, adopted by
consensus today. The Mission’s continued presence
in Al-Hudaydah and its role in supporting the parties
in implementing the Hodeidah Agreement remain
essential. The Security Council should continuously
support UNMHA’s activities.
The Council has been committed to supporting
the progress of a sustainable, United Nations-led
peace process in Yemen. The parties to the conflict
should understand that there is no military solution.
Japan reiterates its full support for the Special Envoy’s
efforts to facilitate the process to realize inclusive
Yemeni-Yemeni political talks under the auspices of the
United Nations.
As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363), Yemen
recorded one of the highest numbers of grave violations
against children over the past year. We are distressed
to learn that children in Yemen are still being recruited
as soldiers and targeted for arbitrary detention. They
also suffer from the danger of landmines and explosive
remnants of war. No child should live in fear of attacks,
nor should they be compelled to fight on the front lines
of armed conflicts.
Japan has repeatedly emphasized the importance of
economic stability in Yemen and has provided assistance
for that purpose. In that regard, we are concerned that the
Houthis are imposing measures intended to undermine
the economic capacity of the Government of Yemen,
which will eventually damage the livelihoods of the
people. A stronger economy, essential public services
and an active private sector free from interference
and intimidation are key elements for the stability of
a nation. Japan calls on the Houthis to stop any actions
that would further damage the economy of Yemen, and
to engage with the United Nations.

23-2001511/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker, Japan
welcomes the recent rapid progress of the FSO Safer
Salvage Operation Project. We praise the tireless
efforts of Mr. Gressly and the relevant United Nations
organizations, as well as private sector partners
carrying out this unprecedented maritime operation.
Japan contributed $1 million to the project to support
emergency preparedness for, and response to, oil
pollution. We express our appreciation to the United
Nations Development Programme and oil-spill experts
for utilizing the fund to support the mobilization of
the local population for simulation exercises, provide
equipment for shoreline response activity and conduct
demining operations to provide safe access for shoreline
clean-up. Japan continues to engage with United
Nations agencies to collectively find solutions to fill
the financial gap in order to prevent an environmental,
humanitarian and global economic crisis. This is a
shared responsibility of the international community.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I wish to extend
my sincere gratitude to today’s briefers for their detailed
and instructive remarks on the situation in Yemen.
Their dedication, expertise and first-hand knowledge
are invaluable and will guide our work to contribute to
alleviating Yemen’s immense challenges.
I congratulate the United Kingdom, the Council’s
penholder on Yemen, for its guidance and leadership
in renewing the mandate of United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) for
another year. I welcome the delegations of Yemen and
the Netherlands to this meeting.
As a steadfast supporter of the Mission’s activities,
including by contributing with military observers on
the ground, Brazil regards UNMHA as instrumental
in preventing further escalation in the Al-Hudaydah
governorate and beyond. The economic and
humanitarian importance of Al-Hudaydah’s ports for
the entire country cannot be overstated, as they remain
a lifeline for millions.
The continued impact of landmines on the civilian
population in Al-Hudaydah is cause for concern. As
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s latest review
of UNMHA (S/2023/432), the stabilization of the
military situation has led to increased civilian access
to former front-line areas, where remnants of war
pose a high risk of serious injuries or even death. It
is urgent to strengthen mine action capabilities and
increase related projects. The cooperation of all parties
12/19

10/07/2023

is indispensable to ensuring the safety and well-being
of the local communities.
Turning our attention to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
Brazil acknowledges the recent developments in the
operation to avoid a potentially catastrophic situation
in the Red Sea. We recognize the complexities involved
and remain hopeful that pending matters will soon be
resolved, allowing for the timely commencement of
the oil transfer. We express our gratitude to United
Nations Development Programme, as well as to all
partners and donors, for their relentless dedication
in pushing this critical operation forward amid
challenging circumstances.
Brazil reaffirms its support for the tireless efforts
made by Special Envoy Hans Grundberg. We take note
of his extensive travels and meetings with different
stakeholders within the region in pursuit of a political
solution to the conflict in Yemen. His work, supported
by the international community, is central to the
peace process.
We also welcome the recent increase in commercial
flights between Sana’a and Amman, as well we the
first flight from Sana’a to Saudi Arabia since 2016.
Those developments are not only milestones for
regional connectivity, but also positive indicators of
improvement in the regional political environment.
Despite those positive strides, the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen remains a source of concern. We
are troubled by ongoing access and funding challenges
that impede the efficient delivery of aid. The funding
shortfall in the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen (UNVIM) also raises
significant concerns, as it poses risks to UNVIM’s
important work in facilitating the flow of much-needed
commercial cargo to Yemeni ports.
On the economic front, we underline the necessity
of measures that bolster the Yemeni economy. They
include the resumption of oil exports, the removal of
obstacles to the overland transit of commercial goods
and the improved provision of electricity, all of which
are pivotal to Yemen’s path towards development.
In conclusion, Brazil remains committed to
continuing its work within the Security Council and
elsewhere on this file. Our enduring belief is that,
through diplomacy and the promotion of dialogue and
mutual understanding, we can help the people of Yemen
build the future of peace, stability and development that
they deserve.
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Ms. Joyce Msuya
and Mr. David Gressly for their valuable briefings. I
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Jaap
Slootmaker, Vice-Minister of Infrastructure and Water
Management of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
and His Excellency Ambassador Abdullah Al-Saadi,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Yemen, in
today’s meeting.
I would also like to welcome today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2691 (2023), which extends the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). I also express our
appreciation to the United Kingdom, as penholder, for
introducing and facilitating the resolution.
First, we call upon the Houthis to fully comply with
the resolution and remove all obstacles and restrictions
to the Mission’s freedom of movement. That includes
allowing unannounced and unobstructed visits to the
ports. Secondly, we call upon the Houthis to provide the
revenue from the port of Al-Hudaydah for the benefit
of the Yemeni people, including the disbursement
of salaries owed, in accordance with the Stockholm
Agreement, and to stop using those funds to finance
their military operations.
We fully recognize the recent positive developments
on the Yemeni file and the progress made towards
maintaining the truce first achieved more than a year
ago. However, we must recall that the Yemeni people,
worn down by war, deserve a better reality, one that
assures them a dignified life without war. The time
has come to establish comprehensive peace that is not
merely a truce, one that achieves national reconciliation
and the fair distribution of wealth among all Yemenis.
In that context, we reaffirm the full support of
the United Arab Emirates for the efforts of the United
Nations at both the humanitarian and political levels.
We also appreciate the role of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in defusing tensions in Yemen, which has
witnessed the longest period of relative calm since the
beginning of the crisis. We acknowledge the role of the
Sultanate of Oman in mediating and reconciling the
viewpoints split by war.
Despite the restraint shown by Yemeni Government
forces, there is an unjustified escalation by the Houthis
on various fronts — in Taiz, Ma’rib, Shabwah,
Al-Hudaydah and Al-Dhale. That has included artillery
attacks and drone strikes and has resulted in many

S/PV.9370

civilian casualties, including among children. Just last
week, there was an attack that injured five children in
the district of Hays.
The situation requires us to assume our vital role,
to firmly demand that the Houthis stop those attacks
immediately and to refrain from any attempts to
rekindle the flames of war. Any escalation or step in
that direction is a source of great concern, especially
given the Houthis’ continued build-up of their military
arsenal since the beginning of the truce, including
through smuggling operations in flagrant violation of
resolution 2216 (2015).
Given that situation, it is necessary to accelerate
the conclusion of a permanent ceasefire agreement,
accompanied by a series of confidence-building
measures, such as opening roads, unifying the
economy, paying salaries and exchanging prisoners.
Such an agreement would form the necessary basis for
starting a political dialogue among the Yemeni parties
aimed at reaching a comprehensive and sustainable
political solution.
Yemen is facing immense humanitarian challenges.
The Houthi group is still imposing severe restrictions on
the delivery of aid and the movement of humanitarian
personnel, especially women. Furthermore, they
continuously meddle in the selection process of aid
recipients, employing illegitimate systems that they
have established.
The Houthis also continue to wage an economic
war against the Yemeni people and Government,
which exacerbates human suffering, by targeting oil
facilities and ports in the governorates of Shabwah
and Hadramout, restricting trade movement within the
country, threatening companies and banks and forcing
them to import goods solely through Al-Hudaydah
ports. In addition, the Houthis continue to arbitrarily
confiscate land, buildings and private property. They
even threatened to damage the infrastructure for the
production and export of oil and gas in the governorate
of Ma’rib.
The Houthis are also exploiting summer camps
and school curriculums to sow the seeds of hatred and
extremism among children. Such actions are not only
a violation of children’s rights. Extremism also poses
a genuine risk that leads to the recurrence of conflict,
as acknowledged by resolution 2686 (2023), which the
Security Council adopted last month.

23-2001513/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, we welcome the beginning of the safe
transfer of oil from the FSO SAFER tanker, as part of the
efforts led by the United Nations. We also acknowledge
the commendable efforts of the Netherlands in that
regard. We reiterate our continued support for all
regional and international efforts aimed at ending the
conflict and achieving stability and progress in Yemen.
We look forward with hope and optimism to the day
when Yemen recovers and when peace and prosperity
have prevailed.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their briefings on
the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We
also listened carefully to the Resident Coordinator for
Yemen, Mr. David Gressly.
The situation in the country gives us reason for
cautious optimism. There have been no active hostilities
for more than a year. After the end of the official truce
in October 2022, the situation on the ground has been
relatively calm. Clearly, the parties to the conflict do
not intend to escalate the situation and instead intend
to refrain from large-scale clashes. Positive momentum
has been created by an increase in the number of flights
between Sana’a and Amman, the establishment of a
flight connecting Sana’a and Jeddah and the preliminary
agreement to hold another exchange of prisoners and
detainees. All that gives us hope that the protagonists
in Yemen will soon reach a compromise. The general
trend towards normalization in the region also helps to
create a conducive environment to that end.
Under those conditions, we note that it is important
for regional and international actors to pool their
efforts aimed at achieving a rapprochement of the
positions of the parties to the conflict. We will continue
to coordinate closely with the leading Yemeni forces
to urge them to find mutually acceptable solutions and
build confidence, including with key regional partners.
We are convinced that only progress on the
settlement track as a result of international and
regional efforts will help us avoid the worst-case
scenario for Yemen, namely, a relapse into a fullscale military confrontation, such as that which we
have already witnessed more than once. The ultimate
goal of international mediation should be a lasting
and comprehensive solution to the many problems in
Yemen, which have implications for its neighbouring
States too.
14/19

10/07/2023

As is customary, we reiterate our full support for
the work of Special Envoy Grundberg and commend
his active shuttle diplomacy. We sincerely hope that his
efforts will result in a sustainable, long-term truce that
will create an opportunity for a full-fledged inclusive
national dialogue under United Nations auspices.
Security Council members must realize that,
sooner or later, there will be a need to review and
update the basis for the international legal framework
for a settlement, which should realistically reflect the
actual military and political situation.
We also oppose a broad interpretation of the Security
Council sanctions resolutions on Yemen. Restrictions
should be used to promote a peaceful settlement rather
than to fuel political turbulence in the region. We note
with concern that certain foreign naval presences are
engaged manipulations of Security Council decisions
in bad faith by conducting inspections in nearby waters.
The Security Council unanimously extended the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement for another year. We welcome
that decision. We have always advocated de-escalation
in Al-Hudaydah and maintaining the civilian nature of
its ports. We call on the parties to engage meaningfully
with United Nations mediators and to refrain from
unilateral steps. We welcome the resumption of the
work of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
which is helping to improve the security situation in
that part of Yemen.
Unfortunately, the socioeconomic situation in
Yemen remains complicated. The humanitarian situation
is also dire. The Yemeni people must have unhindered
access to food, medicine and other basic goods
throughout the country without discrimination. Any
restrictions imposed on the delivery of humanitarian
supplies or obstacles to the work of humanitarians are
unacceptable. We note the mediation efforts of regional
stakeholders who are helping Yemenis on the financial
and humanitarian tracks.
We welcome the progress in implementing the
United Nations plan of action for the disposal of the
FSO SAFER tanker, which is moored off the coast
of Al-Hudaydah. That is literally a ticking time
bomb, which threatens to cause a humanitarian and
environmental disaster in the Red Sea. According to
Mr. Gressly, the operation is proceeding on schedule.
We hope that the coordinated efforts of the Yemeni
people, the United Nations Development Programme
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and the specialized non-governmental organizations
will enable us to finally put an end to that threat.
In conclusion, we would like to once again remind
members of resolution 598 (1987) and other initiatives
aimed at subregional stabilization, including the
updated Russian concept of collective security.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya and Resident Coordinator Gressly
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of
the representatives of Yemen and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands at today’s meeting.
Since the beginning of the year, the parties involved
in the Yemen issue have maintained contact on the
resumption of the truce and the achievement of peace.
Saudi Arabia, Oman and other countries in the region
have made positive efforts to preserve the ceasefire
on the ground in general, for which China expresses
its appreciation. We welcomed the holding of the
second Yemen International Forum and the opening of
commercial flights from Sana’a to Jeddah, and we look
forward to more positive progress in that direction.
The window of opportunity for peace will
not remain open forever. We hope that the parties
concerned will feel a heightened sense of urgency,
set reasonable expectations for negotiations that
demonstrate the appropriate flexibility and move
forward steadily and gradually in accordance with the
principle of progressing from easier to more difficult
tasks. The Council should remain united in support
of the United Nations, in its role as the main channel
for good offices, and of the work of Mr. Grundberg,
with a view to helping to ensure tangible results in the
political process in Yemen as soon as possible. China is
concerned about the multiple military clashes that have
recently erupted in Taiz, among other areas, resulting
in casualties and tensions in the security situation. We
call on all the parties to the conflict to exercise calm
and restraint, reject military means and refrain from
action that could undermine mutual trust, exacerbate
tensions or further complicate the political process.
Yemen continues to be the country with the
most critical humanitarian situation on the Council’s
agenda. Since the rainy season began several
governorates in Yemen have been hit by torrential
rains and floods, affecting hundreds of thousands
of people and destroying large swathes of crops and
infrastructure. The international community should

S/PV.9370

increase its humanitarian assistance to Yemen and
actively support the United Nations humanitarian
operations in the country. The relevant parties in the
country should also ensure humanitarian access and lift
unreasonable restrictions.
The transfer of crude oil from the FSO SAFER
tanker is progressing steadily. China appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations in that regard and hopes
that the parties concerned will actively cooperate and
formulate a proper plan for the subsequent disposal of
the crude oil.
The situation in Yemen cannot be improved without
supportive conditions in the region. We welcome the
fact that the countries of the region have continued to
take new steps on a path of dialogue, reconciliation,
unity and cooperation, which has injected hope into
the work of achieving a political settlement of hotspot
issues in Yemen as well as other countries in the Middle
East. As a good friend and partner of the countries in
the region, China stands ready to work with all parties
to uphold genuine multilateralism and implement
global security initiatives. We will continue to make
unremitting efforts to restore peace and stability in
Yemen and achieve shared security and long-term
stability in the Middle East.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings
and continued efforts. We are also grateful to
Resident Coordinator Gressly for his updates and his
perseverance in addressing the FSO SAFER oil tanker
situation together with the United Nations Development
Programme. While much more needs to be done,
that is truly good news. The FSO SAFER operation
represents a model for international cooperation on
Yemen. Together we are making true progress towards
averting environmental, humanitarian and economic
catastrophes that would exacerbate the already dire
humanitarian conditions in Yemen and would have
widespread consequences for the region and beyond.
We must maintain that momentum and secure the
additional $25 million needed to complete both phases
of the FSO SAFER operation, as Mr. Gressly requested.
We encourage private-sector donors to support the
United Nations plan for avoiding a catastrophe.
At the same time, we must balance efforts like
the FSO SAFER operation with the need to continue
providing life-saving humanitarian assistance. The
humanitarian response of the United Nations in

23-2001515/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen remains dangerously underfunded, and cuts to
assistance would have dire consequences for Yemenis at
a time when famine conditions are poised to re-emerge.
We urge bilateral donors, especially those in the region,
to fund the humanitarian response.
The United States welcomes the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) for an additional 12
months (resolution 2691 (2023)). I want to stress that
the Mission must be afforded the freedom of movement
it needs to carry out its vital work. We welcome
UNMHA’s investments in women and peace and
security, which are essential to addressing all aspects
of the conflict in Yemen.
It has been 16 months since the United Nationsbrokered truce in Yemen began. While we are heartened
by the various efforts to bring relief to Yemenis,
including the expansion of flights from Sana’a airport,
we know that those measures are insufficient and
that many Yemenis are not yet feeling that relief.
In fact, some are suffering from continued and even
increased restrictions on the flow of goods, including
Houthi impediments to the sale of cooking gas and the
movement of other goods from southern Yemen to the
north. The Houthis have also continued to block oil
exports, further exacerbating Yemen’s humanitarian
and economic crisis. Yemenis are rightly anxious to see
progress on peace efforts, but that progress will require
the Yemeni parties to come together to negotiate
complex issues such as the use of Yemen’s sovereign
resources to pay public salaries. We urge the parties to
cooperate with the United Nations Special Envoy and to
participate meaningfully in future intra-Yemeni talks.
The United States continues to call for the immediate
and unconditional release of all of its locally employed
Embassy staff who have been detained in Sana’a for
over 18 months. The international community is united
on that issue and the Houthis must allow those innocent
Yemenis to reunite with their families. We also call on
the Houthis to immediately and unconditionally release
the 13 Yemeni Bahais held in Sana’a since last month.
We are especially concerned about Ahmed Al-Malahi,
who requires urgent medical treatment. Finally, we call
on the Houthis to immediately and unconditionally
release Levi Marhabi, one of the few remaining
members of Yemen’s Jewish community. All Yemenis
should have the ability to practise their religion without
fear, and we continue to speak out against religious
persecution in Yemen.
16/19

10/07/2023

We must continue to do everything in our power to
end the war and the violence that has plagued Yemen for
the past eight years, and we must do so with urgency.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank our three briefers, in particular
the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Yemen,
Mr. David Gressly. I also welcome the presence here
today of the Vice-Minister of Infrastructure and Water
Management of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
the representative of Yemen. Switzerland welcomes
the unanimous renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Support of the Hodeidah Agreement
(resolution 2691 (2023)), which demonstrates the
Council’s full support for the Mission. Today I would
like to place particular emphasis on climate and
environmental issues, as Yemen is disproportionately
affected by climate change.
First, we remain concerned about the amplifying
effect of climate change and environmental degradation
in Yemen, which exacerbates the risks and tensions
surrounding access to water in particular, at a time
when the country is already weakened by natural
disasters and food insecurity. Given those challenges,
it will be all the more urgent to step up our efforts to
promote peace in Yemen.
Switzerland also welcomes the progress made
in the rescue plan for the FSO SAFER oil tanker and
commends the commitment of the Resident Coordinator
and the United Nations system to avert an environmental
catastrophe in the Red Sea.
Secondly, we reiterate the importance of an
inclusive process to reach a peace agreement that
serves the interests of all Yemenis. In that respect, we
note the commitment of regional players and stress the
need for a concerted approach in line with the needs
and aspirations of the population. We also welcome
the talks held last month in Amman on a potential
exchange of prisoners. We encourage the parties to the
conflict to continue those exchanges, which represent
important confidence-building measures, and reiterate
Switzerland’s readiness to host future discussions on
that subject.
Thirdly, we call on the parties to the conflict to
allow and facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian aid, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. Freedom of movement
for humanitarian workers and the granting of visas and
work permits are essential to ensure that all vulnerable
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

people can benefit from humanitarian aid. In that
context, we note with concern the situation of refugees
and migrants arriving from the Horn of Africa, who
are at increased risk of exploitation, arbitrary detention
and refoulement. We are equally concerned about the
increase in hate speech against those vulnerable groups
by some political leaders.
With regard to children, and echoing our discussions
during last week’s open debate (see S/PV.9366), we
call on all parties to fully and swiftly implement their
respective action plans and other concrete commitments
to end and prevent grave violations against them.
Finally, Switzerland deplores the impact of the
conflict on civilians. That is exacerbated by the lack
of respect for the rules governing the conduct of
hostilities by the parties to the conflict, such as the
arbitrary arrest and detention of members of the Baha’i
community in Sana’a. In that respect, Switzerland
reminds the parties to the conflict of their obligations
under international law.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Hans Grundberg, Ms. Joyce Msuya and Mr. David
Gressly for their briefings. We welcome Vice-Minister
of Infrastructure and Water Management of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment
to pursuing the path to peace. We welcome all efforts and
initiatives to end the war that was launched by Houthi
militias in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of our Yemeni people and to achieve their aspirations
to comprehensive and sustainable peace on the basis of
the agreed terms of reference for a political solution,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
relevant Security Council resolutions on Yemen,
notably resolution 2216 (2015). We look forward to
redoubling and integrating regional and international
efforts to shape the transition that all the Yemenis are
aspiring to. It entails restoring State institutions and
ending the coup by the Houthi militias.
The desired peace cannot be achieved unless we
have a true partner that believes in peace, the civilian
State, equal citizenship and a partner that renounces its
divine right to rule.

S/PV.9370

It is high time to turn regional and international
positions into collective action, to compel Houthi
militias, supported by the Iranian regime, to seriously
engage with United Nations efforts through its Special
Envoy for Yemen and the efforts of our brethren and
friends to end the conflict that left comprehensive
and tremendous destruction and caused the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world. The option for
peace today is the ideal choice, but we are missing,
unfortunately, a true partner in achieving peace. In
that context, we commend the efforts by the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, its honest stances and sincere
commitment to supporting the Presidential Leadership
Council and the Yemeni Government to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of our Yemeni people and
to achieve their aspirations towards restoring State
institutions; achieving development, stability and
security; renewing the humanitarian truce and reviving
the political process. The Yemeni Government has
engaged positively with all options for peace and has
increasingly shown flexibility. It made a number of
unilateral concessions, supported the tireless efforts by
our brethren in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Sultanate of Oman to renew the truce and to implement
all of its provisions even after it ends in order to stop
the suffering of our people and not to allow the Houthi
militias to return to a full-scale escalation and to
aggravate the humanitarian suffering.
On the other hand, instead of fulfilling their
commitments and engaging in good faith with
Government initiatives and international and regional
efforts while making the necessary concessions, the
Houthi militias continue to be intransigent by rejecting
all initiatives and efforts to achieve peace. They
continue to violate international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. They further impose
restrictions on rights and freedoms, including their
continued blockade on the governorate of Taiz and their
use of the humanitarian dossier for political blackmail.
Those militias continue to target civilians and civilian
neighbourhoods, including women and children. They
are mobilizing their fighters and sending them to the
front lines. They continue to recruit tens of thousands
of children in so-called summer camps and drag them to
the battlefields. The Houthi militias are also imposing
the system of male guardian on women in areas under
their control, denying Yemeni women their basic right
to actively participate in the building of the society.
They continue to engage in arbitrary procedures,
systematically detaining religious minorities in flagrant

23-2001517/19

S/PV.9370

The situation in the Middle East

violation of the freedom of religion and the freedom to
perform religious practices provided for by international
laws and instruments. Most recently, they have detained
17 Baha’is in Sana’a, including five women. They have
become among the forcibly disappeared. They have
stormed numerous homes and terrorized numerous
families. Houthi militias are not observing the truce.
They refuse any efforts to extend it and persist with their
economic war against the Yemeni people. That reveals
their true intentions. They reject peace and undermine
the peaceful settlement of the conflict and aggravate the
humanitarian situation. The Yemeni Government calls
again on the international community and the Council
to shoulder their responsibilities and to bring pressure
to bear on Houthi militias supported by Iran. They must
stop their practices and not use the economy to promote
their interests. They must choose peace and stop their
crimes and flagrant violations of international law and
international human rights law.
The Yemeni people cannot endure any more
humanitarian suffering and economic burdens. The
Houthi militias persist with their hostile approach.
They are destroying the country’s resources and its
social fabric. They continue to wage a systematic
economic war on the Yemeni people, targeting national
economic facilities and oil terminals. They prevent
vessels and commercial tankers from entering ports
used for export. They are obstructing the efforts of
the Yemeni Government to provide basic services and
to pay the salaries of public employees. They prevent
the Yemeni Government from including employees
living in areas under the control of Houthi militias.
That approach could jeopardize all prospects for peace
and undermine efforts to end the war and could put the
lives and livelihood of Yemenis at risk. It has led to
a reduction in public revenues and adversely impacted
the economy and the ability of the Government to
provide basic services and pay salaries and has made
the situation in Yemen more complex.
In addition, the Houthi militias continued their
assault on the private sector. Most recently, they
stormed the Chamber of Industry and Commerce in
Sana’a. They forcibly replaced its board of directors
with another that is loyal to them. Their actions
are undermining the public sector and the business
community. They are preventing the flow of food items
and other basic commodities to areas under their control.
To address those new and emerging challenges, the
Yemeni Government has implemented comprehensive
reforms to maintain the relative stability of the national
18/19

10/07/2023

economy. The Government has countered corruption,
streamlined spending, improved revenues and enhanced
accountability and transparency. We call on the
international community and the Council to act swiftly
and support the efforts of the Presidential Leadership
Council and the Yemeni Government to stop the Houthi
economic war against the Yemeni people and stop their
arbitrary actions against the private sector and banks.
They must end the restrictions that they impose on the
movement of goods and humanitarian aid. We further
call on the international community and the Council
to support the efforts made by State institutions to
safeguard the economic and humanitarian situation
against collapse. We value the support provided by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
with regard to service, development and humanitarian
aspects. They have helped to alleviate the suffering of
the Yemeni people. We look forward to enhancing that
support in order to enable State institutions to fulfil
their duties.
As the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2691 (2023), which extends the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement,
we would like to recall that the Houthi militias continue
to undermine the Stockholm Agreement, in particular
the Hodeidah Agreement. The Houthi militias are
rendering it meaningless by placing many restrictions
and obstacles on the work of the Mission, with the aim of
preventing it from fulfilling its mandate, restricting its
movement and trapping it in the areas under the control
of those Houthi militias. They do not allow the Mission’s
patrols to move freely within the city to monitor
the ceasefire and verify any violations. In addition,
Houthi militias continue to commit violations in the
Al-Hudaydah governorate. Most recently, they targeted
civilian neighborhoods in the district of Hays, which
resulted in civilian casualties, including eight children.
They also planted landmines indiscriminately, targeting
civilians and their livelihoods and causing severe
injuries, disabilities and significant human casualties.
The Yemeni Government commends the efforts
of the Masam mine-clearance project. At the same
time, we call on the international community and the
United Nations to support the efforts of the Yemeni
Government and the relevant authorities to overcome
the tragedies resulting from the mines and explosives
planted by Houthi militias.
In conclusion, the Government of Yemen commends
the progress made in the FSO Safer Salvage Operation
23-20015

10/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Project. We commend the efforts of the Resident
Coordinator, Mr. David Gressly, the United Nations
country team and the United Nations Development
Programme. We also wish to thank the donors, the
friendly and brotherly countries and the private sector
for their support in ensuring the full implementation
and funding of the Salvage Operation Project, led
by the United Nations. We also value the efforts of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands in that regard. We
reaffirm that the Yemeni Government is committed to
providing all necessary facilitation to implement that
project so as to avert an environment, economic and
humanitarian disaster.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Slootmaker (Kingdom of the Netherlands):
Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Grundberg for
his briefing. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya and Resident Coordinator David Gressly
for their briefings. And allow me to personally express
my gratitude to Mr. Gressly and his team, as well as
to the United Nations Development Programme and
the broader United Nations system for the tireless
efforts to get the FSO SAFER operation going despite
its complexity. And I thank you, Madam President,
for the partnership and important contributions of the
United Kingdom on this file and for giving me the floor
here today.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands and Yemen have a
long-standing history. We have the longest development
cooperation programme with Yemen, uninterrupted for
over 40 years. We are a large provider of humanitarian
aid, and we continue to stand with the people of Yemen
in these challenging times.
Allow me to focus my intervention on a particular
humanitarian concern, namely the decaying FSO
SAFER oil tanker, because inaction will lead, without
a doubt, to devastating consequences — first and
foremost, on the already dire humanitarian situation
in Yemen — but it will also devastate the biodiversity
and environment of the entire Red Sea region, the Saudi
coastline and possibly the African continent. It would
disrupt vital shipping lanes and energy and food supply
chains, and it would cost an estimated $20 billion to
clean up the oil spill.

S/PV.9370

We can prevent all of that. A salvaging operation
is technically feasible, and we have the knowledge and
expertise to prevent a disaster. My country, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, a country partly below sea level, has
learned the hard way that the cost of prevention always
outweighs the cost and suffering of disaster. That is
why, together with the United Kingdom, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has been leading the fundraising
campaign to enable the United Nations to prevent
this catastrophe.
We are grateful for the funding raised collectively
by over 20 countries and various private donors thus
far. Their support contributed to the Organization’s
efforts to secure a replacement vessel, contract a
salvaging company and start the operations. However,
as we heard today from our briefers, we are not there
yet. The United Nations urgently requires $25 million
to fully complete the operation, including establishing
a permanent solution to prevent a similar crisis from
occurring in future. We call on all Member States and
private partners to step up their contributions to meet
that target on short notice.
I would like to underline and welcome the strong
progress made thus far. After years of continued joint
effort, the first steps of the operation to transfer the
oil off the vessel are about to commence. A Dutch
salvaging company has executed the necessary
inspections and the last preparations are under way. We
urge all parties involved in the operation to proceed as
quickly as possible to allow the replacement vessel to
sail to its destination in order not to lose any valuable
time and momentum.
In conclusion, this is a time for international
solidarity. The United Nations-led SAFER operation
is also a unique example of Sustainable Development
Goal 17 — a partnership between the United Nations,
Member States from different regions and the private
sector. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is fully
committed and will do its part to help the people of
Yemen and the region, to prevent a catastrophe. This is
an opportunity not to be wasted.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-2001519/19
