72

General AHembly-Seventh Session

2. Instructs a Special Committee of twelve members to be appointed by the President of the General
Assembly, to prepare, with the assistance of the Secretary-General, a programme of this kind covering a
period of from three to five years and providing for
sessions of the Councils and fonctional commissions to
be held at Geneva at regular intervals and to report 5
to the Assembly as soon as possible.
398th plenary meeting,
25 November 1952.
Following upon the adoption of the resolution, the President
of the General Assembly appointed the following delegations
to be represented on the Special Committee.:
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, CzECHOSOVAKIA, DEN·
MARK, FRANCE, IRAQ, .PAKISTAN, THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIAL·
IST REPUBLICS, THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, THE l:NITED STATES OF AMERICA A)i!D
VEN£.ZUELA.

699 (VII). Use of the citation "Died for the
United Nations" in respect to persona who,
in certain circumstances, are killed in the
service of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 92 (I) of 7 December 1946
regarding the official seal and emblem of the United
1 For the report of the Special Committee, see document
A/2323. The resolution adopted on that report appears as resolution 694 (VII) ·on page 69.

Nations, 167 ( II) of 20 October 1947 regarding the
United Nations flag, and 483 (V) of 12 December
1950 providing for a United Nations distinguishing
ribbon or other insignia for personnel having participated in Korea in the defence of peace and of the
Principles of the Charter,
Considering that, together with those killed in ensuring that defence under the United Nations Command,
others have met or may meet their death in the service
of the United Nations in connexion with actions for
the suppression· of aggression, or missions the aim of
which is the cessation of hostilities, or efforts to prevent a dispute or a situation from deteriorating into
hostilities,
Considering that it is proper to recognize the sacrifice of each and every person in the international cause
by rendering to their memory such tribute as will keep
alive the remembrance of that sacrifice,
1. Declares to have "Died for the United Nations"
all those who are killed in the course of an action or a
mission on behalf of the Organization in connexion
with the maintenance of international peace and security, the prevention or ending of hostilities, or the
suppression of aggression;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to indicate in
each case the actions or missions, past, present or future, coming within the scope of the present resolution.

401st plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.

Printed 1n U.S.A.
Reprinted 1n U.N.-22560-Auauat 1969-200
Reprinted in U. N. - 11204-May 1978-300
