152

General AHembly-Thirtieth Sell!lion

Expressing its deep sympathy with the missions and
their personnel that have become the victims of such
acts,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concem to Member States, includting the host country,
as well as to the Secretary-General,
Recalling the duty of missions accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel to respect the Iaws
and regulations of the host country, without prejudice
to their privileges and immunities under intemational
law,
Noting the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, contained in paragraph 66 of its report,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations wi:th the Host Country,
l. Expresses its deep concern a.t any acts of violence
against sorne missions and other criminal acts committed against missions accredited to the United Nations,
their personnel and property, incliuding acts of vandalism against motor vehicles, demonstrations and picketing accompanied by violence, threats and insults against
personnel of those missions;
2. Strongly condemns any acts of violence and other
criminal acts against the premises of missions and their
personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status
of such missions and personnel under intemational law;
3. Urges the host country to exert all-round efforts
in order to take all necessary measures and ensure their
effective implementation for the purpose of guaranteeing adequate security for missions and their personnel
and creating normal conditions for the functioning of
missions to the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary measures to apprehend, prosecute and 1punish those guilty of
criminal acts against missions ano their personnel;
5. Urges the host country to oontinue to implement
fully and effectively its Act for the Protection of Foreign
Officials and Official Guests of the United States 11 and,
in particular, to take ali appropri.ate enforcement and
preventive measures to make certain that demonstrations and picketing, especially where there is reason to
believe that they may be accompanied by violence or
may prevent the conduct of normal business of missions
to the United Nations, are held in conformity with this
law and closely monitored by the police to prevent any
acts of violence against the miss~ons accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel;
6. Notes the difficulties which diplomatic missions
and their personnel encounter from time to time when
parking their automobiles, and the need to maintain
public safety;
1. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
8. Welcomes the diplomatic oommunity's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffi.c problems;
9. Requests all members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;
u United States Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871/Rev.1).

10. Urges the host country, the Secretariat, the diplomatic community and the organizations concemed to
seek in every way the improvement of relations and the
promotion of mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the local population in order to
ensure conditions conducive to the effective functioning
of the United ~ations and the missions accredited to it;
11. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the host
country, the New York City community and the New
York City Commission for the United Nations and for
the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs, interests
and requirements of the diplomatic community and to
provide hospitality;
12. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1976, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining ali matters
falling within its terms of reference;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide ali
necessary assistance to the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country and to call its attention to issues of
mutual concem relating to the implementation of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations;
14. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at its
thirty-first session, a report on the progress of its work
and to make, if it deems it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the itero entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country,..
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3499 (XXX). Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2552
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 and 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and especially resolution 3349 (XXIX) of
17 December 1974, which established the Ad Hoc Committee on the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee12 and the itero on the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance
and consolidation of intemational peace and security,
the development of co-operation among ali nations
and the promotion of the rules of intemational law in
relations between States,
Considering that the observations, proposals and suggestions submitted to the Ad Hoc Committee call for
more thorough study,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thlrtieth Se-.
sion, Supplement No. 33 (A/10033).

Reaolution■ adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

1. Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3349 (XXIX)
of 17 December 1974 should be reconvened as the
Special Com.mittee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization and continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with which it is entrusted:
(a) To examine in detail the observations received
from Govemments conceming:
(i) Suggestions and proposals regarding the Charter of the United Nations;
(ii) The strengthening of the role of the United
N ations with regard to the maintenance and
consolidation of intemational peace and security, •the development of co-operation among ali
nations and the promotion of the rules of international law in relations between States;
(b) To consider any additional specific proposals
that Govemments may make with a view to enhancing
the ability of the United Nations to achieve its purposes;
(c) To list the proposals which have been made in
the Committee and to identify those which have awakened special interest;
2. Requests the Committee to examine the proposals which have been made or will be made with a
view to according priority to the consideration of those
areas on which general agreement is possible;
3. Decides to enlarge the Ad Hoc Committee by the
addition of the following five Member States: Barbados,
Belgium, Egypt, Iraq and Romania;
4. Invites Govemments to continue the submission
of, or to bring up to date, their observations and proposals in accordance with paragraph 1 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
use of the Committee a study, to complement those
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions
3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973 and 3349
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974, which shouild present
analytically the views expressed by Goverrunents with
respect to the various aspects of the functioning of the
United Nations, including those relating specifi.cally to
the Charter, and also to render ali necessary assistance
to the Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
6. Requests the Committee to submit a report on its
work to the General Assembly at its thirty~fuist session;
. 7. . Decides to ~elude !n the provisional agenda of
1ts th1rty-first seSS1on an 1tem entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization'.'.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

*

•

•

As a result of the appointments set forth in paragraph 3 of
the above resolution, the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening ó/ the Role
of the Organization is composed of the following Member
States: AuiEIUA, ÁJlGENTINA, BARBADOS, BBI..OJUM, BllAZJL,
CHINA, CoLOMBJA, CoNGO, CYPB.US, CzECHOSLOVAKM, EcUADOR,
E.oYPT, EL SALVADOR., FINLAND, FB.ANCE, GEllMAN DEMOCllATIC
REPUBLIC, GEB.MANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OP), GHANA, Gltl!ECE,
GUYANA, INDIA, INDoNESIA, IRAN, lB.AQ, ITALY, 1APAN, KENYA,
ÜBEIUA, MEXICO, NEPAL, NIGEB.JA, NEW ZEALAND, PAJCISTAN,
Pen.lPPJNES, POLAND, ROMANIA, RWANDA, SIEIUlA LEONE,
SPAIN, 'fuNISJA, TulucEY, UNJON OP SovJET SoCJALIST REPUB-

153

LICS, UNITED KINGDOM OP GB.EAT BRITAIN AND NORTHEllN
IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA
and ZAMBIA.

3500 (XXX). Re9pect for human righte
in armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Conscious that a better application of existing humanitarian rules relating to armed con,fticts and the development of further rules remains an urgent task in
order to reduce the suffering brought about by ali such
conflicts,
Rec(!lling the successive resolutions adopted in the
p_reced_mg years by ~e United Nations relating to human
nghts m armed confhcts and the debates on this subject,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the
second session of the Diplomatic Conference on the
Reaffi.rmation and Development of Intemational Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, 13 held
at Geneva from 3 February to 18 April 1975,
Noting also the note by the Secretary-General en~itled ":1-Iuman right~ in armed conflicts: protection of
Journahsts engaged m dangerous missions in areas of
armed conflict", 14
W elcoming the substantial progress made at the second session of the Diplomatic Conference,
Noting that the Diplomatic Conference will continue
its consideration of the use of speciñc conventional
weapons, including any which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects and
its search for agreement, for humanitarian reason; on
possible rules prohibiting or restricting the use of ;uch
weapons,
l. Calls upon ali parties to armed conflicts to acknowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the humanitarian instruments and to observe the internati?nal humanitarian rules which are applicable, in
particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 111
the Geneva Protocol of 1925 18 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 ;17
2. Calls the attention of the Diplomatic Conference
on the Reaffi.rmation and Development of Intemational
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, and
?f the Govemments and organizations participating in
1t, to ,the need for measures to promote on a universal
basis the dissemination of and instruction in the rules
of in~emational humanitarian law applicable in armed
conflicts;
3. Urges ali participants in ,the Diplomatic Conference to do their utmost to reach agreement on additional
rules which may help to alleviate the suffering brought
about by armed conflicts and to respect and protect
non<ombatants and civilian objects in such conflicts;
4. T akes note with appreciation of the decision of
the Diplomatic Conference on the protection of journalists engaged in dangerous professional missions in
areas of armed conflict, and of the intention of the
~onference t? complete its work on the subject during
1ts next sess1on;
13 A/10195 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
14 A/10147.

111 Carnegie En.dowment for Intemational Peace, Th• Ha.gw
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
18 League of Natiom, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
17 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
