S/2007/749

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2007
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment to enhancing
the efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work, including interaction and
dialogue with other relevant United Nations bodies and other States Members of the
United Nations, and to implementing all previously agreed measures, in particular
those contained in the note by the President of the Security Council of 19 July 2006
(S/2006/507). The members of the Security Council are committed to implementing
the additional measures contained in the present note. These measures will serve as
a guide for the work of the Council.

I. Informal consultations
2.
The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to exercise
restraint as far as participation of its members in informal consultations is
concerned. As a general rule, an appropriate number of representatives of the
relevant branches of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs take part in informal consultations, often when
accompanying senior members of the Secretariat providing briefings to the Council.
The same applies to representatives of any another department in the event that a
briefing is provided by its senior representative. Designated representatives of other
departments of the Secretariat and United Nations agencies, usually not more than
one person per department or agency, should participate in informal consultations
only when appropriate, that is, when the issue at hand has direct implications for the
work of that department or agency or when inputs from that department or agency
could be useful for the Council’s deliberations. A designated representative of the
Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General may participate in informal
consultations at any time, unless the Council decides otherwise. The members of the
Council encourage the Director of the Security Council Affairs Division of the
Department of Political Affairs or his/her representative to seek guidance from the
President of the Security Council on a case-by-case basis as and if necessary.
3.
The members of the Security Council will ensure that their participation in
informal consultations is adequate.
4.
As a general rule, the purpose of initial remarks or ad hoc briefings delivered
by members of the Secretariat is to supplement and update written reports of the
Secretary-General or to provide members of the Council with more specific on-theground information on the most recent developments, which may not be covered in

07-65477 (E) 211207

*0765477*

S/2007/749

the written report. The members of the Security Council encourage members of the
Secretariat to focus on key issues and to provide the latest information, as necessary,
without repeating the content of written reports already available to members of the
Council.

II. Matters of which the Council is seized
5.
Consistent with paragraph 49 of the note by the President of the Security
Council of 19 July 2006 (document S/2006/507), the first summary statement issued
during the month of April of each calendar year should confirm those items
identified as subject to deletion that have been retained for one year at the request of
one or more Member States and should also confirm those items which, absent such
a request, have been deleted from the list.
6.
Beginning in January 2008, the references given for each item listed in the
summary statement should be the date of first consideration of the item in a formal
meeting of the Security Council and the date of the most recent consideration of the
item in a formal meeting of the Council.
7.
The first summary statement of each month should contain a full, updated list
of items of which the Security Council is seized. For intervening weeks, a weekly
addendum to the summary statement should be issued listing only those items on
which further action has been taken by the Council during the previous week or
indicating that there has been no change during that period.

III. Annual report to the General Assembly
8.
A draft introduction to the report should continue to be prepared under the
leadership and responsibility of the President of the Council for the month of July of
each calendar year. While drafting the introduction to the report, the President for
the month of July may, when necessary, seek advice from other members of the
Council.
9.
The introduction to the report should contain concise information about the
nature of all decisions taken by the Council during the covered period, in particular
all resolutions and presidential statements.
10. The members of the Security Council acknowledge that the work of the
Security Council subsidiary bodies is an inseparable part of the Council’s work. The
report should, therefore, contain concise information about the work of all
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
11. The Secretariat should include in part II of the annual report a notice of all
draft resolutions considered by the Council at its meetings but not adopted.
12. The report should be issued so as to allow Member States adequate time to
study it before the scheduled debate in the General Assembly.
13. If appropriate, the President of the Security Council will continue the practice
of not scheduling meetings or informal consultations of the Council on the first day
of the debate on the report in the General Assembly.

2

07-65477
