II.

53

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Further deplores any political, economic, financial,
military and technological support to Israel that encour­
ages Israel to commit acts of aggression and to consolidate
and perpetuate its occupation and annexation of occupied
Arab territories;
10. Firmly emphasizes once more its demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its illegal
decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdic­
tion and administration on the Syrian Golan Heights,
which resulted in the effective annexation of that territory;
11. Reaffirms once more the overriding necessity of the
total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all the
Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, which is an essential prerequisite for
the establishment of a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East;
12. Determines once more that Israel's record, policies
and actions confirms that it is not a peace-loving Member
State, that it has persistently violated the principles con­
tained in the Charter and that it has carried out neither its
obligations under the Charter nor its commitment under
General Assembly resolution 273 (III) of 11 May 1949;
13. Calls once more upon all Member States to apply
the following measures:
(a) To refrain from supplying Israel with any weapons
and related equipment and to suspend any military assis­
tance that Israel receives from them;
(b) To refrain from acquiring any weapons or military
equipment from Israel;
(c) To suspend economic, financial and technological
assistance to and co-operation with Israel;
(d) To sever diplomatic, trade and cultural relations
with Israel;
14. Reiterates its call to all Member States to cease
forthwith, individually and collectively, all dealings with
Israel in order totally to isolate it in all fields;
15. Urges non-Member States to act in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
16. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other inter­
national organizations to conform their relations with
Israel to the terms of the present resolution;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/ l 20 E of IO December 1981,
37/123 C of 16 December 1982 and 38/180 C of 19
December 1983, in which it determined that all legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, which had altered or purported to
alter the character and status of the Holy City of Jerusa­
lem, in particular the so-called "Basic Law" on Jerusalem
and the proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
were null and void and must be rescinded forthwith,
Recalling Security Council resolution 478 (1980) of 20
August 1980, in which the Council, inter a/ia, decided not
to recognize the "Basic Law" and called upon those States
that had established diplomatic missions at Jerusalem to
withdraw such missions from the Holy City,
l29 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Sesswn, Supple­
ment No. 49 (A/39/49).

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
2 October 1984, 123
I Declares once more that Israel's decision to impose
its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Holy City
of Jerusalem is illegal and therefore null and void and has
no validity whatsoever;
2. Deplores the transfer by some States of their diplo­
matic missions to Jerusalem in violation of Security Coun­
cil resolution 478 (1980) and their refusal to comply with
the provisions of that resolution;
3. Calls once again upon those States to abide by the
provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions. in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
JO1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/161. Observance of the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 38/455 of 20 December 1983. by
which it established the Preparatory Committee for the
Fortieth Anniversary of the United Nations and entrusted
it with the task of considering and recommending to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session proposals for
suitable activities in connection with the observance in
1985 of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Com­
mittee, 129
1. Decides that the theme of the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations shall be "United Nations for a better
world" and expresses the hope and desire that the year
1985 will mark the beginning of an era of durable and
global peace and justice, social and economic development
and progress and independence of all peoples;
2. Takes note of the programmes and activities,
including those recommended by the Preparatory Com­
mittee for the Fortieth Anniversary of the United Nations,
to be undertaken by the United Nations and its related
organizations, as well as the programmes and activities
suggested for the consideration of Governments of Mem­
ber States and non-governmental organizations;
3. Decides that the Preparatory Committee, estab­
lished at its thirty-eighth session, shall continue to func­
tion in that capacity, under the chairmanship of the Presi­
dent of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
until the observance of the anniversary, with the purpose
of drawing up and co-ordinating plans and organizing suit­
able activities for the anniversary to be undertaken by the
United Nations, in the light of the present resolution and
the report of the Preparatory Committee;
4. Decides that a commemorative session of the Gen­
eral Assembly shall be held for a short period, culminating
on 24 October 1985 and coinciding with the proclamation
of the International Year of Peace;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to draw up a
suitable text for a final document or documents to be con­
sidered for signature and/or adoption during the com­
memorative session;

54

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

6. Expresses the hope that Heads of State or Govern­
ment will find it possible to participate in the commemo­
rative session in order to enhance its significance;
7. Decides that the year 1985 shaJI be observed as Year
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the nec­
essary facilities for implementing the provisions of the
present resolution and the recommendations contained in
the report of the Preparatory Committee.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee
for the Fortieth Anniversary of the United Nations, IH
130 Resolution 1514 (XV).

established in connection with the observance in 1985 of
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations,
Noting that the year 1985 will also mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples 130 and noting the important role that the United
Nations plays in its implementation,
Decides that the events commemorating the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations should reflect in an
appropriate manner the observance of the twenty-fifth
anniversary, also in 1985, of the Declaration on the Grant­
ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
with a view to strengthening international commitment to
the fuJJ achievement of decolonization.
103rd plenary meeting
I 7 December 1984
