V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ l51

39/198. Economic assistance to Vanuatu
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/218 of 20 December 1983, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed countries
and the appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system, with a view to meeting the development needs of
Vanuatu,
Recalling also its resolutions 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976, 32/185 of 19 December 1977, 34/205 of 19 December 1979, 35/61 of 5 December 1980 and 37/206 of 20
December 1982, in which it urged all Governments, in
particular those of the developed countries, to lend their
support, in the context of their assistance programmes, for
the implementation of the specific action envisaged in
favour of island developing countries, and in which it also
called upon all organizations of the United Nations system
to implement, within their respective spheres of competence, appropriate specific actions in favour of island
developing countries,
Noting the difficult problems faced by island developing
countries, owing mainly to their smallness, remoteness,
constraints in transport, great distances from market
centres, highly limited internal markets, lack of natural
resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities,
shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financial
burdens,
Taking into account the fact that Vanuatu is an island
developing country, that it is a geographically remote
archipelago with a small population, that it has demographic disadvantages, that its dependence on imports is
overwhelming and that it has a scarcity of adequate transportation and communications links, all of which pose
special development problems, making the provision of
services difficult and entailing very high overhead costs,
l. Calls the attention of the international community
to the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to
Vanuatu; 111
2. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for

Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme, the Inte111ptional Labour
Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the World Health Organization,
the World Bank, the International Telecommunication
Union, the World Meteorological Organization, the International Maritime Organization and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the
special needs of Vanuatu and to report the decisions of
those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1985:
8. Requests the Committee for Development Planning
at its twenty-first session, as a matter of priority, to give
due consideration to the question of the inclusion of
Vanuatu in the list of the least developed countries and to
submit its conclusions to the Economic and Social Council
at its second regular session of 1985;
9. Calls upon Member States, pending consideration
by the Committee for Development Planning at its twenty-first session of the report submitted to it and in view of
the critical economic situation of Vanuatu, to accord
Vanuatu special measures and, as a matter of priority. to
give special consideration to the early inclusion of
Vanuatu in their programmes of development assistance:
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Vanuatu;
(b) To keep the situation in Vanuatu under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Vanuatu;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation in Vanuatu and in organizing international assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

Vanuatu;

4. Also expresses its appreciation to those States and
organizations which have provided assistance to that
country;
5. Further calls the attention of the international community to the special problems confronting Vanuatu as an
island developing country with a small but rapidly growing
and unevenly distributed population, a severe shortage of
development capital and declining budgetary support from
present donors;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
expand their current and future programmes of assistance
to Vanuatu, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
I I I A/39/388.

39/199. Assistance to Mozambique
The General Assembly
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17
March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all States to
provide, and requested the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate organizations of the United
Nations system, to organize, with immediate effect, financial, technical and material assistance to enable
Mozambique to carry out its economic development programme.
Recalling further its resolution 38/208 of 20 December
1983 and its earlier resolutions, in which it urged the international community to respond effectively and generously
with assistance to Mozambique,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 112
submitted in response to its resolution 38/208, to which is
annexed the report of the mission to Mozambique,
112 ", JQ

182.

152

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - · ___"____
Deeply concerned at the loss of life and the destruction of
Fund for Population Activities - to maintain and mcrease
their current and future programmes of assistance to
essential infrastructures such as roads, railways, bridges,
petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and hospiMozambique, to co-operate closely with the Secretarytals, as identified in the reports of the Secretary-General, 111
General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
Noting with deep concern that Mozambique has conthe steps they have taken and the resources they have
tinued to suffer from a prolonged drought causing heavy
made available to help that country;
losses in food production and livestock and resulting in
dislocation of its people,
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
Also noting with deep concern the extensive damage
resources for an effective programme of financial. technical
caused by the cyclone "Demoina" at the end of January
and material assistance to Mozambique:
1984,
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under co~
Noting that Mozambique faces an emergency food situastant review, to maintain close contact with Member
tion of an exceptional scale and needs imports of 700,000
States, the specialized agencies, regional, other intergovtonnes of cereals in 1984/ l 985 to meet its food requireernmental organizations, international financial instituments,
tions and other bodies concerned, and to apprise the EcoRecognizing that substantial international assistance is
nomic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
required for the implementation of a number of reconI 985, of the current status of the special programme of
struction and development projects,
economic assistance for Mozambique;
I. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
(c) To prepare. on the basis of sustained consultations
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistwith the Government of Mozambique, a report on the
ance to Mozambique;
development of the economic situation and the implemen2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
tation of the special programme of economic assistance for
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
3. Also expresses its appreciation for the assistance pro103rd plenary meeting
vided to Mozambique by various States and regional and
17 December /984
international organizations and humanitarian institutions;
4. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
39/200. Assistance to Djibouti
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
The General Assembly,
adequate food aid to Mozambique to prevent further starRecalling its resolution 38/213 of 20 December 1983
vation and malnutrition;
and its previous resolutions on assistance to Djibouti, in
6. Draws the attention of the international community
which it drew the attention of the international commuto the two areas for immediate action - the supply of
nity to the critical economic situation confronting Djibouti
crude oil and petroleum products and the supply of basic
and to the country's urgent need for assistance,
inputs and consumer goods for the agricultural sector Deeply concerned at the adverse effects of the prolonged
that are critical for the functioning of the economy;
drought on the economic and social development of Dji7. Also draws the attention of the international combouti,
munity to the additional financial, economic and material
Recalling also its resolution 37/176 of 17 December
assistance identified in the annex to the report of the SecreI 982, in which it called upon the international community
tary-General as urgently required by Mozambique;
to continue to support the efforts made by the Govern8. Calls upon Member States, regional and interment of Djibouti to cope with the needs of the refugee
regional organizations and other governmental, intergovpopulation,
ernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide
Bearing in mind its resolution 37/133 of 17 December
financial, material and technical assistance to
1982, in which it decided to include Djibouti in the list of
Mozambique, wherever possible in the form of grants, and
the least developed countries,
urges them to give special consideration to the early incluHaving examined the summary report of the Sccretarvsion of Mozambique in their programmes of development
114
Cieneral,
assistance, if it is not already included;
Noting the critical economic situation of Djibouti and
9. Urges Member States and organizations that are
the list of urgent and priority projects formulated by the
already implementing or negotiating assistance proGovernment that require international assistance,
grammes for Mozambique to strengthen them, wherever
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
possible;
for the steps he has taken to organize an international pro10. Also appeals to the international community to
gramme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
contribute to the special account for Mozambique estab2. Notes with appreciation the assistance already prolished by the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitavided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States. organizating the channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
tions of the Urnted Nations system and other organi,a11. Requests the appropriate organizations and protions;
grammes of the United Nations system - in particular the
3. Draws the attention of the international community
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Interand to the severe structural constraints to its development;
national Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
11 3 A/38/201-E/1983/69 and Corr I and 2. annex I, sect. E; A/38. 216
sect. XIII; and A/39/382.

11 4 A l9'N2. sert \
