I

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

8 DECEMBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

519)

. . .. .. , . . . ,. . . ,., . .. .. ... , ..,.

. , . .. . ,. . . .., . . ,. . .. . . .. . , ,., , .,. . .,,.

Complaints by Senegal:
f’u) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of
Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/951 3);
f’b) Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
.. .. .. . ..I.
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9541)

SIPV.1519

1

NOTE
Symbols of Uniter! Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETEENTH

MEETING

HeId in New York. on Monday, 8 December 1969, at 3.00 p.m.
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia).

standing that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when it is their turn to speak.

Puesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

At the invitation of the President, Mr, L. H. Diggs
(Liberia), Mr. B Rabetafiku (Madagascar), Mr. A. M'$&k
(Tunisia), Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. S. Alattar (Yemen), Mr, G. J. Tomeh
(Syria) and Mr. A. Ould Daddah (Mauritania) took the
places reserved for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/‘l519)

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
Continue its consideration of the question before it, The
first speaker on my list is the representative of Pakistan,
Ambassador Shahi, who will introduce the draft resolution
contained in document S/9542.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaints by Senegal:
(a) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal addressed to the
President of the Security Council (s/9513);
(bj Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (s/9541).

4. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, before I address
myself to the item on our agenda, I should like to join my
colleagues in congratulating you on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council for this month, Zambia
is in the front rank of the struggle of the peoples of Africa
against colonialism and apartheid in the southern half of
that continent. It’has borne the brunt of this struggle with a
dignity and a fortitude that have evoked admiration in
Pakistan. We are confident that under your outstanding
leadership the Security Council will be able to act in
accordance with the expectations of all States Members of
the United Nations on the matter before us and on the
other questions which the Council may be called upon to
deliberate this month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by Senegal:
(aj Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/951 3);
(6) Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9541)

5. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Lord Caradon for the superb manner in
which he discharged the duties of President of the Security
Council for the month of October. Since the Council held
only one closed meeting in that month, we did not have the
opportunity of giving expression to the high esteem in
which we hold him not only because he is an outstanding
representative of the senior Commonwealth country but
also because of his great qualities of statesmanship. To
Ambassador Yost, who was president of the Council last
month, I cannot fail to pay a tribute. November was one of
those infrequent but welcome months when the Security
Council managed to conduct its business’ under the con
fident and skilful leadership of the representative Of the
United States, without any formal meeting.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at our 1516th meeting I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Portugal, Guinea and Morocco to take seats at the Council
table in order to participate in our discussion without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, F. B. de Miranda
(Portugal), Mr. A. Tour6 (Guinea) and Mr. J. charkaoui
(Morocco) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the further
decisions taken at the 1517th and 15 18th meetings 1
propose next, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone,
Tunisia, Mali, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Syria, the United Arab
Republic and Mauritania to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the under-

6. Turning now to the question before us, namely, the
complaint of Senegal against Portugal [S/95131, 1 should
like to begin by pointing out that only four months a@ the
Security Council, in its resolution 268 (1969); strongly
censured Portuguese attacks on Zambian territory and
1

10. First, the international community has rejected the
contention of Portugal that the African Territories under its
domination are an integral part of Portugal and constitute
its “overseas provinces”. These so-called provinces, accord.
ing to General Assembly resolutions 1542 (XV) and
1514 (XV), are Non-Self-Governing Territories within the
meaning of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations and, as such, entitled to self-government and
independence.

declared that if Portugal did not desist from violating the
territorial integrity of Zambia the Council would meet to
consider further measures. The present complaint against
Portugal by Senegal cannot be viewed in isolation from the
Zarnbian complaint or other similar grievances of the
African countries which have engaged the Council’s attention during the past few years. Portugal has been repeatedly
charged with premeditated acts of provocation and armed
attacks against the African neighbours of its so-called
overseas provinces. It is therefore necessary that Senegal’s
present complaint be viewed in the wider context of the
confrontation between the Governments and peoples of
free Africa on the one side and Portuguese colonialism on
the other.

11. Second, in resolution 180 (1963) the Security Council
affirmed that this contention of Portugal-that is, that the
African Territories are an integral part of Portugal and
constitute its overseas provinces-was
contrary to the
Charter and also determined that the situation in the
Territories under Portuguese administration was seriously
disturbing peace and security in Africa. The General
Assembly also declared, in resolution 1807 (XVII), that the
colonial war being carried on by the Government of
Portugal “constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security”.

7. The representative of Senegal has placed before the
Council certain facts which show that of late, Portuguese
incursions have become more frequent and serious. To
compound the seriousness of the facts cited by the
representative of Senegal in his first letter [S/9513], the
aerial bombardment of the same village, Samine, on
7 December has been brought to the attention of the
Security Council by Senegal in document S/9541. In this
attack of yesterday the number of dead has mounted.
Twice in the past-in 1963 and 196%Senegal was obliged
to approach the Security Council for redress against the
Portuguese colonial authorities. The Security Council took
the necessary action in resolutions 178 (1963) and
204 (1965) respectively, deploring the Portuguese military
incursions against Senegal’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and requesting the Portuguese authorities to cease
and desist from any such violations in the future. Nevertheless, I regret to say, the Portuguese armed attacks continued.

12. Third, in view of Portugal’s continued refusal to
recogniz,e the right of the peoples of its colonial territories
to self-government and independence, the General Assenlbly, in the same resolution, requested all States Members of
the United Nations to deny Portugal any support or
assistance which might be used by it for the suppression of
these peoples.
13. Fourth, by its resolution 2105 (XX), the Assembly,
while recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle by the
peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, invited all States to
provide moral and material assistance to the national
liberation movements in colonial territories. This appeal has
been repeated in several subsequent resolutions, notably in
paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
relating to Southern Rhodesia.

8. I said earlier that Senegal’s present complaint must be
viewed in a wider context-namely, that of the confrontation between Portuguese colonialism and free Africa. In
their letter of 2 December [S/9.524 and A&l],
36
independent African States Members of the United Nations
have demonstrated their solidarity with Senegal,the victim
of acts of aggression by Portugal and have expressed their
concern at the constant threat posed by the Portuguese
colonial army in its “war of reconquest in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)” to the neighbouring
States, besides Senegal, of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Zambia, Guinea, Congo (Brazzaville) and Tanzania.
In addition, a complaint from Guinea is awaiting consideration by the Council. Furthennore, it was only a little
more than four months ago that the Security Council, in its
resolution 268 (1969), strongly censured Portuguese armed
attacks on Zambian territory.

!
1

14. It may be asked, what is Portugal’s defence against this
indictment? In his statement at the 15 16th meeting df the
Security Council, the representative of Portugal advanced
certain arguments: First, Senegal he said was attempting to
“invent” situations by causing incidents or allowing them
to be caused against Portugal and coming to the Security
Council to complain against Portugal. But, we may ask,
what has the representative of Portugal to say against the
invitation by the General Assembly, in its resolution
2105 (XX) and other resolutions that I have mentioned, to
Senegal, among other States, to provide moral and material
assistance to national liberation movements in colonial
territories-which
movements the General Assembly COI>
siders to be legithnate?
15. Second, the Portuguese representative alleged a series
of violent incidents against Guinea (Bissau) from Senegal,
contending that Portugal had the right to react. Since
Portugal has foreclosed all means of peaceful resolution of
the conflict between the right of self-determination and its
own colonialism in Africa, ia it expected of the people of
Guinea (Bissau) that they should not struggle for their
freedom? Is such a struggle contrary to the purpose&
principles and c+ligations set forth in the Charter of the
United Natic~‘?

9. The case of the international community against Portugal was stated by my delegation, along with several others,
in this Council on the Zambian complaint. This case was
based on the various resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council pertaining to colonialism and
racialism in southern Africa. I should like briefly to
recapitulate the indict,ment of Portugal by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in some of the salient
resolutions adopted by these two principal organs in the
past.
‘!
L

1 G. Third, th! WII‘cSCi1 tiltiYC Of PO~tll~ill
SOllgllt
t0 justify
the shelling of’ Saminr in tbc ulcrcisc of what he called the
right of Self-dcfCncc. The council is only too familiar with
tltis prCtCXt XlV~lncCd in tilt: (‘uuncil on previous occasions
;1S well, IIUtCthly in rcgnrd to ZllC ScKtllled right of reprisal,
‘1vllilC expressing the views of my delegation at the meeting
of lthe SecUrity
Council concerning the complaint brought
by your eoultry, Mr. President,tigilillst Portugctl 011 23 July
lYh19,I[said:

and to a growing exodus of the population of those
Territories to those of neighbouringStates. The High
COl~niSSiOnCr
for
Refugeeshas estimated the present
strength of such refugeesto be in the region of half a
million. IS it not natural that uprooted men, womenand
children should struggleto regain their homelands?Who
can say that their strugglefor humanrightsis illegitimateor
outlawed by the Charter, or that thoseStatesandGovernments which extend to them asylum and assistance
are
guilty of violating the principlesof law andjustice?

“Pakistan dots not and cannot subscribeto the notion
that the spontaneoushelp and sympathy rendered to a
resistance movement should esposc the country that
ACCOSTS
it to tbc p~nolty of reprisals,This notion is
advanced not only by colonial Powers but also by all
those who se& to cffacc a distinct people’sindividuality
a!~i to suppressits demand fljr self-determination.But it
is a notion which has been esplodcd by the international
law that is progressively developing in the post-colonial
tlgo. It is this law which refusesto rccognize the so-called
ri,gbt ol” pursuit. The Council cannot but refuse to
COlllltCll~l1lCC
the claim to Such il right, whether it is
involved itI southem Africa, in the Middle East or
elsewhere.We regret that ~nucll of the casewhich the
rieprcscntative of Portugal sought to make out, if analysed, restsultimately on nothing but the assertionof this
right of pursuit under the guiseof self-defence.”/I488th
tiwc thg, pam. 78.1

20. There is another claim that Portugal advancesin
justification of its repressive
policiesin its so-calledoverseas
provinces, namely, that the popular struggle in those
Territories is not rooted in widespreadnationalistmovements but is due to ideological forces operating from
without their borders, That argument has found little
credenceexcept perhapsin Portugal itself. The statement
issuedby the Headsof State and Governmentof East and
Central Africa in Lusaka has clearly brought that ii;to
focus, and I quote from that historicManifesto,whichwas
endorsedby the GeneralAssemblyon 20 November1969:

17, The right of self-dcfcnceinvoked by Portugal is clearly
untenable. Ncitlrcr the African community of States nor
the United Nations recognizes the Portuguesecolonial
possessions
in Africa iIs iiltcgral par&sof Portugal’smetropolitan territory, no Illiltter
wllat the municipal law Of
Portugal may dccrec. The right of the colonial peoplesto
self-detcrminntit~1~cannot bc legislatedaway by domestic
legislationwhich violates the rules of international law and
the obligationsor Member States under the Charter of the
United Nations. Thcreforc, to talk of flouting by Senegal
or, for that matter, by any independent African State of
“norms of international conduct”
and “flagrant violations
of international law committed againstPortugal in Africa”
is to harp on the rules of international law which were
lclevelopedin the colonial age and which have since been
profoundly modified by the law of the United Nations.
18,. Portugal has also been contending that such incidents
as may occur should be settled on the basisof bilateral
negotiations. It is true, of course, that a large number of
these incidents have, in fact, been so settled. The question
is, why do the aggrieved African countries sometimes
prefer, as Senegalhas now done, to come to the Security
Council to complain against armed attacks by Portuguese
cwlonial authorities? The statement of the representativeof
Senegalprovided the answer.The fact is that the basicissue
in question is not bilateral in nature. Even if it can be said
that the individual frontier incidents between Portugal’s
colonial Territories and their African neighboursare amenable to bilateral settlement, the root causeof the tension
and conflict involves an issue which concernsthe entire
international community and the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of peace in
Africa, aselsewhcle.
1’9. The suppressionby Portugal of freedom movementsin
its colonial Territories has given rise to a refugeeproblem
3

“The present Manifesto must, therefore, lay bare the
fact that the inhumancommitmentof Portugalin Africa
and her ruthless subjugationof the peopleof Mozambique, Angola and so-calledPortugueseGuineaarc not
only irrelevant to the ideological conflict of powerpolitics, but . . . to the politics, the philosophiesand the
doctrines practisedby her Allies in the conduct of their
own affairs at home.The peoplesof Mozambique,Angola
and PortugueseGuineaarenot interestedin communism
or capitalism;they areinterestedin their freedom.They
arc demandingan acceptanceof the principlesof independenceon the basisof majority rule.“1
That is a quotation from the LusakaManifestoin answerto
Portugal’scontention that the nationalistmovementsin its
colonial Territories arc inspjredby ideologicalforcesfrom
outsidetheir borders.
21, The situation in Portuguesecolonial Territorieswill,
we fear, continue to remaina potential dangerto peaceso
long as Portugal doesnot fulfil its obligationsunder the
Charter of the United Nationsto leadthem to self-government and independence,But, to qur infinite regret, the
Government of Portugal seemsasdeterminednow asin the
past to flout those obligations.PremierMarccllo Caetano
statedasrecently as7 October 1969:
“Portugal cannot yield, cannot compromise,cannot
in the strugglebeing waged in the overseas
WC must be ready to do all that canpeacefully
be done to further the natural developmentof the great
African prOVincCs.
But we must be intransigentas to a
withdrawal which would imperil for many Years al1 that
hasbeenaccomplishedin centuries.”
capitulate
provinces.

It appears from that quotation from the PortuguesePrime
Minister’s statement that Portugalis irrevocablycommitted
to wage a protracted
and cruelwar againstthe Peoples
Ofits
1 official Recordsof #g &vx?m~Assembb, ~@tt~f~~~~
Session, Annexes, age&a item 106, document AD’7541 para.
the Manifesto.

colonial Territories. It also follows that that war will
continue to spill over into the territories of those countries
which aid and comfort those peoples in conformity with
United Nations resolutions.

and Guinea (Bissau) to freedom and independence in order
that a true partnership based on a commitment to human
equality and dignity may supersede the present relationship
of subjugation and domination between Africa and Portugal.

22. If the Security Council wishes to ease the tensions in
Africa, it is its duty to extend at this stage the fullest moral
and political support to Senegal in the defence of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. All that Senegal has
done is to attempt to carry out the resolutions of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations
which have repeatedly condemned the persistent refusal of
the Government of Portugal to implement resoltition
1514 (XV) and all other relevant resolutions both of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council, and
Portugal’s policy of using the Territories under its domination for violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African States.

29. I commend the draft resolution to the Security
Council, with the following revisions which the four
sponsors, namely, Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan and Zambia,
have agreed to make in its text as a result of consultations,
Those revisions are as follows. In document S/9542, which
is the draft resolution I have referred to, the second
preambulat paragraph, which reads “Having heard the
statements by the parties” should be deleted. In the first
line of paragraph 1 the words “Government of Portugal for
ordering” should be replaced by “Strongly condemns the
Portuguese colonial authorities for”, which would then be
followed by the remainder of the paragraph: “the shelling
of the village of Samine,” and so on, as in the present text.
I hope I have made myself clear.2

23. It is in the light of these considerations that I have the
honour now to introduce formally, on behalf of the
delegations of Algeria, Nepal, Zambia and my own delegation, the draft resolution that has been circulated in
document S/9542.

30. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi, for the kind words he has
addressedto the chair.

24. The contents of this draft resolution cannot but have
been clearly anticipated by the members of this Council in
view of similar and repeated complaints in the past and the
actions taken on them by the General Assembly. It is
especially important to bear in mind resolution 180 (1963)
and resolution 218 (1965) of the Security Council, by
which the Council made the determination that the
situation in the Portuguese colonies wasseriously disturbing
peace and security in Africa.

31, Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): Mr. President, I am happy
to have this opportunity to extend to you the best wishes
of my delegation on your accession to the Presidency. It
has been a great pleasure to work with you during the past
year and I am looking forward to another year of friendly
co-operation with you and your delegation in the Security
Council. I also wish to join in paying tribute to the
Presidents of the Council in October and November, Lord
Caradon and Ambassador Yost.

25. To those members of the Council who may find it
difficult to support this draft resolution unreservedly, 1 can
reiterate the assurance that it is not animus against Portugal
but grave concern at not only the situation existing on the
Senegal-Portuguese (Bissau) front but also the potential
danger along the entire frontier between free Africa and
Portuguese colonialism that has inspired this draft resolution.

32. As we are considering the complaint brought before
the Security Council by the Government of Senegal, we are
conscious of the fact that it comes from a State which
desires nothing but to live in peace and to promote peace
and which, under the leadership of President Senghor, plays
a constructive role in the work of the Security Council and
in international co-operation in general. The complaint of
Senegal thus merits our most serious attention.

26. It is with a sense of sad duty that we view the
rejection by Portugal of the call to reason that is contained
in the United Nations Charter, in the historic Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and most recently in the now overwhelmingly
endorsed Manifesto on Southern Africa-the Lusaka Manifesto, initiated and signed by all the Heads of Government
and States of Central and East Africa.

33. The facts about the incident which have led to the
convening of this meeting of the Security Council do not
seem to be in dispute, The representative of Senegal told US
on 4 December that Portuguese armed forces based in
Guinea (Bissau) had once again violated the territorial
integrity of his country by shelling the village of &mine,
causing casualties and material damage. He pointed out that
this was not the first time that the territorial integrity Of
Senegal had been violated by Portuguese forces. Similar
incidents have in fact occurred intermittently ever since
1963 and they have become more frequent and more
systematic each year. Decisions by the Security Council in
1963 and 1965 requesting Portugal, in accordance with its
declared intentions, to take whatever action might be
necessary to prevent any violations of Senegalese sovereignty and territorial integrity have not led to any lasting
improvement in the situation.

27. It is tragic that Portugal-a country that has made such
great contributions in the march of civilization;a country
that has been untainted by accusations of racial discrimination and colour prejudice-should
act in concert with
Pretoria and Salisbury to perpetuate colonialism, apartheti
and illegal racist minority rule in Southern Africa.
28. In introducing this draft resolution in document
S/9542 we once again appeal to Portugal to abandon its
colonial wars and, in the spirit of the Lusaka Manifesto, to
recoguize the right of the peoples of Mozambique, Angola

2 The text of the revised draft resolution was subsequenth’ issued
as document S/9542/Rev.l.

4

34. This morning the representative of Senegal informed
the Council of a new attack made yesterday by Portuguese
forces on the village of Samine, killing five persons and
seriously wounding one. This new serious incident servesto
underline the urgency of the complaint brought by the
Government of Senegal. The representative of Portugal has
not disclaimed responsibility for the incident of 25 November. He has expressed regret over the loss of life and
mataial damage that may have resulted. He maintains,
however, that the Senegalese Government allows its territory to be used by armed elements infiltrating into Guinea
(B&au) and that this takes place with the knowledge of the
Senegalese authorities and with the support of Senegal’s
armled forces. He insists therefore that the Portuguese
forces have acted in legitimate self-defence.
35. According to the Charter, in disputes of this kind a
solution should be sought in the first place through the
means envisaged in Article 33. My Government has consistently emphasized the primary duty of parties to a dispute
to seek solutions by negotiation and conciliation. We are
aware, however, that such a procedure presupposes the
existence of the minimum measure of mutual confidence
between the parties. In the present case this prerequisite
does not seem to exist. In these circumstances it. is the duty
of tlhe Security Council ~t~~~ti$&‘-&~
&mplaint and to
seek. an effective remedy to the sitii’tiion within the terms
of Chapter VI of the Charter..+--a,,“,“’
36. The complaint which the Council is now examining
must be seenin a larger context. As recently aslast July the
Council considered incidents which had taken place on the
frontiers between Zambia and adjoining African Territories
under Portuguese administration, and a few days ago we
were informed that the representative of Guinea had
submitted to the Council yet another complaint against
Portugal [S/9528/. Thus repeated incidents along the
borders between African Territories under Portuguese
administration and neighbouring independent African
Stat.es form a pattern of tension and violence. The
underlying cause for that situation is Portugal’s disregard
for the aspirations of the peoples in Territories under its
administration, its persistent refusal to make any advance
towards granting them the self-determination and independenIceto which they have an inalienable right under Chapter
XI of the Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In fact,
no lasting improvement in this situation can be expected so
lon8 as the Government of Portugal continues to pursue in
Afriica a policy which cannot be reconciled either with the
legitimate aspirations of the African peoples living under
Portuguese rule or with the deepest convictions of the
independent African States.
37. It is in the light of those considerations that my
delegation will determine its position with regard to the
draft resolution which has just been introduced in the
Council by the representative of Pakistan.
38. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Jakobson for
the remarks he made about me. They were much too
complimentary.

39. The next speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of Syria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
40. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Allow me first, Sir, to present to
YOUOur sincerest COngratUlatiOns on your accessionto the
Presidency of the Security Council for this month. you
symbolize, in a word, the spirit of Africa’s liberation from
the yoke of colonialism, the spirit of determination to free
the Territories that are still non-self-governing, and the
spirit of peace, justice and progress. They all go together.

41. May I also express our grateful thanks to you, Sir, and
to the members of the Security Council for granting the
request of the delegation of Syria to participate, We are
deeply concerned over the matter being considered at the
request of our brother delegation from Senegal. The
problems arising from the obstinate non-compliance of
Portugal with United Nations resolutions calling on the
administering Power to implement forthwith the provisions
of the resolution concerning independence-namely General
Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV)-must indeed be the concern of all Member States, even of humanity at large, You
cannot have a United Nations Organization and colonialism
at one and the same time. The principles and objectives of
the United Nations are in total contradiction to those
inspiring colonialism. If colonialism is not defeated, those
principles and objectives will be-and that will mean the
defeat of the Organization. There is a polarization between
the two; the one completely negates the other.
42. The matter raised by the representative of Senegal
presents one aspect of the stubbornly surviving remnants of
colonialism, actually one of the most serious aspects.With
the denial to the African massesunder colonial rule of their
right to self-determination and with the repeated encroachments on the security and territorial integrity of sovereign
and independent States of Africa, the threat to international peace and security is made twofold and must engage
in earnest the prompt attention of the Council, as it is
engaging it now. In this connexion, that conclusion is only
strengthened by the complaint our brother delegation of
Guinea is going to raise before the Council-and for the
same reason, namely, Portuguese aggressive acts against
Guinea.
43. In essence, the rigime in Lisbon, like a few other
reactionary colonial rkgimes, aims at deflecting the trend
towards liberation which has characterized the secondhalf,
in particular, of the twentieth century and at keeping the
African masses in Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola
under the colonial yoke in defiance of all United Nations
resolutions. If such defiance is allowed to continue with
impunity, the United Nations will be indeed in a serious
crisis. Its principles will be in jeopardy and it will be unable
to fulfil its role in the establishment of international peace
and -justice. We are all, therefore, indebted to the Government and the delegation of Senegal for reporting to this
highest organ of the United Nations in order to expose this
threat not only to their country, not only to their brethren,
but to the whole fabric of the United Nations, thus facing
the Security Council with its responsibilities.
44. The arguments of the delegation of Portugal, even in
detail, are untenable. The representative of Senegal has put

at the disposal of the Council specific data on the assaults
committed by the coloniul Portuguese army against the
citizens and the territory of Senegal. The delegation of
Portugal could not deny the facts; they are too evident to
permit of denial, Instead, the delegation of Portugal puts
the blame on Senegal for not resorting to bilateral contacts
and dialogue.

setsitself above the law, or is it the party that is defending
the law? Who is entitled to self-defence--anarmy whose
presenceis .illegitimate or the African massesand peoples
who are mercilesslysubjectedto illegal rule? Is Portugal
the objective of Senegal’sbombardment, or is Senegalese
territory subjectedto Portugueseattacks? Are the women
and children of the Senegalese
village of Samine posinga
threat to the security of Portugal, or is the colonial
Portuguesepresenceengulfing the whole of Africa and
putting the peaceof the world in the deadliestdanger?

45. Appearing in garments of innocence and peacefulness,
that call for contacts and dialogue, is most misleading. The
real dialogue was offered long ago; it is still refused by the
very regime which purports to be asking for it. That regime
has undermined from the start the very premises of any
fruitful dialogue by claiming that the African Territories
under its domination have no right to self-determination,
have no African personality of their own, and ‘are mere
Portuguese provinces. That ludicrous and arbitrary disposition of peoples and territory by decree by a colonial r6gime
is the most glaring example of tyranny. What dialogue is
possible when such absurd claims are advanced? Does the
Lisbon r&me expect the sovereign countries of Africa to
acquiesce in the suppression of their brothers’ right to
self-determination and in the suffocation of their brothers’
distinct African personality ? Does the Portuguese rdgime
expect the countries of Africa to turn the refugees from
Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola over to the
oppressor?

48. The delegation of Portugal comesbefore the Council
to plead againstviolence. What violence is worse than the
forceful occupation of vast portions of the African continent, the force mobilized for illegitimate consolidationof
colonial rule and denial of natural rights to millions of
Africans? The regimeof Lisbon turns its wrath againstthe
countries that supply the liberation movements with
weapons. Who is to be condemned-those who extend
moral and material support to a legitimate struggle for
self-determinationand independencein full observanceof
United Nations resolutions, or those who supply the
Portuguesecolonialistswith the meansof force requiredto
consolidateits colonialismand silenceAfrican aspirations?
49. A serious attack by colonial Portuguese forces was
madeon Saminevillage in Senegal.It made innocent human
victims-among them women, children and the aged.Not
only have the attackingforcesviolated sovereignly, international law and morality, but such brigand assaultson
territory and innocent peoplerun counter to every normof
civilized conduct, and, asif the Lisbon regimewants to give
an exhibition of more power, it bombards populated
localities of Senegalwhile its first aggressionis being
debatedhere within the Council.

46. Can we forget that since the adoption of resolution
1514 (XV) no fewer than 30 resolutions have been adopted
by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Special Committee of Twenty-Four
on dccolonizations
regarding the same,problem that we arc discussing now? It
is the ‘IJnited Nations resolutions themselves-the latest of
which is General Assembly resolution 2395 (XXIII) of 29
November 1968--which affirm the inalienable right of the
African people under Portuguese domination to self-determination, freedom and independence, and the legitimacy
of their struggle to achieve that right; which condemn the
persistent refusal of the Government of Portugal to
implement resolution 15 14 (XV); which denounce the
situation in the Territories under Portuguese domination as
aggravating explosive conditions in all of southern Africa;
and which appeal to all States to help the Africans in their
struggle against Portuguese domination and to withhold
assistance for the prosecution of the colonial war against
those Africans. Indeed, resolution 2395 (XXIII) condemns
Portugal’s violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African States and it also condemns
the collaboration between Portugal and the racist rhgimes in
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.

SO. In the last analysisit is the presence of Portugalin
Africa by force of armswhich is unwanted and illegitimate.
Those who supply the colonialistswith arms are known.
The marks of the manufacture of their planes and destructive weapons are also too obvious to permit denial.The
flow of weaponsis too deliberateto permit any excuse.The
principles of the Charter, the resolutions of the United
Nations, are all againstthis illegitimate occupation andthe
support which the Portuguesereceivefrom their allies.With
the escalationof this colonialwar so asto involve sovereign
African countries aswell, they have trampled on peacein
Africa and menacedthe peaceof the world. It is, therefore,
for the Security Council to take up the gauntlet, to enforce
the rule of law, to acceleratethe accessof subject peoples
to the exercise of self-determination, to silence with
effective measuresthe guns of the aggressorand to remove
the threat to Africa and international peace and security
once and for all. Meanwhile,it is the duty of every country
to come to the support of the subjected people and
demonstrate solidarity with the independent countriesof
Africa in their noble stand of resisting aggression.Thisis
not only an elementary rule but it is a stand of principle
and not a stand of expediency. If it is not fulfilled, the
independenceand integrity of every small State will be in
peril.

47. Those United Nations resolutions provide the authoritative answer to the arguments and claims of the Portuguese
delegation. The regime of Lisbon has tried to distort the
picture; it projects on to others its own crimes and
arrogates to itself rights due to others. It launches wanton
attacks on the territory of Senegal, kills innocent citizensincluding women and children-and then claims that it was
the victim rather th,a.n the aggressor, It speaks of selfdefence. But, who is to judge whom? Is it the party that
3 SIJ~&~ Committee on the Situation with regard to the Impkemerltationof the Declarationon the Granting01”Independence to
ColonialCountriesand Peoples.

51. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Syria
for the kind wordshe hasaddressed
to me.
6

52, Mr. MORALES-SUAREZ (Colambia) (trunslated from
Sparzish): Mr. President, I would ask you to accept the
sincere congratulations of my delegation that someone of
your ability, competence and equannimity now presides over
the deliberations of the Security Council. I wish also to
congratulate your predecessors, Lord Caradon and
Mr. Yost, on the way in which they discharged their duties.

morning. I now call on the representative of Senegal on a
point of order,
GO. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I apologize for speaking once again, but I
should like to make it clear that while I agreed, as I said,
that the draft resolution should not be put to the vote
today, I did specify that the vote should take place
tomorrow morning.

53. In regard to the item before the Council, my delegation wishes to express its feelings of shock at the events
which have been denounced and its deep regret at the loss
of innocent human lives. I wish to convey these feelings to
the representative of Senegal.

61. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Senegal for the statement he has made on a point of order.
It is my understanding, as I stated earlier, that the vote will
take place tomorrow morning.

54. Al; regards our theoretical position, that is to say our
position on the principles that have been invoked in the
consideration bf the item, it should first of all be noted that
we are against the survival of all colonial rBgimes and that
we have, as it were, an inborn anti-colonialist attitude, so
that the self.determination of peoples is one of the essential
tenets of our thinking in international relations. Fortunately, history has proved that colonialism is essentially
short-ljved. Peoples aspire to freedom and that is a vital
tendency which overcomes any attempt to suppress or
condition it. On the other hand, my delegation does not
hesitate to condemn any arbitrary qualification of selfdefence and any justification for reprisals or punitive acts.
For if we are against the colonialist system, that does not
make us the enemy of a nation. We maintain old bonds of
friendship with Portugal, and even though that does not
incline hs in its favour against evidence and justice, it does
prevent us from taking a decision without having Portugal’s
version of the facts. I think we can ask no less in casessuch
as the present one, and that circumstances can hardly be
overloloked by the dclcgation of Colombia.

62. Since there are no representatives who wish to take
part in the general debate, with the permission of the
Council, I should like to make a statement in my capacity
as representative of ZAMBIA.
63. When Zambia sent a letter of complaint to the
President of the Security Council on 15 July 1969
[S/9331/, requesting an urgent meeting of the Security
Council, we stated that the regular armed forcesof Portugal
had violated the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Zambia by bombing the village of Lote, thereby causing
considerable harm to life and property. When that meeting
was convened [1486th meeting/ we listed 60 specific acts
of aggressionagainst Zambia by Portugal, Out of those 60
incidents the representative of Portugal stated that only
about two were real acts of aggression or violation of
Zambia’s territorial integrity. We argued, however, that
whatever the number it did not alter the fact that Portugal
had deliberately ‘violated the Charter of the United Nations.
64. In the same debate my colleague, the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, reminded the
Council that on no fewer than three occasions the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
appealed to the Security Council to condemn forcefully the
aggressiveacts of Portugal. Mr. Boye of Senegal also spoke
and told the Council of the unrest that is being causedby
Portugal in Senegal. Many eminent friends from Africa
spoke of their experiences in their own countries, which
share tlte fate of being neighbours of African territories still
suffering inhuman oppression from the last bastion of the
colonial epoch. At that first meeting and the ones that
followed later my delegation was told by the allies of
Portugal in this chamber that Zambia had failed to establish
a prima facie case and that they could not support a
resolution that condemned acts of banditry committed by
Portugal, Obviously, Portugal must have felt comforted and
assuredof continued support when it repeated similar acts.

55. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Colomlbia for the kind words he addressed to me.
56. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated jbm French): I
apologize for intervening once again in this painful debate,
but I do SO on a point of order. The Council will doubtless
recall that this morning I asked it to meet without
interruption and to adopt a decision today. However,
certain friendly delegations have asked me to agree to
deferring the vote until tomorrow morning. Naturally, I can
only agree to that request, and I should be grateful to you,
Mr.President, if you would agree to postponing the vote
until l.omorrow morning.

5’7. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Senegal for his intervention on a point of order to inform
members of the Council that he does not wish to insist on
his original proposal that the Council should vote on this
item today. I call on the representative of Portugal on a
pdint of order.

65. On 4December 1969, this Council met to hear the
representative of Senegal, Mr. Boye, in his most judicious
manner, give precise information on more than 20 flagrant
violations of which his courltry had been the target this
year alone. He mentioned places, dates, and names of
persons who had been killed or captured; he even mentioned the villages which had been burnt. TO all those
complaints and all that information given by the representative of Senegal, the Lisbon Government was content to
make an over-all, cynical denial,

58. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): I merely wish to state that
my delegation reserves its right to intervene tomorrow
morning or at the next meeting of the Security Council, if
the President will permit me to do so.
r‘;‘I., ‘The PRESIDENT: I shall permit the representative of
Portugal 30 make a statement before the vate tomorrow
7

free themselves by whatever means and at whatever cost.
The only crime that Zambia, Senegal, Guinea, Tanzania,
and Congo (Kinshasa) and other countries have committed
is to respond affirmatively to the appeal of the Organization of African Unity and the General Assembly addressed
to all States. Paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution
2107 (XX) is pertinent. It calls upon all Member States: “in
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to
render the people of the Territories under Portuguese
administrations the moral and material support necessary
for the restoration of their inalienable rights”.

66, It is the hope of my delegation that those who
supported the Lisbon administration in the course of the
last debate and told them that the complaint of Zambia was
not clear will not in this debate repeat the same story.
Portugal’s acts must be severely condemned, for facts
cannot be better told than they were by the learned
representative of Senegal or in a language clearer than that
employed by him.
67, We have always pointed out that the Lisbon Government would not have to be harassed here at the United
Nations, at the Organization of African Unity or at any
meeting of people who long to see the world at peace, if
only Portugal did one thing: leave Mozambique, Angola,
and Guinea (Bissau) and grant the right of self-determination to the indigenous people. Portugal knows that as far as
Africa and the United Nations are concerned Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) are not Portuguese
provinces whatsoever. We repeat that those Territories are
merely Non-Self-Governing Territories, whose peoples are
still deprived of the right to self-determination and independence. They are African Territories still being exploited by
Portugal and its allies; they are parts of Africa, or
Territories to which the United Nations resolution
1514 (XV) is applicable. That resolution represented a
turning point in the history of imperialism and colonialism
in Africa and elsewhere in the world and provided a basis
for change.

71. It is that assistance which we openly give to the
oppressed people that the Lisbon regime terms “acts of
aggression” and would like the Security Council to condemn. We in my own country have thousands of refugees
from Angola and Mozambique. They are men and women
who have run away involuntarily from their own soil to
seek shelter in a foreign country. Mr. Boye eloquently
pointed out that there are well over 50,000 refugees in
Senegal alone being looked after by his Government in
collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. My delegation must point out that the
Government and people of Zambia regard the presence of
Portugal in Africa as a rotten sore requiring immediate
surgery. It is intolerable and unacceptable, and the pride of
Africa is extremely hurt by the Portuguese presence in
Africa. Consequently, we regard it as an act of good faith
and an obligation to give any possible assistance to all those
who are prepared to sacrifice everything, including their
lives, in order to rout the oppressor. Furthermore, our act is
only a positive response to the call of the world, and we
would be letting down the world Organization were we to
respond otherwise. That is why we feel all the more
encouraged and in duty bound to act in this way.

68. But Portugal, instead of responding affirmatively and
giving effect to the aspirations of the United Nations
Charter, has defied that resolution. It is needless for me to
reiterate the numerous other resolutions that Portugal has
defied. There are many other resolutions of the General
Assembly and Security Council, all of which I cannot
mention, but the following are pertinent: General Assembly
resolutions 1807 (XVII), 18 19 (XVII), 19 13 (XVIII), and
Security Council resolutions 163 (1961) and 183 (1963).
As I said there are many more, and not even a single one
has been heeded or respected by the Lisbon rbgime.

72. Only last month the African people, in their tireless
efforts to work together with the United Nations, presented
to the General Assembly the Manifesto on Southern Africa,
a lucid and clear document acclaimed by peace-loving
nations of the world as memorable, eloquent and fair. The
document provides a working framework for the oppressor
and the oppressed. It insists that the African people want a
peaceful settlement of all problems of colonialism and
racial “superiority”. But it is also emphatic on the point
that, should those colonialists refuse to negotiate, then the
people of Africa would never abdicate their responsibility
and abandon those who are still under the colonial yoke.

69. Yet Portugal is a Member of the United Nations. It is
the impunity with which Portugal defies those resolutions
and the comfort it receivesfrom its imperialist NATO allies
which enhances its obduracy. Surely being a Member of the
Organization and freely adhering to the Charter of the
Organization does not mean that one simply has the right
to sit behind a placard marked “Portugal” in the General
Assembly, its Committees, the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations. Membership demands of a
Member State that it live up to its obligations. Portugal has
not lived up to them.

73. It is only a matter of time before all of Africa shall
become free. We believe ardently in historic determinism,
and we believe that no single nation, however strong,
however well armed it may be, will crush the spirit of
nationalism. That is a fact which has been proved in
Europe, in Asia, in Latin America and in Africa. If
Portugal’s presence and domination can survive my genera
tion, it certainly cannot survive the generation that will
come after mine. Here is the advice that the allies of
Portugal should give it: that Portugal is fighting a lost war;
that it is foolishly wasting all the financial help that they
give it. Is it not Portugal which is the most under-developed
country in Europe? Lisbon is spending about $400 millioll
a year-or 45 per cent of its national budget-on defence
and security alone, Defence and security in Lisbon mean

70. Every time the representative of Portugal has been
called upon by this Council to answer charges of aggression
brought against his country, he has unashamedly tried to
confuse the course of debate: for instance, by wanting to
give the impression that Portugal is at war with the
independent African States that border the Non-SelfGoverning Territories of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau). We have never declared war against Portugal; for,
had we done so, the position would clearly have been
different. Portugal is fighting a war of oppression; it is in
the armed conflict with heroic men who are determined to
8

wars in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea (Bissau). That is a
lot of money for a country with such a low standard of
living. At times we wonder whether Portugal has any
friends in Europe at all. They must try to disillusion it by
telling it that military and colonial adventurism in this
second half of the twentieth century is a notion as fantastic
as the dream of an opium smoker. Portugal has such poor
provinces as Alentejo within its territory to develop, and
would save millions of dollars if it got out of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). Leave the people of
those Territories to shape their own destiny, we say. The
obligations of Portugal are in Europe, and not in Africa.

peoples of Africa have a monopoly of anything it is of
optimism that we shall conquer and that Africa shall be free
and shall regain its usurped rights.
75. We shall have another occasion to continue this
vigorous denunciation of these irresponsible acts of terrorism and banditry by Portugal,
76. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I would say that, as I
indicated earlier, there are no further speakers on my list
for the general debate. In accordance with the views
expressed during informal consultations that have been held
during the course of the meeting, the next meeting of the
Security Council, which will concentrate specifically on the
matter of voting, will take place tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.

74. In this debate Portugal and its allies will hear the voice
of agony from Africa. It is the voice of a continent still
bleeding from wounds inflicted by a foreign oppressor; yet
in it they will hear the rhythm of optimism, for if the

The meeting rose at 6.5 pm.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PlJ8LlCATlONS
be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York

or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

ter
publications
des Nations
Unier
sent
dbpositaites
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
Nalions
Vnfes, Seclion
der ventes,
New York

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Los publicacfones
de 10s Nacianer
en lodor
portes
del mundo.
Conrulle
Ventor.
Nueva
York o G&bra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
ler libroirier
et les ogances
oupres
de votre librairie
ou adresser-vous
b:
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Unidos
ea16n en venta
en librerias
o LU librero o dirijose
a: Nacioner

$LJ.S. 0.50 (or equivnlent

in other

y cosos distribuidoror
Unidor,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

82280-December

1972-2,050
