S/PV.8619

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8619th meeting

Monday, 16 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28168 (E)
*1928168*

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity today to brief the Council once again on
the situation in Yemen.
Today I will argue, based on the facts in front of us,
that we have no time to waste before moving forward
with purpose and resolve towards a political solution to
end the conflict in Yemen. In my most recent briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8598), I made just such a call.
If anything, the facts before us now make that even
more compelling.
What are the reasons behind this appeal? The
first reason is the worrying military escalation. The
attack on ARAMCO facilities in Saudi Arabia on the
morning of Saturday, 14 September, which has caused
significant disruption to the Kingdom’s crude oil
production, has consequences well beyond the region.
I echo the Secretary-General’s statement condemning
this attack. At a minimum, this kind of action carries
the risk of dragging Yemen into a regional conflagration
because of one thing we can be certain — that is, that
this extremely serious incident makes the chances
of a regional conflict that much higher and of a
rapprochement that much lower. With Yemen in some
way or other linked to that possibility, none of it is good
for Yemen.
2/22

16/09/2019

That is, frankly, terrifying and an eventuality
that runs completely counter to the many detailed
conversations I have had in recent weeks with people in
Yemen, the region and elsewhere in favour of a series of
steps to be taken by the parties towards de-escalation. It
is not entirely clear who was behind the attack, but the
fact that Ansar Allah has claimed responsibility is bad
enough. Whatever we may discover of the attack, it is a
sure sign that for Yemen the direction of travel seems to
be away from the peace we all seek. Every day the war
goes on, the greater is the threat to regional stability, as
we have seen. We need to make a bold move.
It is always and inevitably invidious to choose for
attention one event in a war as broad, complex and
violent as the one we face in Yemen. But we do so,
as I do on this occasion, to illustrate the horror of the
war and thus appeal to the collective conscience, with
an emphasis on the terror faced by ordinary people in
Yemen on a daily basis.
The attack on Dhamar on 1 September led to the
deaths of approximately 110 people and the wounding
of 43 more. Only a handful escaped unhurt from that
building. I am well aware of the reasons put forward
for this attack. My purpose here is not to adjudicate,
of course, on that decision, but the attack itself
nevertheless reminds us so vividly of all that we want
to bring to an end. The actions I have described make
peace more difficult and, indeed, even more necessary.
The second reason for my appeal is the situation in
the south. Events there present to us an eerie calm. The
city of Aden remains broadly under the control of the
Southern Transitional Council. In neighbouring Abyan,
its forces face those of the Government of Yemen. In
Shabwa, further east and north, a shaky standoff has
been achieved. Forces from other fronts have moved to
support their respective sides in this new and dangerous
crisis. Those moves, in turn, destabilize those other
fronts, encouraging new military adventurism.
There is really nothing good to be said about
this besides the calm I mentioned. I am of course,
encouraged by the calls for peace from other groups
in the southern governorates that do not want events in
Aden to be repeated or to spread. Nevertheless, the risk
of further fragmentation, violence and displacement is
real. The status of forces and their rearmament make
even the most optimistic of us cautious in judgment.
I condemn, as I did last month before the Council,
the unacceptable efforts of the Southern Transitional
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Council to take control of State institutions by force.
The functioning of State institutions is a necessity and
must prevail.
In Jeddah, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is intensely
focused on mediating a solution. We discussed this at the
last meeting of the Council on this issue, on 20 August.
I wish the Kingdom every success. As I said then, it is
indeed the indispensable mediator and frankly it brings
real meaning to the phrase that its success will be our
success. I welcome the presence of delegations from
the Government of Yemen, under the leadership of
President Hadi Mansour, and the Southern Transitional
Council in Jeddah. I can imagine and know that the
Council joins me in wishing the Saudis, their leadership
and the two delegations every success in their crucial
effort to reduce this threat to Yemen’s very existence.
As many have said before, the lasting and
resounding message from developments in the south
is a clarion call for an urgent need to end the conflict
in Yemen as a whole. As President Hadi told me last
month, we need to make progress urgently if the war
is not to expand further. There is simply no argument,
no choice and no better use of our energy now than to
engage in that endeavour. We see the war therefore not
merely continuing to wreck the lives and livelihoods
of men and women in Yemen, but also threatening to
metastasize into something that threatens the existence
of Yemen itself. We must therefore move to end it and
end it soon.
Despite this admittedly very grim picture, we
had some limited progress this month. Since my last
briefing, the parties have taken further steps towards
implementing the Stockholm Agreement. On 8 and
9 September, the parties held the sixth joint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee in the Red
Sea to discuss ceasefire enhancement, disengagement
from the front lines and the implementation of plan for
the redeployment of forces. The meeting was held in a
very positive and a very pragmatic atmosphere, and I
am grateful to the leadership of the parties who made
this so and their representatives present on that vessel.
I am very pleased to say that the tripartite ceasefire
and the de-escalation mechanism are now alive and well
and that a joint operations centre has already been set up
and running for a full week. That mechanism, perhaps
overdue, allows for greater communication between
the parties with liaison officers physically present on
a 24/7 basis and with contact with commanders on the

S/PV. 8619

ground to prevent military escalation. The tripartite
mechanism is, in fact — again, way overdue — the first
joint practical initiative since the Stockholm Agreement
was made. It is practical in the sense of an immediate,
visible impact on the way that the parties operate in
Al-Hudaydah.
Both parties asked for that mechanism, as part of
their efforts to shore up the ceasefire. I am sure that it
will help to save lives. We have already seen a decrease
in the number of incidents in Al-Hudaydah over the
past week. I am therefore encouraged by the parties’
willingness to implement further measures, including
the regular meetings of the liaison offices I mentioned
and their meetings in specific locations along the front
lines in Al-Hudaydah, as well as the opening of key
humanitarian corridors. The sustained reduction in
violence, still somewhat controversial in some minds,
but not in ours, has been one of the major achievements
of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement so far. I welcome those
concrete steps to reinforce it and improve access for the
delivery of humanitarian aid. We must be reminded that
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement remains a humanitarian
agreement. Those shall continue to be the primary goals
of the Agreement reached in Stockholm last December.
On the basis also of detailed analysis in that last
Redeployment Coordination Committee meeting of
the issues surrounding the phase one redeployments
we have all been waiting to see happen for so many
months and on the basis of a proposal I presented to
the Committee, the parties now have a revised proposal
before them based on the discussions for their urgent
consideration to allow those redeployments to take
place. We expect their response by 20 September. I
appeal to the parties to respond positively.
The Al-Hudaydah Agreement is moving
forward — slowly perhaps, late certainly, but with
purpose. My own hope is that we will continue to
manage improvements in the ceasefire and prevent any
major attacks in the governorate. That is the bottom
line of that Agreement. Meanwhile, the parties now
have in their hands the decisions about redeployments.
As we have heard — as the Council has certainly
been involved — I would like to congratulate the new
Head of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the new Chair of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, my good
friend and colleague Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha.
I can think of no one better qualified for that difficult,

19-281683/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

demanding and important role. I wish him every success
in his position. Of course, he has my full support. I
would also like to express and reiterate my gratitude
to UNMHA colleagues who continue to work under
extremely difficult conditions and have maintained the
level of attention and engagement and pace during the
period between the departure of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard and the imminent arrival of Lieutenant
General Guha.
I do not have much to say today about other elements
of the Agreement reached in Sweden. I have seen no
breakthroughs on prisoner release — a matter made
all the more tragic given the deaths in Dhamar. My
proposal for the release of the first batch of prisoners
was welcomed by one party but not by the other, which
insisted, instead, that all prisoners everywhere must be
released in one go — an interpretation of the all-for-all
principle. I am afraid that is not a practical suggestion.
If it were, we would have certainly followed it some
time before now. As both sides are reluctant, at different
times, to avow the identity, existence and location of
prisoners, identifying prisoners and their location in
the fog of war, not exclusively in Yemen, is desperately
difficult task. That is why I have concluded, perhaps
rightfully or wrongfully, that we should identify and
release and then continue to identify and release and
that the first batch of prisoners be followed by other
batches, until we exhaust the list of all prisoners agreed
between the parties. For now, that is not to be.
The complex military situation in Taiz, the third
element agreed in Sweden in December last year, has
posed serious challenges to all our frequent efforts to
implement the statement of understanding, which is the
title of the Agreement reached in Stockholm. However,
I was encouraged by a recent statement by the Minister
of Planning of Yemen to engage and be ready to help
the people of Taiz, as was originally agreed. We were
together in a meeting in Berlin, just a few days ago. We
have not given up. I would like to do that, primarily
now, through support for the local community and for
women’s groups and local groups that have always been
so active on the same issues in Taiz. I was privileged to
meet them at a seminar hosted by the European Union
in Amman a few weeks ago.
The energy, creative will and desire to improve the
conditions of families and civilians, as represented and
exemplified by those groups, are remarkable. I would
like to voice my support for that. I think that they will
light the way for the rest of us. I hope that at a future
4/22

16/09/2019

meeting of the Council, you, Mr. President, will allow
them to brief us all on the ways and means of how
Yemeni civilians see resolving the conflicts that oppress
them in the war. Our main goal, and their main goal,
in Taiz continues to be the opening of humanitarian
corridors to alleviate human suffering and allow access
to humanitarian assistance.
I began by saying that the case for an urgent
move towards peace has never been stronger. I hope
that remarks on the various aspects of the situation in
Yemen — the war itself, the threat from the south, the
unforeseen direction in which the ARAMCO attack
will take us — have made that plain.
I know from the daily and detailed discussions
that I have with Yemenis, officials, young people,
women and, indeed, the diplomats of those States
anxious to see an end to the conflict — and they tell
me clearly — that they want me to get on with my job,
just as the members of the Council do and have made so
clear in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2019/9), for
which I am indeed very grateful. In parallel, therefore,
to the continued efforts to implement the Stockholm
Agreement and not forsaking it for a minute, the Yemeni
parties must move forward to resume an inclusive
political process to reach a comprehensive solution to
end the conflict, and that must be done without delay.
We must maintain the momentum, if we are to preserve
the unity and future of Yemen for its people.
I will continue to intensify the engagement I have
already begun with a wide range of Yemeni stakeholders
in the coming weeks. As part of those efforts, I aim to
start informal discussions with different stakeholders,
including the representatives of political parties, but also
public figures, women, youth and civil society. Those
discussions, of course, will include what they consider
to be the key elements that need to be included in the
final agreement to be decided, debated and, hopefully,
agreed between the parties in the near future.
Finally, I would like to make a personal statement.
I was present in Sweden when agreements were made,
as we are all aware. I have a personal reason to hold
those agreements very dear. Nobody needs have the
slightest doubt about my desire, and our desire at the
United Nations, to pursue those promises to their
conclusion. I am frequently reminded, for example,
that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement must be implemented
before we do other things. To those people I say that the
United Nations will continue, under the leadership of
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Abhijit Guha, to devote unparalleled time, effort and
energy to achieve that objective. Let us have no doubt
about that. Let us have no doubt either that that will not
detract from our essential focus on efforts to reach a
political settlement to resolve the conflict in Yemen. I
am sorry my statement was so long.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Let me, like Martin, at the outset
again repeat the United Nations condemnation of
Saturday’s attacks on Saudi Arabian oil facilities and
reiterate the Secretary-General’s call of yesterday on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and prevent
any escalation.
On 29 August, as Martin just reminded us, the
Security Council issued a presidential statement on
Yemen (S/PRST/2019/9) — its fourth since 2015 and
the first since it adopted resolution 2451 (2018) last
December. In that statement, the Council advocated
for key humanitarian priorities, including, first,
respect for international humanitarian law; secondly,
unhindered humanitarian access; thirdly, a fully funded
aid operation; and, fourthly, support for Yemen’s
struggling economy.
Many of those themes were also addressed in
resolution 2451 (2018) and, indeed, in nearly all the
Council’s products since hostilities escalated in Yemen,
more than four years ago. We have also covered
those issues extensively in our monthly briefings to
the Council.
And yet, with few exceptions, we seem no closer
to the outcomes we all say we want. In some cases, we
have moved farther away. I would like to update the
Council now on the current situation on each issue.
First, let me turn to the issue of international
humanitarian law, which requires all parties to
respect civilians and civilian infrastructure and to
take constant care to spare them throughout military
operations. Since last month’s briefing, we have seen
numerous incidents that have killed or injured civilians
or damaged civilian infrastructure.
Two weeks ago, air strikes hit a prison in Dhamar
governorate. In better times, this facility had been
a university — itself a sobering illustration of where
this war has taken Yemen. More than 100 people were

S/PV. 8619

killed in the attack, making it one of the deadliest of
the conflict. What exactly happened in this incident
remains disputed.
The scale of the carnage in Dhamar is shocking. But
otherwise, this kind of attack is disturbingly common
and familiar. On Friday, three days ago, shelling by
Ansar Allah-affiliated forces in Al-Hudaydah killed
11 civilians, including seven children. The same day,
two children were killed in a separate shelling incident
in Taiz. There are many other similar examples. We see
a persistent pattern of attacks in Yemen that kill or injure
civilians or damage critical civilian infrastructure.
A nationwide ceasefire, as I have long advocated,
would reduce people’s exposure to harm right now. All
parties must uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law at all times. Part of this commitment
entails accountability for serious violations. In 2017
the Human Rights Council established the Independent
Group of Eminent Experts to examine possible
violations. They have just released a disturbing report,
and I hope that their mandate will again be extended.
Secondly, despite the Council’s recent and
repeated calls for unimpeded humanitarian access, the
operating environment for aid agencies has perhaps
never been worse than it is right now. In June and
July, humanitarian agencies reported 300 incidents
that hindered humanitarian assistance, affecting
4.9 million people. Almost 90 per cent of incidents
were due to bureaucratic impediments and other kinds
of interference.
Most of those incidents were due to restrictions
imposed by Ansar Allah authorities. They include
obstacles to beneficiary registration, attempts to divert
aid and efforts to control the selection of implementing
partners. Humanitarian workers have been detained
at checkpoints and, in several cases, arbitrarily
arrested. Staff also face intimidation and harassment
at Sana’a airport.
The Ansar Allah authorities are now seeking
to introduce new regulations for international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that would
undermine humanitarian principles. A large number of
NGO projects in the north have been unable to start this
year, affecting some 4.3 million people.
I am also disappointed at the fact that the longplanned assessment of the FSO SAFER oil tanker
has not taken place. Based on prior agreement from

19-281685/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

the Ansar Allah authorities, we deployed the United
Nations assessment team and equipment to Djibouti
last month. The assessment should have started on
27 August. As the start date approached, Ansar Allah
authorities raised several objections, despite their
earlier agreement. We worked hard to overcome those
objections, but, when it became clear that progress was
highly unlikely, we just had to send the team home.
We remain eager to assist with the SAFER, within
the limits of technical feasibility and available funds.
But whether this work can proceed is up to Ansar
Allah. I have explained to the Council many times now
the risks posed by the tanker, and I implore Member
States to do all they can to allow us to address this issue
as quickly as possible. Our team can still deploy within
three weeks if allowed to do so.
In the south, the recent violence in Aden and other
areas illustrates how volatile the situation remains.
Millions of people in the south also need humanitarian
assistance, including help to prevent and treat cholera
or stave off extreme hunger. The services we provide
in the south are essential to save lives and reduce the
suffering there.
Recent clashes between the Government and
forces affiliated with the Southern Transitional
Council undermined this critical work, restricting
some operations for several days. Despite this, we have
done everything we can to keep operations on track.
Humanitarian staff remain in place and are not leaving.
But this volatility, if not addressed, will continue to
present a serious potential threat to aid operations in the
south. We are also concerned by ongoing Government
delays in approving NGO projects, which are currently
holding up relief programmes for an estimated
1.6 million people. We continue to see bottlenecks at
the Dhubab checkpoint, where coalition requirements
are slowing aid agencies’ access to Government-held
areas along the west coast.
The third point is funding for the aid operation.
Despite all the access problems, we can reach people
and save lives if humanitarian agencies are adequately
financed. Let me repeat that: if funded, the aid operation
will help save millions of lives.
I have just this morning received confirmation from
the Saudi authorities that they plan on 25 September to
transfer $500 million in a single payment to my Office
in discharge of the pledge they made for the Yemen
6/22

16/09/2019

humanitarian response plan in February. I warmly
welcome this and look forward to the signing of the
agreements on 25 September alongside the transfer of
the funds that day.
The United Arab Emirates has also just allocated
$200 million to the response plan. This includes
$100 million for the World Food Programme and an
additional $100 million channelled through my Office
for other urgent priorities.
Until there is more money in the bank, we will not
be in a position to reopen vaccination programmes and
nutrition centres or to resume cholera-prevention work
or other activities that we have had in recent weeks
to close down. Other programmes targeting millions
of people will also remain at grave risk. So, again, I
welcome the developments I have just informed the
Council of.
The fourth point that the Council highlighted in its
29 August statement is Yemen’s struggling economy.
This is an issue that requires more attention. Recent
indicators are alarming. The exchange rate is once more
depreciating and is now hovering at just over 600 Yemeni
rial to the dollar — compared with, as the Council will
recall, 215 rial to the dollar before the crisis. We have
not seen the rate cross the 600-rial threshold since last
year, when uncontrolled depreciation took hold in the
country and prompted major hikes in food prices.
Because Yemen imports nearly everything, higher
exchange rates mean that millions more people are
unable to afford food and other essential goods. Last
year, the collapse of the currency was a primary driver
in pushing Yemen to the brink of widespread famine.
In the past, injections of foreign exchange have
helped to stabilize the exchange rate. Last year, such
support quickly brought the rate back from a peak
of 800 rial to about 400 rial. We need a predictable,
regular programme for those injections, which, I hope,
Yemen’s partners will provide. I am encouraged by the
news last week that Saudi Arabia has released another
$90 million to the central bank from a $2 billion deposit
announced in January 2018.
I also remain concerned about the potential impact
of regulations of the new Government of Yemen on
commercial fuel imports, including Decree 49. We are
concerned that such measures could discourage critical
import flows despite the presence of an effective United
Nations inspection and monitoring mechanism to
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8619

facilitate them. The stricter enforcement of regulations
is already creating delays for commercial ships serving
Al-Hudaydah. As of today, the Government and the
coalition are blocking 10 vessels with commercial fuel
imports from entering Al-Hudaydah. Together, the
ships are carrying 163,000 metric tons of fuel. That is
more than an average month of fuel imports.

regional and international peace and security but also
as an effort to disrupt global oil supplies.

The impact on hundreds of thousands of families
is already being felt. People who are barely surviving
now will find it much harder to do so unless adequate
levels of commercial imports, including fuel, are able
to enter the country continuously through all ports. In
the wake of fuel shortages last April, the Government
introduced more flexible arrangements and shortages
eased. According to Government statements at the
time, that approach did not undermine the stated
purpose of the regulations. We therefore hope that the
Government will again take that route. We also call on
Ansar Allah to end interference in fuel markets, which
exacerbates shortages.

Turning at to the situation in Yemen, I note with
great sadness and concern/trouble that the situation
is not improving. What we heard today from the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Special Envoy
shows that we are in grave danger of letting the
situation slide backwards despite everyone’s efforts.
We have been gravely concerned about the escalation
in violence in the south, and we condemn the use of
force by the Southern Transitional Council to seize
State institutions.

Beyond those humanitarian priorities, the presidential
statement mainly addressed the urgent need to get the
peace process back on track. We all agree that peace
is what Yemen needs more than anything, and Martin
Griffiths and his team have our full support as they
work with the parties to achieve that.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
Let me start by joining the United Nations
unequivocal condemnation of the attacks on the
ARAMCO facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
on 14 September. They were reckless and despicable
and are completely unjustifiable. It is only sheer
luck that no one was killed, not by any design of the
perpetrators. Threatening civilian areas and commercial
infrastructure is a violation of international law, as
well as being dangerous and provocative. I am sure that
all members of the Council will today want to join in
condemning the attacks not only as a clear threat to

At the moment, we are still assessing what happened
and who is responsible for the attacks. Once that is
being established, we will discuss with our partners
how to proceed in a responsible manner. We hope for
a united international response to the terrible attacks.

The Saudi-led talks in Jeddah need our full backing
and all parties need to cease hostilities and engage in
the talks. We support Saudi Arabia’s efforts. We hope
that the talks can broker a deal that brings southern
representatives into the Yemeni Government and
makes the Yemeni Government more representative.
Inclusivity is a key pillar of stability, as we have seen
in so many conflicts around the world. For the United
Kingdom’s part, we stand ready to assist in any way
that we can, and we support what the Under-SecretaryGeneral said with regard to safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian responses and commercial
supplies. Goods need to be able to move freely through
Aden port across the south and from Aden to the north
of the country, and we call on the parties to ensure
the continued functionality of institutions and the
protection of civilians from human rights abuses.
The Special Envoy rightly devoted a large part of
his briefing to the broader inclusive political process.
We remain strong supporters of efforts to that end.
They are given renewed momentum by the events over
the weekend and in the south of Yemen last month. In
its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9, of 29 August,
the Security Council gave its full backing to the
Special Envoy and his efforts to work with the parties
to pave the way for the resumption of comprehensive
negotiations without delay on the security and political
arrangements necessary to end the conflict and
resume a peaceful transition in Yemen. We look to
such negotiations to engage all parties in an inclusive
dialogue in order to resolve differences and address

19-281687/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including those
in the south, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Turning to the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah
and the Ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, we
too welcome the appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha and look forward to working with him. I wanted
to welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee held on 8 and 9 September and
urge the parties to engage constructively in that process
and to finalize outstanding negotiations to allow for the
implementation of the first and second phases of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We heard from the Under-Secretary-General
about the very dire situation of attacks, violence and
violations of international humanitarian law. I thought
what he said about the operating environment and the
300 incidents affecting nearly 5 million people was
particularly shocking and something that the Council
should address. We also echo his calls on handling
the tanker incident. I wonder why we have so many
bureaucratic impediments from Ansar Allah and what
lies behind that. But we look to all parties to work with
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
ensure that support reaches those who so desperately
need it.
The one bright spot, as Mr. Lowcock also said,
is the pledge from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
$500 million, to be made on the 25 September during
high-level week. That is extremely welcome news and
we join others in thanking the Saudi Arabian authorities
for that step. All donors should now consider whether
they can provide additional funding this year to ensure
that the $4.2-billion humanitarian appeal is fully
funded. For our part, we have already disbursed 87 per
cent of our funding and we are assessing whether we
can provide more.
Finally, while I would like to say more when we get
to closed consultations, I would like to end by echoing
what the Under-Secretary-General said about the
economy. We are also very worried about the backlog
of fuel vessels outside Al-Hudaydah. We hope that the
Government of Yemen will engage constructively with
importers on the effective implementation of Decree
49 and that the revenues can be used for the regular
payment of public salaries in all areas of the country.
It is vital that fuel continue to enter the Red Sea ports,
8/22

16/09/2019

reducing the risk of pump prices increasing, which
would further worsen the humanitarian situation.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. We are grateful for the
tireless efforts of their teams, and I look forward to
working with them to bring lasting peace and security
to the people of Yemen.
Before I continue, I would like to briefly address
the deeply troubling attacks on Saudi oil facilities
that occurred this past weekend. The United States
condemns those attacks in the strongest possible terms
and stands firmly with our Saudi friends. We must all
be clear-eyed about that event — it is a direct assault on
the world energy supply. Claims of responsibility have
been made but, as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo
has clearly stated, there is no evidence that the attacks
came from Yemen; the emerging information indicates
that responsibility lies with Iran.
Turning to today’s briefing, the United States offers
its condolences for the loss of life due to clashes in
Yemen. This ongoing unrest distracts from the broader
settlement process, which benefits only Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula and other malign actors. We
urge the parties to use the Saudi-led talks to address
their differences, and we commend Saudi Arabia for
creating a space for that dialogue. To be clear, the use
of force to express grievances will further destabilize
Yemen and lead to greater suffering. Only an inclusive
political settlement will guarantee Yemen’s stability,
unity and prosperity in the long term.
We support the Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate
a comprehensive political agreement, and we encourage
the parties to demonstrate progress, particularly by
implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We call
on the Houthis to cease escalatory attacks that have
affected civilians in Saudi Arabia. Moreover, Iran
must stop providing lethal aid in defiance of the arms
embargo outlined in resolution 2216 (2015).
As the Under-Secretary-General explained in his
briefing, civilians continue to bear the brunt of this
conflict. Nearly 80 per cent of the population is in
need of humanitarian assistance. Allow me to repeat
myself: nearly 80 per cent of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian aid alone will not solve this crisis.
However, it remains critically important for millions of
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

vulnerable Yemenis. As one of the largest humanitarian
contributors in Yemen, we are encouraged to hear that
a portion of the outstanding $1.2 billion in aid funding
pledged by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
may be disbursed in the coming weeks. These urgently
needed funds will help essential aid programmes
resume operations, and we are especially encouraged by
Mr. Lowcock’s announcement today that money is on its
way. We call on all donors to increase their funding for
these under-resourced programmes. Beyond funding
constraints, humanitarian aid workers must also be
permitted immediate access to civilians affected by
unrest. Finally, as we have heard, currency instability
further worsens Yemen’s humanitarian crisis. In that
regard, we call on the parties to continue to respect
the Central Bank of Yemen and other Government
institutions underpinning economic stability.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my personal
desire to work closely with the members of the Security
Council and the entire United Nations to support the
people of Yemen.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to express our sincere thanks to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his briefing. We assure him of our full
support in his efforts. We would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his briefing.
We align ourselves with the other members of
the Security Council who have condemned in the
strongest terms the attacks last Saturday against the
two ARAMCO facilities, Abqaiq and Khurais, in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. These attacks are a
stark violation of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. We emphasize our full support for
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and all the measures it
has taken to ensure its safety, stability and territorial
integrity. Attacks of this kind necessitate the activation
of the arms-embargo measures pursuant to relevant
Security Council resolutions.
In my statement I would like to address two
main issues: the political developments and the
humanitarian developments.
With regard to political developments, nine months
have elapsed since the entry into force of the Stockholm
Agreement. In that period we have seen continued
stalemate and a lack of any tangible progress. However,
the Redeployment Coordination Committee continues

S/PV. 8619

to hold its meetings, and the parties are still abiding
by the provisions of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement,
in particular the activation of the de-escalation and
ceasefire mechanisms. This is very encouraging, as it
helps to build trust, assists in implementing the different
stages of the Agreement as provided for in the concept
of operations, allows for the making of a tangible move
forward in creating an environment of trust between
the two parties leading to the implementation of the
agreements on the exchange of prisoners, detainees and
the forced disappeared and on Taiz understandings,
which has been under siege for more than four years.
We express our concern about the latest
developments in a number of areas in southern Yemen.
We look forward to the concerted efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in hosting talks in Jeddah
between the representatives of the Yemeni Government
and representatives of the Southern Transitional
Council. We hope that such talks will lead to the return
of security and stability and thereby maintaining the
unity and sovereignty of Yemen.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, its
repercussions are worsening the crisis in Yemen,
especially with such imminent challenges as food
scarcity, the spread of epidemics and continuous
impediments that obstruct humanitarian assistance.
We renew our appeal to all parties to cooperate with
humanitarian relief agencies, refrain from imposing any
restrictions on, or placing obstacles to, their movement
and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
We would like as well to express our concern on a
subject Mr. Lowcock just raised, that is, the inability of
employees of certain non-governmental organizations
to reach some areas in the north of the country. We
also express our deep concern of what he mentioned
about the inability of United Nations to reach the FSO
SAFER oil tanker in Ras Isa, to undertake the necessary
assessments and verification of the situation, which
portends a grave environmental crisis in the Red Sea.
In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast position that
there is no military solution to this crisis. We renew our
call on all Yemeni parties to fully implement the three
elements of the Stockholm Agreement and to support
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to reach a political solution based on the three agreedupon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and

19-281689/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). That would lead to an end to
this crisis, preserve the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Yemen and prevent any
interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the holding of this important briefing on the evolution
of events in Yemen and wishes to express its gratitude
to the Russian Federation for convening this meeting
at a critical moment for that nation on the Arabian
peninsula. We are also grateful for the important and
illustrative briefings made by Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock.
Allow me to begin by expressing our strong
condemnation and total rejection of the drone attacks
perpetrated on Saturday, 14 September, against two
ARAMCO oil facilities located in the eastern region
of Saudi Arabia. Those and previous attacks, including
those against certain parts of Yemen, only afflict the
civilian population in the affected localities and further
exacerbate the tense and delicate situation currently
existing in the subregion, as well as undermine all
efforts made and progress achieved on the road to a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
With regard to the situation in Yemen, Equatorial
Guinea continues have faith in the work of the United
Nations, which, last December, through the good
management of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, opened a new chapter in the process of
bringing about a peaceful resolution to the conflict
with the signing of the Stockholm Agreement, the
implementation of which has seen some progress in
the first half of this year, thanks to certain cooperation
between the parties, whom we have been encouraging
to be bold and give more of themselves, so as to make
this historic agreement more effective.
At the Council’s meeting in August, we, like other
members of the Council, expressed our deep concern
about the escalation in bloody clashes in the city of Aden
and other parts of Yemen (see S/PV.8598). Although
since then we have received information on an apparent
calm, we hope that the parties to the conflict have
reached out to each other to engage in steadfast and
stable negotiations with a view to bringing sustainable
peace to the people of that city and Yemen as a whole.
The resurgence of attacks by violent extremist
groups is yet another disturbing aspect of the hostile
10/22

16/09/2019

environment in Yemen. On 1 August, the same day as
the missile attack on the Al-Galaa base, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant claimed responsibility for
a bomb attack on a police station that resulted in the
deaths of 12 policemen in Aden. An attack by Al-Qaida
on the Arabian Peninsula the next day in Abyan killed
at least 20 Government soldiers. In order to fight that
violent extremism, it is imperative to have a stable
Government, backed by the main political parties in the
country, resulting from a comprehensive and inclusive
peace agreement.
Yemen’s humanitarian and economic conditions
are increasingly oppressive. It is estimated that almost
22 million people are in need of some form of assistance.
In that tragic context, we wish to express our full support
for the humanitarian work of the United Nations system
and other agencies deployed in Yemen and to reiterate
the moral and legal duty to allow them full access to
those in need. We therefore continue to look forward
to the full implementation of the agreement reached
between the World Food Programme and the Houthi
authorities on selecting and registering those who will
receive humanitarian assistance.
Before concluding, we urge the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi movement to continue to work on the
ongoing and full implementation of the important
commitments set out in the Stockholm Agreement. At
this very moment, the composition of the local forces to
take over the security of the city of Al-Hudaydah and
the ports is crucial.
In that regard, we hope that all members of the
Council will continue to support the mediation efforts
of Special Envoy Griffiths and that the international
community, as well as States that are interested in and
have influence over Yemen, will exert the necessary
pressure on all parties to the conflict with a view to
finding a sustainable and definitive solution that frees
the population from this conflict, which has caused so
much damage to the country.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We
welcome the recent appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha as the new Head of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement, to whom we extend
our full support.
Yemen’s future is at a historic moment, in which
it is necessary for the parties to demonstrate their
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

willingness to move forward in the implementation
of the agreements. That is why we once again express
our concern about the current impasse. The situation is
partly attributable to the rigid positions of the parties,
which have considerably diminished the momentum that
this important political process needs. In that regard,
we are pleased that the Redeployment Coordination
Committee has held another meeting to support the
process of implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
Any small step of progress is constantly disrupted
by continued offensives by the parties to the conflict.
We join in the condemnations for the attack on
oil installations on Saudi territory. Those actions
destabilize the region and further avert the prospect
of reaching lasting peace in Yemen. We also strongly
condemn the attack on a detention centre in Dhamar
earlier this month, which resulted in the deaths of more
than 100 people. We urge the parties to take all the
necessary measures to protect the civilian population.
Tensions must be assuaged. The immediate cessation
of acts of violence committed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure in violation of human rights law
and international humanitarian law is more necessary
than ever.
There is no peace without justice. That is why
we urge the parties to cooperate with independent
investigative mechanisms, such as the Group of
Eminent International and Regional Experts on
Yemen, established by the United Nations Human
Rights Council.
On the other hand, the humanitarian situation
remains catastrophic. The war continues to affect
millions of civilians who depend on the tireless work of
humanitarian workers. That difficult effort is impacted
by the lack of funding for the humanitarian response
plan in Yemen. We therefore call on all major donors to
urgently make their donations. The parties must ensure
respect for humanitarian principles and guarantee safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian workers. It is
unacceptable that severe restrictions continue to hamper
the implementation of projects that are necessary to
save the lives of millions of people.
That grave humanitarian situation is further
compounded by the use of landmines, which have
affected hundreds of civilians. The proliferation of those
devices constitutes not only a threat to people’s lives
but also one of the factors that jeopardizes agricultural

S/PV. 8619

production and access to water, depriving civilians of
the means necessary to survive.
Food security is particularly relevant in a country
where less than 3 per cent of the land is arable. In 2018,
Yemen suffered the world’s most severe food insecurity
crisis, and the multidimensional effect of that scenario
has caused severe conditions for conflict-induced
hunger, which could very well constitute a war crime.
We must not be distracted from the ultimate goal
of those efforts. An immediate and definitive ceasefire
is needed throughout the country. That will be possible
only with the resolute will of the parties to put an end
to a conflict that has already claimed too many lives.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
We strongly condemn the serious drone and missile
attacks on civilian targets in Saudi Arabia, including
this weekend’s attacks on oil installations, which were
claimed by the Houthis. Such attacks are unacceptable
and jeopardize the efforts to reach a lasting political
solution to the conflict. We also join the SecretaryGeneral in both condemning and calling on all the
parties to exercise maximum restraint in the current
climate of tension.
With respect to Al-Hudaydah, we welcome the
outcome of the last meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on 8 and 9 September, in
particular regarding the de-escalation mechanism and
the activation of the joint operations centre. We reiterate
our call on all parties to fully implement the withdrawal
agreement, respect the ceasefire in its entirety and
resolve outstanding points of disagreement. I take this
opportunity to congratulate Lieutenant General Guha
on his appointment to head the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. We continue to call
on all parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement in
its entirety, including the prisoner exchange agreement
and the Taiz agreement.
Additional efforts are needed to improve the
humanitarian situation, which remains catastrophic, as
we have heard. We commend the humanitarian agencies
for their outstanding work despite the difficulties
encountered. It is critical that all parties facilitate access
for humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law.

19-2816811/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

We draw the Council’s attention to the excellent
and recently published report of the Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts on Yemen
(A/HRC/42/17). Belgium is part of the core group of
supporters of the Human Rights Council resolution
36/31, which established the Group of Experts. We will
support the extension of the mandate at the next session.
We call on the parties to honour their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In that context, Belgium stresses the
importance of taking measures to protect against sexual
and gender-based violence, such as the establishment of
structures and services to respond to sexual violence.
Belgium encourages the Special Envoy to continue
to prepare the next steps in the political process, which
must be inclusive, with the meaningful participation of
women and young people, so as to adequately reflect
the ethnic, geographical and political diversity of
the population of Yemen. As stressed in presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/9, of 29 August, a political
agreement negotiated following an inclusive dialogue
is the way to resolve disputes and address the legitimate
concerns of all Yemenis, including those in the south.
In that context, we welcome the talks organized by
Saudi Arabia in Jeddah so as to identify a solution to
the situation in the south, and we call on all parties to
participate constructively.
Violence in the rest of the country continues and
exacerbates the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence hampers access to humanitarian
assistance. We call on all parties to cease hostilities
throughout the country. Belgium remains very
concerned about the high number of child victims of
air strikes and ground fighting and demands that all
parties take immediate measures to protect children.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
South Africa wishes to express its support for
Mr. Griffiths and commends his efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen. We also
welcome our colleague from Yemen and look forward
to his briefing.
We further welcome the appointment of Lieutenant
General Guha as Head of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, and we wish him
well in his Mission. We condemn the attack on the Saudi
12/22

16/09/2019

oil facilities and call on all the countries of the region to
de-escalate tensions that might undermine security and
stability in the Gulf region, the supply and security of
global energy, and the security of maritime trade.
My delegation would like to address two points in
our statement today: first, the political situation, and
secondly, the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen.
First, on the political situation in Yemen, we
continue to call on all parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to de-escalate tensions and fully commit to
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an inclusive Yemeniled dialogue to resolve differences and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. South Africa
supports dialogue and the cessation of hostilities in the
country, including in the southern region of Yemen.
It is only through a diplomatic and negotiated
solution that the people of Yemen can achieve
sustainable and lasting peace. We therefore continue to
stress that the differences among the parties in Yemen
cannot be solved by military means, as such a course
of action would only further aggravate the situation.
We call upon the Council and the countries of the
region to spare no effort in supporting the political
process in Yemen. South Africa welcomes all efforts
and interventions of neighbouring countries to find
an inclusive, peaceful political settlement in Yemen.
Moreover, we believe that accountability is an essential
part of achieving lasting peace and stability.
On the humanitarian situation, South Africa remains
extremely concerned about the dire humanitarian crisis
in Yemen, which has caused immeasurable suffering
for millions of civilians, as reported this morning by
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock. We note the latest
report of the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen (A/HRC/42/17), which
calls on all the parties to do their part to address the
humanitarian situation in Yemen.
The impact of the conflict on civilians in Yemen has
been devastating, as over 24 million people, or nearly
80 per cent of the population, requires humanitarian
assistance and protection. The number of civilian
casualties continues to rise, and the Human Rights
Council has certified 7,508 civilian deaths — including
those of 1,997 children — since March 2015.
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The continued violence committed by all parties
to the conflict is not conducive to peacebuilding
measures. South Africa reiterates its call on all parties
to de-escalate the fighting in other parts of the country
and commit to a general ceasefire so as to enable
dialogue and inclusive peaceful negotiations. South
Africa remains extremely concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. To date, over 15 million
people — more than half the population of Yemen — are
facing starvation; 1.1 million are affected by cholera,
and 3 million have been forced to flee their country.
Vulnerable groups, especially women and children,
often face the most severe consequences of war, and
this is no different in Yemen. Those statistics shows
that the humanitarian crisis in Yemen continues to be
the world’s worst, and the Council has to pay more
attention and dedicate more time to addressing it. South
Africa joins Mr. Lowcock in calling on all parties to
abide by their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict will be a negotiated,
Yemeni-led political settlement that is inclusive and fair
and puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens
of Yemen first.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
We firmly condemn Saturday’s attacks on the oil
facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais. Such actions can
only exacerbate tensions and the risk of conflict in the
region and undermine political efforts to resolve the
crisis. They absolutely must end.
I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for their briefings.
In the face of the catastrophic humanitarian
situation, we must redouble our efforts. The
intensification of fighting continues to come at a high
cost for the population in all governorates of Yemen.
All parties must ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law. In that connection, I recall two
absolute priorities: the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and guaranteed
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
Four and a half million people are unable to receive
assistance due to restrictions imposed by the parties to
the conflict. New constraints imposed by the Houthis

S/PV. 8619

on food aid supply chains could further aggravate the
situation. Given the fact that more than 80 per cent of
the Yemeni population is dependent on humanitarian
aid, this aid must not be allowed to decline at any cost.
The World Food Programme needs $663 million for the
next six months, two-thirds of which before the end of
the year. We support the appeal of the Under-SecretaryGeneral for pledges to be honoured as soon as possible
or for new contributions to be made to the United
Nations humanitarian response plan. We commend
those States that have indicated their intention to
respond to this call.
The fight against impunity is essential, including to
achieving lasting peace. France calls on the parties to
conduct transparent, independent, impartial and credible
investigations and to cooperate with international
mechanisms. France takes note of the conclusions of
the report of the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen. It is important for the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to be
able to adopt conclusions.
Only a political solution will bring a lasting end to
the crisis in Yemen and the suffering of the population.
With every passing day, it becomes more urgent to
find that solution, as reinforced by the recent tensions
in the south of the country. Discussions to reach a
comprehensive political agreement must therefore
resume without delay or preconditions and on a more
inclusive basis. The parties to the Stockholm Agreement
must pursue their implementation efforts.
But the progress expected in Al-Hudaydah should
not be a prerequisite for the resumption of discussions
to reach that comprehensive political solution. We can
wait no longer. France encourages the parties to take
steps in that direction and reiterates its support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy. In addition, France stands
ready to promote de-escalation. A commitment by the
parties to the conflict to reducing the level of tensions
would be a first step towards resuming discussions on a
political solution. The partial withdrawal of the forces
of the United Arab Emirates on the ground is a step in
the right direction in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their valuable
briefings. We recognize the important work they are
both doing, in their respective capacities, to end a
conflict that has no military solution and to address

19-2816813/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

the largest humanitarian crisis in the world today. We
also welcome the appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha to head the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement.
Peru has been following developments in Yemen
with concern. While we welcome the recent meeting
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the
commitments made there, we would be remiss in not
stressing the extreme fragility of the current situation,
given the deep mistrust that prevails among the parties
and the rigidity of their positions.
We strongly condemn the drone attack on Saudi
Arabia’s oil installations on Saturday, claimed by
the Houthis, which puts regional and world security
at high risk and is having unpredictable global
economic consequences. We join the SecretaryGeneral in calling on all parties involved to reduce
tensions and seek negotiated solutions, pursuant
to international law. Furthermore, we regret the
atrocities committed by the Houthi rebels and the
disproportionate responses thereto, such as the attack
on a detention centre, which show the parties’ disdain
for international humanitarian law and human rights.
We are also concerned that the climate of violence is
now compounded by profound uncertainty in the south
of the country, with a real risk of Yemeni institutional
collapse. In that regard, we welcome the recent joint
statement by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates to help end confrontational rhetoric and
accusations among the various actors and to return to
diplomatic channels.
The delicate situation in the south, together with the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, reminds us of the
urgent need to act swiftly and pragmatically in order to
make greater progress in reaching a political solution,
as promoted by the United Nations. To that end, Peru
considers it essential that a new round of consultations
be convened as soon as possible and underscores that all
sectors of civil society and the country’s regions must be
properly represented, including groups from the south,
provided that they commit to respecting the territorial
integrity of the country and agree that the use of force
is exclusively reserved for the State. We encourage
parallel efforts to continue, in critical areas — for
instance, the redeployment in Al-Hudaydah — the
exchange of detainees and the establishment of the joint
committee in Taiz.
14/22

16/09/2019

However, the emphasis on the political process in
Yemen should in no way obviate the need to continue
addressing the humanitarian crisis there. We are
especially alarmed by the degree of food insecurity and
the deterioration of economic indicators that deepen the
suffering of the population.
One of the main issues of concern is the insufficient
fulfilment of the pledges made at February’s donor
conference. We therefore welcome the announcement
of contributions from Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates to which Mr. Lowcock referred. We
encourage the countries concerned to take appropriate
measures so as not to prolong the severely adverse
impact on the roll-out of the humanitarian response
plan. Moreover, we note the urgency of continuing to
prioritize the containment of cholera, in the light of
the increase in the number of cases observed compared
to last year. In that regard, we commend the crucial
prevention and control work carried out by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its
humanitarian partners, which has prevented outbreaks
of the disease. We emphasize that the ports, airports
and roads in Yemen must remain open and operational,
in line with the Council’s various statements. In
addition, humanitarian aid and the population’s access
thereto cannot and should not be conditional on
strategic considerations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that my delegation will
continue to work to build a sustainable peace in Yemen
that puts an end to the humanitarian disaster, promotes
regional stability, provides full respect for human rights
and guarantees accountability for the atrocious crimes
committed there.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. China supports the Special
Envoy in his efforts to promote the political process in
Yemen and commends the United Nations and relevant
agencies for their tireless efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in that country.
Recent developments in Yemen have added new,
complex dimensions to the search for a political
solution. The international community is paying close
attention and has called for an early de-escalation of
tension in the south. China condemns the attack on
Saudi oil refinery facilities and opposes any attack
on civilians and civilian installations. We call on the
parties to refrain from any action that could lead to the
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

further escalation of tensions in the region and, instead,
rely on political means, such as peaceful negotiations to
achieve regional peace and stability.
China supports maintaining the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen.
The parties should be guided by the primacy of the
interests of their country and their people, show reason
and restraint, resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations and restore stability and order in
Yemen as soon as possible.
China has taken note of the recent joint statement
issued by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
in which they expressed their willingness to promote
the ceasefire arrangement and facilitate constructive
dialogue among the Yemeni parties. We hope that
countries of the region will continue to create the
positive conditions for the Yemeni parties to ease
tensions and enhance mutual trust.
The Stockholm Agreement is a major step towards
achieving a political solution to the issue of Yemen.
It was an important outcome brought about through
the good offices of the United Nations, and it should
therefore be fully implemented. Focus should be placed
on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement and the Redeployment Coordination
Committee should play a constructive role in that
regard. On 8 and 9 September, the Committee held
its sixth joint meeting, at which it was decided to
activate the mechanism to strengthen the ceasefire and
de-escalation to establish a joint operations centre and
deploy monitoring teams to the front lines of several
locations in Al-Hudaydah.
We hope that those concrete measures will lead
to the effective implementation of the ceasefire in
the Al-Hudaydah area and the reduction of civilian
casualties. The Yemeni parties should continue
with the good offices of the United Nations, pursue
dialogue and consultations on outstanding issues,
including those concerning the regional security
forces and port revenues, and strive to make progress
on issues, including the exchange of prisoners and the
implementation of the Taiz agreement.
The Yemeni people are the primary victims of
the fighting in the country, and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is indeed worrisome.
The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance to the country. We hope that

S/PV. 8619

the donor countries will honour their commitments
through strengthened coordination with the United
Nations. We hope that the parties concerned will ensure
that humanitarian supplies can reach all populations
and regions in need of such assistance.
A political solution is the only solution to the
Yemeni issue. The United Nations will continue to
play its role as the main avenue of good offices in
the political process, and the Security Council should
continue to maintain unity and provide political
support. The Yemeni parties should act in accordance
with Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative,
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome
document of the National Dialogue Conference; return
to the path of dialogue; and resolve the issue through
political negotiations.
Through bilateral and multilateral channels,
China has provided large amounts of assistance in the
areas of the economy, education, and health care, and
will continue to do so to the best of its ability. China
sincerely hopes that the country can restore peace and
stability and achieve development as soon as possible.
China stands ready to play a constructive and positive
role in that regard.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their detailed accounts of the current
situation in Yemen.
At the outset, let me also express our condemnation
in the strongest terms of the recent attacks on two
major oil facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Such incidents pose a direct threat to the global energy
supply as well as to broader security and stability in
the Middle East, as they have the potential to further
escalate regional and global tensions. We call on all
parties to exercise the maximum level of restraint.
Let me now address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and the activation of the
ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation mechanism,
which enables the establishment of a joint operations
centre. We hope that it will help preserve the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah and build trust among the parties.
However, in our view, it is critical to expedite the
implementation of the remaining stages of the
redeployment of forces from the city. We also encourage
the parties to take meaningful steps to ensure the full

19-2816815/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

implementation of all the remaining provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement.
Poland is deeply concerned about the surge of
violence across Yemen in recent weeks, in particular
in the south, resulting in a high number of casualties
among civilians and threatening the vital lifelines for the
import and distribution of basic supplies and services
across Yemen, both by air and sea. If the fighting
continues, it will contribute to further instability,
the exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis and the
deepening of Yemen’s political and social divisions.
It is therefore paramount that the parties cease
all military operations and engage in a constructive
dialogue to resolve their differences without further
delay. They must also meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and ensure the protection of civilians
at all times.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
are deeply alarmed by the negative impact of the
underfunding of the humanitarian response plan for
Yemen. Without the much-needed financial help, United
Nations humanitarian operations will have to be further
scaled-back. As the survival of millions of Yemenis
depends entirely upon the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, we urge all donors to swiftly disburse the
pledges made during the conference in Geneva. We
also urge the parties to ensure unhindered access, both
in terms of humanitarian aid and personnel into and
across Yemen.
I would like to reiterate once again that there
can be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen.
Violence and military operations contribute only to the
prolongation of the crisis and further deepen the already
immense suffering of the civilian population. Poland
strongly believes that an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process must be urgently resumed in parallel
with the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement,
as it is the only way to end the violence and create the
necessary conditions for a substantial improvement of
the disastrous humanitarian situation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Mr. Griffiths
for his tireless efforts to bring about a negotiated,
comprehensive solution to the conflict and urge
the parties to engage constructively and without
preconditions with the Special Envoy. Yemen cannot
wait for peace any longer.
16/22

16/09/2019

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
excellent briefings.
Côte d’Ivoire remains deeply concerned about
the resurgence and escalation of violence that is
undermining hopes for achieving peace and is
exacerbating the already dire humanitarian situation.
My delegation condemns in the strongest terms the
14 September attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil facilities,
which are likely to undermine regional security and
stability. The stalemate and risk of fragmentation
caused by the conflict, as well as the various theatres
of open fighting in Yemen, could have irreversible
consequences for the country and the entire region if
the peace process remains at an impasse.
Relaunching the political process through inclusive
dialogue, with the support of regional and international
actors, remains one of the major challenges to be met
in order to end the ongoing violence that is deepening
political, cultural and economic divisions in Yemen.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9 on 29 August,
which encourages Special Envoy Griffiths to pursue
his efforts within the framework of the resumption of
comprehensive negotiations. The statement calls on all
parties to work to preserve the unity and stability of
Yemen and urges the warring parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
My delegation also welcomes the initiatives
undertaken by various stakeholders to revive the political
process, including the meeting on 8 and 9 September of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee under the
auspices of the United Nations, the planned meeting
in Jeddah, and the joint declaration of 9 September
by regional actors, calling for constructive dialogue.
All of this forward momentum must be maintained
and strengthened at all costs to create the necessary
conditions to bring about peace in Yemen.
There remains an urgent need to scrupulously
respect and fully implement the Stockholm Agreement,
signed in December 2018, and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, concerning the redeployment of the
military forces at the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Issa. Indeed, my delegation is of the opinion that
19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the control of ports is undoubtedly a major issue. We
also remain convinced that the establishment of local
security forces in these ports will reinvigorate the
political process.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the parties to proceed
in redeploying port military forces under the auspices
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) with
a view to ensuring the unhindered and expeditious
movement of its personnel and equipment needed for
humanitarian assistance.
My country would also like to stress the need
for the Security Council and other stakeholders to
engage in new initiatives to help the warring parties
speed up the process relating to the prisoner-exchange
mechanism and the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz, which would
facilitate the opening of humanitarian corridors. These
two initiatives are undeniably important components of
the peace process crucial for rebuilding trust between
the parties.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
a source of major concern for Côte d’Ivoire. It is
imperative that all protagonists respect international
humanitarian law and human rights in order to create
the conditions for better access to humanitarian
assistance for populations in need. Indeed, after several
years of conflict, Yemen has been bled dry. According
to United Nations agencies, 24 million people find
themselves in a situation of humanitarian emergency,
10 million are food insecure and 3.3 million internally
displaced. My country therefore urges bilateral and
multilateral partners to respond to emergency appeals
so as to support the financing of humanitarian aid and
life-saving programmes.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in Yemen and reiterates
its call for an inclusive political process incorporating,
in particular, the people of the south, women and
civil society. In conclusion, my country congratulates
Lieutenant General Guha on his appointment as Chair
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
Head of UNMHA and assures him of its full support.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for
their briefings and commitment. Martin said in his

S/PV. 8619

statement that he held the Stockholm Agreement dear. I
appreciate that commitment.
As our colleague for Cote d’Ivoire just said,
there is no military solution to this conflict. There
is no alternative to a political. I therefore very much
appreciate the briefers’ work. I know these are little
steps, but even little steps are very important, as
was just explained, with regard to Al-Hudaydah and
elsewhere. To encourage them to continue, I would also
like to welcome Lieutenant General Guha to his work.
With regard to the political developments, we also
appreciate the Saudi engagement to get the Yemeni
Government forces and the Southern Transitional
Council around the table so as to achieve de-escalation
in the south. On all of the different political tracks, we
believe that it is very important that these talks be an
inclusive political process involving women, young
people, civil society and regional actors.
Mark Lowcock’s briefings are the most depressing.
Whenever he comes to the Security Council, it is not a
happy day, and today is no exception. But what we are
seeing in Yemen is truly a nightmare and I think that we
as a body cannot accept the violation of international
humanitarian law becoming a new normal.
I would like to take the opportunity to welcome
the Ambassador of the United States, Kelly Craft.
In her statement, she said that 80 per cent of the
population was in need of humanitarian assistance.
What we are witnessing is the world’s gravest
humanitarian catastrophe.
At the same time, again recalling what Mark
said, the operating circumstances in Yemen are worse
than ever. We really have to emphasize this and work
against it. We remember before the summer break
when David Beasley of the World Food Programme
described the despicable practice of the Houthis
misusing humanitarian funds for their own purposes
(see S/PV.8578).
Mark mentioned funding shortfalls. In Geneva,
Germany pledged €100 million. We committed to and
paid this amount. We have also pledged an additional
€30 million, which I think we have also mostly
disbursed. I therefore hope that Saudi Arabia will
proceed on 25 September to pay what it had pledged.
Turning to the victims, many around the table have
evoked them. Our Belgian colleague mentioned sexual
violence against women. Our South African colleague

19-2816817/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

mentioned the number of children being killed from air
attacks. Many speakers have referred to the new report
of the Group of Eminent International and Regional
Experts on Yemen, mandated by the Human Rights
Council. The report (A/HRC/42/17) demonstrates the
terrible impact on of the conflict on the daily lives of
the people. Basic human rights are violated on a daily
basis. There is no excuse for allowing the killing,
torture and abuse of innocent people in this horrible
conflict. I therefore join my French colleague in calling
for that report to have real consequences.
Mark deplored the attack on civilian infrastructure.
Since our last briefing, we have seen numerous more
attacks against civilian infrastructure. I was not aware
that the prison attacked in Dhamar, where more than
100 were killed, used to be a university. This just shows
the extent to which things have deteriorated in Yemen.
There have been further attacks on Al-Hudaydah and
Taiz. I can only join the call for a nationwide ceasefire.
That is what is needed.
We also firmly condemn, like all other members,
the attacks on the Saudi oil facilities. This has a grave
impact on the world economy and energy supply, as
well as on the environment. Those responsible for
these attacks must be identified and we cannot allow
impunity for that or for any of these many violations of
international law.
As everyone has said, it is time for de-scalation,
and I would strongly welcome it if the Security Council
were to publicly endorse that and say something about
the need for de-escalation of the situation.
The President: In his statement, the representative
of Germany referred to a summer break. Did we have a
summer break? I did not notice.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. I
commend their tireless efforts in trying to push for new
developments despite the wide variety of difficulties.

16/09/2019

We also note the establishment of the joint operations
centre and the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) facility and its
activation. With the establishment of the centre, it is
hoped that both parties and the United Nations can
work on de-escalation and effectively address incidents
that occur in the field. We hope that this exercise will
also enhance confidence and trust between the parties.
I believe that any progress on the implementation of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement will always be welcomed by members of the
Security Council. We hope that more progress will be
delivered in the near future. Indonesia also welcomes
of the appointment of Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha
as RCC Chair and Head of UNMHA. Indonesia wishes
him success in carrying out the mandate given by the
Security Council.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation
in Yemen and the continuation of the peace process,
as we heard from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock,
the humanitarian situation is not getting better, and
the lack of funding may force the closure of some of
the relief programmes in Yemen. It is indeed very
concerning. In our opinion, the need for humanitarian
assistance will be greater, as will its cost, if the conflict
continues. The only way to reverse the situation is by
securing a wide-scale ceasefire and continuation of
the political process so as to end the conflict. In that
connection, we call on donors to fulfil their pledges and
for the resumption of the political process in Yemen.
While once again emphasizing the importance of the
Stockholm Agreement and urging parties to implement
it, Indonesia affirms that it is time to move forward into
a bigger and more comprehensive political process. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an all-inclusive dialogue.

In responding to the briefing, Indonesia would like
to underscore three points.

Thirdly, with respect to the security situation and
escalation of violence, we again express our concern
about the continuous attacks by the Houthis, in particular
the recent drone attack claimed by Ansar Allah against
two major oil facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Such attacks indeed provoke further escalation of the
violence and we strongly condemn them.

First, regarding the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement, we welcome the latest
joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) to oversee the implementation
of the Agreement between the Government and the
Houthis to demilitarize the port city of Al-Hudaydah.

With regard to the situation in the south, we support
the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to hold a
dialogue in Jeddah to resolve the situation. We also call
for an end to all incidents of violence and encourage
the various parties to engage with the joint committee
to monitor and stabilize the situation. The new

18/22

19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8619

confrontation in the south reaffirms the need to resume
the broader political process in Yemen. After all, peace
throughout Yemen is the end game for all parties.

outside its borders needs to be provided to the entire
population of the country, regardless of who controls a
given area.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We are seriously concerned about the 14 September
drone strikes on major oil facilities in Saudi Arabia.
We strongly condemn strikes on non-military targets
and the destruction of socioeconomic infrastructure.
Armed escalation threatens to complicate the search
for a political solution to the conflict and could also
become a large-scale regional confrontation. We call
on all parties to show restraint and ensure that such
dangerous incidents do not recur. At the same time, we
recommend that no hasty conclusions be made about
who carried out the attacks, as that could destabilize
the already tense situation in Yemen and the Middle
East as a whole.

We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their detailed briefings on
the political, military and humanitarian situation in the
Republic of Yemen. It is now clear that Yemen and its
people are experiencing a very serious political and
humanitarian catastrophe.
As we have heard from our briefers today, the
situation in the country remains dire. Despite the fragile
ceasefire prevailing in Al-Hudaydah, intense fighting in
the south of the country is cause for serious concern. We
call on the parties to the military confrontation in Aden
to resolve their disagreements through negotiations.
Increased tensions make it difficult to establish a
balanced dialogue with all political stakeholders in the
country, while taking into account all their concerns,
and only help terrorist groups.
We support Mr. Griffiths’ mediation efforts
to make the parties to the conflict understand that
there is no military solution to the conflict and that
a comprehensive ceasefire and confidence-building
measures are needed. In that connection, we welcome
the meeting on 9 September of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. We expect that negotiations
and the quest for compromise will help move us forward
in implementing the Stockholm Agreement.
The further deployment of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and
the withdrawal of military forces from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa will not only facilitate
de-escalation throughout the country but also help to
unlock other aspects of the Stockholm Agreement,
including the exchange of prisoners and de-escalation
in Taiz, and to move towards a discussion of the
parameters of a settlement.
As we heard from Mr. Lowcock, the humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate and
increasingly resembles a full-fledged humanitarian
disaster. Humanitarian assistance to Yemen needs to be
a priority of our work. Let me again underscore that the
humanitarian assistance which Yemen receives from

In conclusion, I recall resolution 598 (1987),
which requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation
with States of the region, to develop a security and
confidence-building architecture in the region. In
that context, the well-known Russian concept of
collective security in the Persian Gulf, which is aimed
at unblocking conflict situations and developing
confidence-building and control measures, is becoming
increasingly relevant. We again call on all parties
concerned to study that document and engage in
collective work to find mutually acceptable solutions to
regional problems.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country’s presidency of the Security Council this
month and wish you and the delegation of the Russian
Federation every success.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like also to welcome Mrs. Kelly Craft,
Permanent Representative of the United States, and
wish her every success.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
The Republic of Yemen condemns in the strongest
terms the cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated against

19-2816819/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

the two ARAMCO facilities in the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia last Saturday at dawn. It was a drone
attack. In that regard, the Government of Yemen
affirms its solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in combating attempts to undermine its security
and stability. We support all measures taken by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to fight terrorism and ensure
security and stability in the region.
Developments since 8 August in the temporary
capital Aden and in some governorates in southern
Yemen — including the armed rebellion by the Southern
Transitional Council, supported by the United Arab
Emirates — require us to seriously and transparently
review the situation in order to overcome this dilemma,
address its causes and prevent its repercussions. The
dilemma is marked by the taking control of State
civilian and military institutions, as well as an assault
on public and private property. It has deflected us from
our main objective: the Houthi coup d’état supported
by Iran.
On 8 August, military formation groups of the
Southern Transitional Council waged a military
rebellion, the second following a similar attempt in
January 2018. Those military groups operating outside
the State framework attacked legitimate Government
forces, their positions and their facilities in Aden.
Following that attack, the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which heads the coalition, along with its
wise leadership, made great efforts to contain this
crisis, and we appreciate that. Nevertheless, the rebels
continued attacking State institutions in two other
governorates, Abyan and Shabwah. The national army
opposed the attacks, which run counter to the coalition
proclamations, and was able to force those military
formation groups to withdraw.

16/09/2019

whatever reason. Moreover, the Government of Yemen
welcomes the appeals for dialogue made by the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We value the Kingdom’s
position, which totally rejects the recent escalation of
violence in the interim capital, Aden, and a number of
southern governorates. We also thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia for its rejection of all the repercussions of
those military attacks and for its strong insistence on
the restoration of all civilian and military institutions
in the quest for Yemen’s full security, stability,
unity and territorial integrity. Indeed, any threat to
Yemen’s stability is a threat to the Kingdom’s security
and stability.
We also commend the clear position of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in supporting the Government of
Yemen as represented by the President of the Republic
of Yemen, His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour. We thank the Kingdom for its efforts to
preserve the foundations of the Yemeni State and the
interests of our Yemeni people. We thank it for its
opposition to the Houthi coup, and we value its efforts
to ensure that we do not overlook the coalition’s goals:
supporting State legitimacy, uniting all efforts to put
an end to the coup d’état and addressing the Iranian
interference in Yemeni domestic affairs and the region.
The Yemeni Government has undertaken tremendous
endeavours and made tireless efforts to put an end to
the crisis and to return to the rightful path of achieving
an overarching, peaceful solution based on the agreed
terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its executive mechanism, the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).

Unfortunately, on 28 August we were taken by
surprise by air strikes waged by the United Arab
Emirates on our military troops posted in Aden. To
curb the bloodshed, we withdrew our units from the
interim capital of Yemen. The next day we were also
surprised by continued illegal air strikes, in violation
of the coalition’s goals, against the national army in
Aden and in Abyan governorate. Those attacks claimed
the lives of many national army soldiers and injured
numerous others.

We have expressed our full support for the
efforts undertaken by Mr. Griffiths and for all other
international efforts aiming to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen. The Yemeni Government, in its commitment
to achieving lasting peace, has taken part in a number
of discussions, the most recent of which were held in
Sweden. The Government expresses its commitment
to implementing the Stockholm Agreement; which
is a positive step forward in terms of building trust,
alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people and
achieving the lasting peace we so desire.

We reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of
the continued efforts to arm and support military
formation groups outside the State framework, for

The Yemeni Government has demonstrated great
flexibility in order to save the Stockholm Agreement.
However, the stubborn armed Houthi militias are

20/22

19-28168

16/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

playing for time and have duped the international
community while prolonging the war and the people’s
suffering and undermining the peace efforts sponsored
by the United Nations through its envoy, Mr. Griffiths.
They could also undermine the Council’s efforts to
achieve a comprehensive political solution based
on the agreed terms of reference, one that meets the
aspirations of all the Yemeni people and fulfils their
desire to build a new, federal Yemen based on the
principles of justice, equality, respect for the law, good
governance and national partnership for peace, rather
than war and destruction.
Following the agreement reached at the sixth
joint meeting in Al-Hudaydah of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on 8 and 9 September, we
nevertheless are gravely concerned about the continued
shelling, incursions and violations of the ceasefire in
various directorates in Al-Hudaydah governorate.
Those violations are being perpetrated by the Houthi
militias, which target civilians in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. Those militias must uphold all provisions of
the Stockholm Agreement and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. They must rapidly redeploy their troops as
provided for in the agreed operational concept while
activating the tripartite control mechanism and freeing
all prisoners and detainees as well as those forcibly
disappeared, in addition to lifting the blockade on the
city of Taiz.
The Government of Yemen is striving to achieve
a number of goals. At the humanitarian and economic
levels, we are looking to increase the State’s revenue
so that it can pay all civil servants in all governorates.
We are looking to ensure that fuel can reach all parts
of Yemen, abiding, of course, by the necessary safety
standards and legal constraints. We are working to
ensure that there is no shortage of fuel in local markets
and that fuel prices cannot be manipulated. Since
the coup d’état, Houthi militias have been collecting
taxes and imposing illegal taxes on importers of oil
products. The Government of Yemen calls upon the
United Nations and its agencies to discharge their
responsibilities and to play their humanitarian and
professional role. We urge them to force the Houthi
militias to cease impeding the Government’s efforts
aimed at alleviating the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people in such difficult circumstances. They
must lift all impediments that obstruct the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those in need. We call for

S/PV. 8619

sanctions and pressure to be imposed on the Houthi
militias so that they do not cause an oil crisis, which
would only worsen the humanitarian situation and
compel merchants to violate Government directives.
We would warn against the continued efforts of
Houthi militias to hinder the work of United Nations
experts to evaluate the situation of the FSO SAFER
tanker, which contains 1.14 million barrels of crude
oil. If that oil were to spill, there could be devastating
environmental consequences in the Red Sea. We deplore
the silence of the international community on this point
and urge the Secretary-General and the Council to take
urgent measures to bring pressure to bear on Houthi
militias, which would make it possible for the group
of experts to reach the tanker and assess its technical
status, thus avoiding a maritime catastrophe that would
have repercussions for Yemen and the region.
Iran has caused a great deal of damage in Yemen
and the region and has played a serious sabotaging
role by providing arms and funding to the Houthi
militias. Those militias, under the banner of the Iranian
revolution, strive to practise oppression and torture,
while using certain areas in Yemen as platforms to launch
missiles that threaten the security of neighbouring
States and maritime navigation in the Red Sea. They
also undermine regional and international security.
The United Nations reports demonstrate the
support that the Houthi militias receive from Iran.
As a result of the coup d’état by the Houthi militias,
Yemen is witnessing the worst humanitarian disaster
in the world. The militias continue their violations by
pillaging humanitarian aid, bombing silos, expanding
their siege of cities and villages and launching attacks
against civilians and residential areas. They lay
mines, recruit children, destroy the homes of political
opponents, target journalists, detain people arbitrarily
and kidnap political and human rights activists, as
well as bank managers and businessmen, with no
legal justification. All such acts are in violation of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Before concluding, I would like to stress that
there can be no further consultations without the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We therefore call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities by implementing the Agreement and all
its provisions without further delay.

19-2816821/22

S/PV.8619

The situation in the Middle East

I also wish to affirm that the Yemeni Government
has done its utmost and will continue to do all it can
to support the United Nations and its agencies in
carrying out their activities. We are ready for increased
cooperation and support so that they can continue their
United Nations-facilitated work without impediment.
We have clarified this issue in our response to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Addressing the conflict in Yemen means putting an
end to the coup and restoring the State institutions that

22/22

16/09/2019

have been taken over. We once again call on the Council
to implement its resolutions on Yemen in order to reach
a comprehensive political settlement that meets the
aspirations of all Yemeni people and achieve a lasting
peace based on the agreed terms of reference.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-28168
