United Nations

A/RES/64/161

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/439/Add.2 (Part II))]

64/161. National institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions, the most recent of which is resolution
63/172 of 18 December 2008, and those of the Commission on Human Rights
concerning national institutions and their role in the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation
and strengthening of independent, pluralistic national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (“the Paris Principles”), 1
0F

Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will
continue to play in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in strengthening participation and the rule of law and in developing and
enhancing public awareness of those rights and freedoms,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the
development of independent and effective national human rights institutions, guided
by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for
strengthened and complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights and those national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June l993, 2 which reaffirmed the
important and constructive role played by national human rights institutions, in
1F

_______________
1
2

09-47149

Resolution 48/134, annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

*0947149*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/161

particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in
preventing and remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on
human rights and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that all human rights must be treated
in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions, at their
meeting held in Vienna in June 1993 during the World Conference on Human
Rights, 3 for the promotion and protection of human rights, in which it was
recommended that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced
to meet the requests for assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen
their national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
2F

Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General to the
Human Rights Council on national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights 4 and on the accreditation process of the International Coordinating
Committee, 5
3F

4F

Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among
national human rights institutions, noting with appreciation the continuing work of
the European Group of National Human Rights Institutions, the Network of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Americas, the
Asia-Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the Network of
African National Human Rights Institutions, and encouraging them to participate in
the workshop on regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human
rights to be organized by the Office of the High Commissioner in 2010,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General 6 and
1.
the conclusions contained therein;
5F

2.
Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent
and pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles;1
0H

3.
Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights in working together with Governments to
ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including by contributing
to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the
international human rights mechanisms;
Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the
4.
promotion and protection of human rights in supporting cooperation between their
Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and protection of human
rights;
_______________
3

See A/CONF.157/NI/6.
A/HRC/10/54.
5
A/HRC/10/55.
6
A/64/320.
4

2

A/RES/64/161

5.
Recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action,2 it is the right of each State to choose the framework for
national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the national level in
order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights
standards;
1H

Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and
6.
pluralistic national institutions or, where they already exist, to strengthen them for
the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the
7.
establishment of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of
8.
human rights established by Member States to continue to play an active role in
preventing and combating all violations of human rights as enumerated in the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international
instruments;
Recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and
9.
protection of human rights in the Human Rights Council, including its universal
periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and follow-up, and the special
procedures, as well as in the human rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Council
resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 7 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005; 8
6F

7F

10. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence
and stability of national human rights institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of those States that have
provided their national institutions with more autonomy and independence,
including by giving them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and
encourages other Governments to consider taking similar steps;
11. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests
from Member States for assistance in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions;
12. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of
Ombudsman institutions, encourages increased cooperation between national human
rights institutions and regional and international associations of Ombudsmen, also
encourages Ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards enumerated in
international instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their independence
and increase their capacity to act as national human rights protection mechanisms,
and in this regard reaffirms General Assembly resolution 63/169 of 18 December
2008 on the role of Ombudsman institutions;
13. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to work on national human rights
institutions, encourages the High Commissioner, in view of the expanded activities
_______________
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.

3

A/RES/64/161

relating to national institutions, to ensure that appropriate arrangements are made
and budgetary resources provided to continue and further extend activities in
support of national institutions, and invites Governments to contribute additional
voluntary funds to that end;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary
assistance for holding international and regional meetings of national institutions,
including meetings of the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, in cooperation with
the Office of the High Commissioner;
15. Encourages national institutions, including Ombudsman institutions, to
seek accreditation status through the International Coordinating Committee;
16. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the
exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment and effective
operation of national institutions;
17. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms as well as
agencies, funds and programmes to work within their respective mandates with
Member States and national institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and the rule
of law, and in this regard welcomes the efforts made by the High Commissioner to
develop partnerships in support of national institutions;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

4
