s

UNITED
NATIONS

--------

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/18538
22 December 1986
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL1 ARABIC, CHINESE, ENGLISH,
FRENCH, RUSS IAN, SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 2730th meeting of the Securitv Council, he1d on 22 December 1986, in
connection with the consideration of thP. itP.m entitled "The situation betwP.Pn Ir~n
and Iraq", the President of the Security Council made the followinu statement:

"The Secur i tv Council met todav to consider the report of thP.
Secretarv-General of 26 November }q86 (S/18480) requested bv Security Coun~il
resolution 588 (1986). After consultations, I have been authorized to makP
~he followina statement on behalf Jf the members of the Security Councilr
'The members of the Security Council take note of the reoort of the
Secretarv-General (S/18480) and express Profound concern at the serious
situation which continues to exist between Iran and Iraq. Thev reiterate
their call for the imolementation of Security Council resolutions
582 (1986) and 588 (Jq86) and for the resolution of the prolonQed
conflict hv peaceful means. They aaain emphasize the obliaation of
Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means anrl, in this
context, to co-ooerate with the Security (:ouncil. In this reQard, the
members of the Council •HQ@ the Secretarv-General to continue with hi::
efforts and call upar. the oarties to co-operate with him.
'The memhers of the Securitv Council continue to deµlore thP
violation of international humanitarian law and other laws of armed
conflict. Thev express their deepeninQ concern over the wioenina nf the
conflict throuQh the escalation of attacks on purely civilian tarqets, on
merchant shippinci and oil in:.tallations of the 1 ittoral States. Th'-!Y
cal 1 for respect, in accordance with international law, for the
territorial intearitv of the States of the reQion and for the riQht of
free navioation and commerce, as well as for the operation of off-shore
installations."'

,I

86-3481fi

2119s

(r.:)

'
