Re11olntion11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

note of Council resolution 684 (XXVI) requesting the
Secretary-General to keep in mind the possibility of
organizing in the future an international seminar on a
subject of universal interest.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1283 (XIII). International Health and Medical
Research Year
The General Assembly,
Considering that active international co-operation and
the exchange of knowledge and experience in the field
of health and medical research are important factors in
improving the health and welfare of mankind,
Desiring to encourage further practical steps to combat widely prevalent diseases, such as malaria, tuberculosis, smallpox, cholera, cancer, cardiovascular ailments,
leprosy and poliomyelitis, which still represent a serious
threat to the health of the people,
Believing that these aims could be greatly furthered
by the organization of an International Health and
Medical Research Year,
I. Invites the World Health Organization to consider, in accordance with article IV of the Agreement
between the United Nations and the World Health Organization,3 the recommendation to organize, primarily
on a national basis, an International Health and Medical Research Year, preferably in 1961, and to adopt
methods for intensifying international co-operation in
this field with a view to, inter alia:
(a) 'Disseminating the knowledge gained from experience in combating these diseases ;
( b) Substantially expanding, co-ordinating and organizing joint scientific research in the prevention and
treatment of these diseases and in the rehabilitation of
patients;
( c) Exchanging experience in the use of atomic
energy in medicine ;
(d) Organizing popular health education on a broad
scale;
( e) Providing assistance to under-developed countries, including equipment, medicine, special literature
and qualified specialists ;
2. Further invites the "\Vorld Health Organization to
transmit its views on this matter to the Economic and
Social Council at its twenty-eighth session and to the
General Assembly at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1284 (XIll). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report of the Bnited Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,4
Bearing in mind that a substantial international effort
still needs to be made in order to achieve solutions for
'United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 19 (1948), No. 115.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/3828/Rev.1) and Supplement No.
llA (A/3828/Rev.1/Add.1).

zs

non-settled refugees, and in particular for those living
in camps,
Having considered the decisions taken by the Executive Committee of the United Nations Refugee Fund5
at its ninth (special) session pursuant to General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
1. Welcomes the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the United Nations Refugee Fund that
the protection activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should be increased;
2. Takes note of the programme recommended for
1959 by the Executive Committee of the United Nations
Refugee Fund;
3. Notes that the High Commissioner has been authorized by the Executive Committee of the United
Nations Refugee Fund to appeal for the funds required
f9r the programme ;
4. Appeals to Governments of States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
to support the High Commissioner's programme, either
through financial contributions or through offers of resettlement or both.
d
t.
782 n p1enary mee ing,
5 December 1958.

1285 (XIll). World Refugee Year

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 4 together with the
resolution adopted by the Executive Committee of the
United Nations Refugee Fund at its ninth (special)
session on 26 September 1958,6
Convinced of the need to make a further world-wide
effort to help resolve the world refugee problem,
Having considered the proposal for a World Refugee
Year to begin in June 1959,
Noting that this proposal has two aims, namely:
(a) To focus interest on the refugee problem and to
encourage additional financial contributions from Governments, voluntary agencies and the general public for
its solution,
( b) To encourage additional opportunities. for permanent refugee solutions, through voluntary repatriation, resettlement or integration, on a purely humanitarian basis and in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the refugees themselves,
1. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to co-operate, in
accordance with the national wishes and needs of each
country and from a humanitarian point of view, in promoting a World Refugee Year as a practical means of
securing increased assistance for refugees throughout
the world;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take such steps
as he may think fit to assist in the promotion of a World
Refugee Year in accordance with the present resolution.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
• Ibid., Supplement No. lJA (A/3828/Rev.1/Add.1), para. 21.
• Ibid., Supplement No. 11A (A/3828/Rev.l/Add.l), appendix II.
