United Nations

A/RES/70/163

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 72 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.2)]

70/163. National institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, the most recent of which was resolution 68/171 of
18 December 2013, and those of the Commission on Human Rights and the Human
Rights Council concerning national institutions and their role in the promotion and
protection of human rights, the most recent of which were Council resolutions 20/14
of 5 July 2012, 1 23/17 of 13 June 2013 2 and 27/18 of 25 September 2014, 3
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation
and strengthening of independent, pluralistic national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles), 4
Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will
continue to play in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, strengthening participation, in particular of civil society organizations,
and promoting the rule of law and developing and enhancing public awareness of
those rights and freedoms,
Recalling its resolution 69/168 of 18 December 2014 on the role of the
Ombudsman, mediator institutions and other national human rights institutions in
the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the
development of independent and effective national human rights institutions, guided
by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for
strengthened and complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the
__________________
1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum
(A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
2
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
3
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II.
4
Resolution 48/134, annex.

15-16917 (E)

*1516917*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/163

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights and those national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June l993, 5 which reaffirmed the
important and constructive role played by national human rights institutions, in
particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in
preventing and remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on
human rights and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that all human rights must be treated in
a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights at their meeting held in Vienna in June
1993 during the World Conference on Human Rights, in which it was recommended
that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced to meet the
requests for assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen their national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on
national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights 6 and on the
process currently utilized by the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to accredit national
institutions in compliance with the Paris Principles, 7
Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among
national human rights institutions, and noting with appreciation the co ntinuing work
of the Network of African National Human Rights Institutions, the Network of
National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the
Americas, the Asia-Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the
European Network of National Human Rights Institutions,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General; 8

2.
Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent
and pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles; 4
3.
Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights in working together with Governments to
ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including by contributing
to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the
international human rights mechanisms;

__________________
5

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
A/HRC/27/39.
7
A/HRC/16/77.
8
A/70/347.
6

2/6

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

A/RES/70/163

4.
Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights in supporting cooperation between their
Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and protection of human
rights;
5.
Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established
and operating in accordance with the Paris Principles, in the continued monitoring
of existing legislation and in consistently informing the State about the impact of
such legislation on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making
relevant and concrete recommendations;
6.
Recognizes the role that national human rights institutions can play in
preventing and addressing cases of reprisals as part of supporting the cooperation
between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion of human
rights, including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to
recommendations made by international human rights mechanisms;
7.
Also recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, 5 it is the right of each State to choose the framework for
national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the national level in
order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights
standards;
8.
Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and
pluralistic national institutions or, where they already exist, to strengthen them for
the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
9.
Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the
establishment of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and welcomes in particular the growing number of States that have accepted
recommendations to establish national institutions compliant with the Paris
Principles made through the universal periodic review and, where relevant, by treaty
bodies and special procedures;
10. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights established by Member States to continue to play an active role in
preventing and combating all violations of human rights as enumerated in the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international human
rights instruments;
11. Stresses that national human rights institutions and their respective
members and staff should not face any form of reprisal or intimidation, including
political pressure, physical intimidation, harassment or unjustifiable budgetary
limitations, as a result of activities undertaken in accordance with their respective
mandates, including when taking up individual cases or when reporting on serious
or systematic violations in their countries, and calls upon States to promptly and
thoroughly investigate cases of alleged reprisal or intimidation against members or
staff of national human rights institutions or against individuals who cooperate or
seek to cooperate with them;
12. Recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights in the Human Rights Council, including its universal
periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and follow-up, and the special
procedures, as well as in the human rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Council

3/6

A/RES/70/163

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 9 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005; 10
13. Welcomes the strengthening of opportunities for national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to contribute to the work of the
Human Rights Council, as stipulated in the Council review outcome document
annexed to Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011 11 adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011, and encourages and welcomes
the increasing use made by national human rights institutions of these participatory
opportunities;
14. Also welcomes the contribution of national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles to the work of the United Nations, including of
the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States Parties to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open -ended Working
Group on Ageing and the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system;
15. Encourages national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris
Principles to continue to participate in and to contribute to deliberations in all
relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in accordance with their
respective mandates, including the discussions on the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development; 12
16. Encourages all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, in
accordance with their respective mandates, including the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, to further enhance the participation of national human
rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles and to allow for their
contribution to these United Nations mechanisms and processes, bearing in mind the
relevant provisions dealing with their participation contained in General Assembly
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1, 5/2 and
16/21 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74;
17. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, within their respective mandates
and in accordance with the treaties establishing these mechanisms, to prov ide for
ways to ensure the effective and enhanced participation by national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles at all relevant stages of their work;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide support to national
human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles as they engage with
relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, with full respect for their
respective mandates, and with a view to enabling their most effective contributions,
in order to further the implementation of international human rights obligations and
commitments;
__________________
9

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II,
sect. A.
12
Resolution 70/1.

4/6

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

A/RES/70/163

19. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to work, within their respective
mandates, with Member States and national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good
governance and the rule of law, welcomes in this regard the efforts made by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop partnerships in
support of national institutions, including the tripartite partnership between the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Co ordinating Committee of
National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, and in this
respect encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to enhance their interactio n with
national human rights institutions, including facilitating their access to relevant
information and documentation;
20. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence
and stability of national human rights institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of those States that have
provided their national institutions with more autonomy and independence,
including by giving them an investigative role or enhancing such a rol e, and
encourages other Governments to consider taking similar steps;
21. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests
from Member States for assistance in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions;
22. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of
ombudsman institutions, encourages increased cooperation between national human
rights institutions and regional and international associations of ombudsmen, and also
encourages ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards enumerated in
international instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their independence
and increase their capacity to act as national human rights protection mechanisms;
23. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the High
Commissioner to work on national human rights institutions, encourages the High
Commissioner, in view of the expanded activities relating to national institutions, to
ensure that appropriate arrangements are made and budgetary resources provided to
continue and further extend activities in support of national institutions, and invites
Governments to contribute additional voluntary funds to that end;
24. Welcomes the important role played by the International Coordinating
Committee, in close cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner, in
assisting Governments, when requested, in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris Principles, in
assessing the conformity of national human rights institutions with the Paris
Principles and in providing technical assistance to strengthen national human rights
institutions, upon request, with a view to enhancin g their compliance with the Paris
Principles, and calls upon Member States and other stakeholders, including United
Nations agencies, to follow up on the recommendations of the Subcommittee on
Accreditation of the International Coordinating Committee, with a view to enabling
national human rights institutions to fully comply with the Paris Principles in both
law and practice;
25. Encourages national institutions, including ombudsman and mediator
institutions, to seek accreditation status through the Intern ational Coordinating
Committee;
5/6

A/RES/70/163

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

26. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the
exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment and effective
operation of national human rights institutions and to support the work of the
International Coordinating Committee and its regional coordinating networks in this
regard, including through support for the relevant technical assistance programmes
of the Office of the High Commissioner;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the assistance
necessary for holding international and regional meetings of national institutions,
including meetings of the International Coordinating Committee, in cooperation
with the Office of the High Commissioner;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its seventy-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

6/6
