S

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3282
23 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 23 September 1993, at 1.35 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. BARBOSA
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86593 (E)

S/PV.3282
2-5

The meeting was called to order at l.35 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE QUESTION CONCERNING HAITI
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (S/26480 and Add.l)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on Haiti, documents S/26480 and Add.l.

Members of the Council also have before

them document S/26484, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by the United States of America.
I should like to draw attention to the following revisions to be made to
the draft resolution contained in document S/26484, in its provisional form.

I

shall read those amendments in English.
(spoke in English)
The seventh preambular paragraph should read as follows:
"Recalling the situation in Haiti and the continuing responsibility of
the Council under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace
and security,".
At the end of the existing final preambular paragraph add the following:
"and recalling in this respect the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 17 September 1993 (S/26460),".

S/PV.3282
6
(The President)
Immediately following, insert a new preambular paragraph, which reads as
follows:
"Considering that there is an urgent need to ensure conditions for the
full implementation of the Governors Island agreement and the political
accords contained in the New York Pact as contained in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General of 13 August 1993 (S/26297),".
In operative paragraph 1, the words "Peace-keeping" after the words "United
Nations" should be deleted.
Operative paragraph 3 should read as follows:
"Determines that the UNPMS shall provide guidance and training to all
levels of the Haitian police and monitor the way in which the operations
are implemented in accordance with paragraph 9 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 21 September 1993;".
Operative paragraph 5 should read as follows:
"Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to place the peacekeeping mission under the oversight of the Special Representative of the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the Organization of
American States, who also oversees the activities of the International
Civilian Mission (MICIVIH), so that the peace-keeping mission may benefit
from the experience and information already obtained by the MICIVIH;".
At the beginning of operative paragraph 7, the words "safety and" should be
inserted after the word "such".
After existing operative paragraph 12, insert a new paragraph, which reads
as follows:
"Expresses its appreciation for the constructive role of the
Organization of American States in cooperation with the United Nations in
promoting the solution of the political crisis and the restoration of
democracy in Haiti and, in this context, stresses the importance of
ensuring close coordination between the United Nations and the Organization
of American States in their work in Haiti;".
The remaining operative paragraphs should be renumbered accordingly.

S/PV.3282
7-10
(The

President)

(spoke in Spanish)
I should also like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the
following documents:

S/26352 and S/26361, reports of the Secretary-General

concerning Haiti dated 25 and 26 August 1993, respectively, submitted pursuant
to the Secretary-General’s reports to the Security Council dated 12 July 1993
(S/26063) and 13 August 1993 (S/26297); S/26180, letter dated 26 July 1993 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of a letter from His Excellency
Reverend Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, President of the Republic of Haiti;
S/26471, letter dated 14 September 1993 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the General Assembly, transmitting the text of a letter from
the Deputy Secretary General of the Organization of American States; and
S/26482, letter dated 21 September 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to vote on the
draft resolution before it, as orally revised, in its provisional form.

Unless

I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
favour.

There were 15 votes in

The draft resolution, as orally revised, has been adopted unanimously

as resolution 867 (1993).
Given the lateness of the hour, and in conformity with the decision adopted
in the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now suspend the meeting until
3.30 p.m.

S/PV.3282
11

The meeting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3.55 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I shall now call on

those members of the Council who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. WALKER (United States of America):

Today the United Nations takes

another important step towards the restoration of democratic government to
Haiti.
By authorizing the deployment of 567 United Nations Police Monitors and a
military construction unit of 700, we are saying to all Haitians of democratic
spirit and good will that the community of nations is ready to lend a helping
hand.

Both the United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) can

be proud of the role they are playing in helping the tree of liberty take root
in Haitian soil.
We all understand that the road ahead will not be easy.
a period of fundamental change.

Haiti is entering

Its most important civic institutions must be

refashioned as the building blocks of a democratic society.

To fulfil that

role, these institutions will have to have legitimacy in the eyes of the Haitian
people.

They must be accountable to the Haitian people.

They must operate on

behalf of the Haitian people.

And they must reflect the unique character and

courage of the Haitian people.

They cannot be imposed from the outside.

But,

with the consent of Haitian leaders, outsiders can help Haitian citizens by
giving them the benefit of our experience, by providing appropriate material
support, and by sharing with them our faith in democratic processes and ideals.
The establishment and maintenance of civil order by democratic means is
essential to the future of Haiti, and helping that to occur is a central purpose
of the United Nations mission.
Last July, each party to the Governors Island Agreement undertook a solemn
commitment to his country’s future.

As witnessed by our action today, the

international community is responding accordingly.

But we expect the Governors

Island signatories to meet their own obligations in full, especially with
respect to safeguarding the human rights of Haitian citizens and ensuring the
safety of United Nations Mission personnel in Haiti.
It has been almost two years since the democratically elected leader of
Haiti, Father Aristide, was overthrown.

The international community condemned

S/PV.3282
12-15
(Mr. Walker, United States)
that illegal action and ultimately took the very serious step of applying global
economic sanctions as a way of influencing those who had perpetrated it.
By our action today, we say to those in Haiti who still believe that the
cause of democracy can be thwarted and that their own interests will prosper
only under a dictatorial regime that the time for such thinking is past.

To

those in Haiti who have suffered the consequences of repression compounded by
massive poverty and have nevertheless maintained their faith in democracy, we
say that the time for validating their faith is at hand.

To all Haitians, we

say that the time for bitter division is now behind you, and the time for
reconciliation and nation-building has come.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

My delegation felt

it was a matter of urgency to vote for this resolution under which it is decided
to send to Haiti a United Nations Mission that will promote the implementation
of the Governors Island Agreement.
My country welcomed the signing of that document, which allows for the
return of the legal authorities on 30 October next.

The conclusion of that

Agreement and the implementation of the initial phases provided for in it were
achieved through the commitment and tireless work of the representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Dante Caputo, to whom my country would once again pay a
tribute.

It is particularly shocking that today he should be insulted and

threatened in the very country where he is bringing peace and democracy.

Let me

reaffirm that France continues to support very strongly the work that he is
doing in Port au Prince.

S/PV.3282
16
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
The many positive developments in Haiti since July also reflect a spirit of
compromise on the part of the leaders of the various factions.

It would be

unfortunate if the atmosphere were to deteriorate in an enduring way that would
compromise the initial achievements in the process of national reconciliation.
France strongly condemns the many recent acts of violence and human rights
violations in Haiti.

My country calls on those responsible to show restraint

and to respect the rules of the game of democracy.
My country notes the decision to dispatch, for a period of six months, a
military construction unit; while not specifically provided for in the Governors
Island Agreement, this will help involve the armed forces in the civilian work
of rebuilding the country.

We can only welcome this.

To be sure, the projects

to be carried out in this framework will have to be financed by a special fund,
which should be funded largely by the participants in the military construction
unit.
France hopes that the immediate deployment of the United Nations Mission in
Haiti will help restore confidence and stability in that country by bringing the
endorsement of the international community and the guarantees needed during this
transitional period.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

The recent developments in Port au Prince should

be condemned as a blatant attempt to prevent the new constitutional government
from properly carrying out its functions.

Japan strongly hopes that the

responsible authorities will take immediate measures, in good faith with the
Governors Island Agreement, to maintain public order and expedite the process of
recovery and a return to democratic, constitutional order in Haiti.
The adoption of today’s resolution is of great significance, since the
resolution affirms the international community’s determination to remain
actively committed to the goal of a peaceful and genuinely democratic order in
Haiti.
Japan believes that a stronger United Nations presence in Haiti will
contribute to a solution of the problems that continue to beset the Haitian
people.

Japan thus supported the establishment of a new peace-keeping operation

for Haiti.

S/PV.3282
17

Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

The Chinese

people have all along cherished deep and fraternal feelings towards the Latin
American countries and their peoples.

We have followed developments in Haiti

closely and we support the Haitian peace process.

We hold that comprehensive

and impartial implementation of the Governors Island Agreement and the New York
Pact is the key to the peace process; the international community has made
tremendous efforts to that end.

In order to consolidate the initial progress in

the peace process and to avoid set-backs, we urge the various Haitian parties to
give due weight to Haiti’s national interests, to support the legitimate
government in Haiti, earnestly to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and to continue to overcome difficulties, so as to create the
conditions necessary for the scheduled return to Haiti of
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In order to achieve those objectives, the Security Council has approved the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, and has decided to send the United
Nations Mission in Haiti to assist Haiti in establishing a new police force and
in modernizing its armed forces.

We are convinced that this endeavour of the

international community will help the Haitian government restore security,
gradually stabilize the situation and ensure the success of the peace process in
Haiti.
In view of all this, China supports the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, and voted in favour of the resolution adopted before lunch.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

My

delegation is gratified at the speed with which the Security Council adopted the
resolution establishing the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) only a few
days after receiving the relevant report of the Secretary-General requested in
resolution 862 (1993).

In the light of events, our decision supplements the

statement made by the President on behalf of the members of the Council on
17 September, in which, in view of the deteriorating situation in Haiti and
the acts of violence provoked by certain armed groups, the Security Council
sternly warned those responsible for such acts of the possible reimposition of
sanctions should the Secretary-General recommend this to the Council.
The Council’s two-pronged decision - last week’s statement and today’s
resolution establishing the United Nations Mission in Haiti - clearly

S/PV.3282
18-20
(Mr. Yáñez Barnuevo, Spain)
demonstrates the determination of the United Nations to have a presence in
Haiti, to help the parties genuinely to implement the Governors Island Agreement
and the New York Pact, and to bring to the people of Haiti the help they need to
restore democracy and democratic institutions.
We consider that the dispatch of the Mission should have a positive impact:
it will establish a climate of trust that will enable the legitimate government
of Prime Minister Malval to assume effective control over the Haitian
administration.

In the medium and long term, it should also contribute to a

deep transformation in the functioning of the Haitian armed and security forces,
making them institutions genuinely in the service of the democratic government.
We are deeply concerned by the present situation.

We are concerned by the

threats against the Special Representative of the Secretaries-General of the
United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS), Mr. Dante Caputo,
and by the obvious, active resistance by certain sectors of the Haitian security
forces in impeding the good-faith implementation of agreements entered into, and
the transfer to democracy.
I refer to another aspect of the statement made by the President of the
Security Council on 17 September:

that the Council would hold the Haitian

military and security authorities personally responsible for the safety of all
United Nations personnel in Haiti.
point.

Today’s resolution also emphasizes that

We consider it very important for us to remain vigilant and to ensure

that any action that could compromise the safety or freedom of movement or
action of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in Haiti immediately
receives the response it deserves from the Security Council.
It is important to stress that the international community is continuing to
work to help the Malval Government regain democratic legitimacy and to ensure
the return of the legitimate President of Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

S/PV.3282
21
(Mr. Yáñez Barnuevo, Spain)
Close cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States and between the International Civilian Mission, which is
organized and directed by those two organizations, and the United Nations
Mission in Haiti, which is now being created, will ensure a continued, active
international presence in the country during this key transitional period of the
return to democracy.
We hope that the United Nations Mission in Haiti, which we have just
established and which we hope will soon be on its way to Haiti, will be able to
fulfil as envisaged the various stages of its undertaking and that at the same
time the Governors Island Agreement and the New York Pact will be fully
implemented.
We trust that all Haitian sectors will recognize the international
community’s determination and will have no doubt that the Security Council is
prepared to take whatever measures are necessary for the speedy restoration of
democracy and institutional normality in Haiti.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

The Brazilian Government continues to follow

the situation in Haiti very closely, and with great apprehension.
It is essential, in our view, that the Governors Island Agreement and the
New York Pact be strictly implemented in good faith by the parties in order to
achieve the solution of the political crisis in Haiti and to restore democracy
and the rule of law in that country of the Latin American and Caribbean region.
The work carried out by the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
the Organization of American States and, in particular, the efforts of their
Special Representative, Mr. Dante Caputo, continue to be crucial.

Brazil gives

the fullest support to that work and those efforts.
The resolution adopted today provides important additional elements to
ensure that the situation in Haiti will evolve in such a way as to allow the
full and undelayed implementation of the Governors Island Agreement. The
maintenance of a climate of security in Haiti will be essential to that end.
In responding promptly and effectively to the request made by the
Constitutional Government of Haiti for assistance in the establishment of a new
police force and the modernization of the armed forces, the United Nations is

S/PV.3282
22
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
making an outstanding contribution to ensuring the successful outcome of the
efforts of the Haitian people to overcome their present difficulties.
The recent incidents of politically motivated violence in Haiti, which
Brazil has strongly condemned, have underlined our concern about the situation
in that country and the urgency that is called for in our endeavours to ensure
the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, as provided for in the
resolutions adopted by the United Nations and the Organization of American
States.
Expeditious action was clearly required on the establishment of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti.

We therefore gave our full support to the adoption

today of resolution 867 (1993).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

With the Council’s

permission, I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Venezuela.
Venezuela welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of this draft
resolution, which, we are sure, is an essential contribution to the creation of
the conditions necessary for the return of President Aristide to his country on
30 October this year and for the restoration of democratic order in Haiti.
Venezuela supports the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s reports
of 25 August and 21 September 1993, especially with regard to the establishment
and immediate deployment of a United Nations Mission in Haiti.

This is an

urgent operation because of, among other things, the grave situation of violence
and political intimidation that has re-emerged in Haiti, which impedes the
effective functioning of the legitimate Government and the creation of a climate
of tranquillity and stability, essential for the implementation of the relevant
provisions of the Governors Island Agreement, while also hindering United
Nations efforts to re-establish democracy in Haiti.
Venezuela must express its deep concern over this situation.

The

international community has committed itself to guaranteeing the implementation
of the Governors Island Agreement and the New York Pact, and will not tolerate
acts of defiance whose continuance would force it to reimpose the sanctions
provided for in resolution 841 (1993).

S/PV.3282
23
(The President)
We reiterate our support for the presidential statement made on behalf of
the Council on 17 September, which declares that anyone attempting to harm
United Nations personnel in Haiti will be held personally responsible.
Finally, Venezuela considers that this action of the Security Council,
which we will follow very closely, is but one of the steps necessary to restore
democracy in Haiti.

It trusts that this process will be consolidated and that

its objectives will be fully attained in the shortest possible time.
That is the end of my statement as representative of Venezuela.
resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no further speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

I now
