S/2010/384

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 July 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1315 (2000) of
14 August 2000, by which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to
negotiate an agreement with the Government of Sierra Leone to create an
independent special court to prosecute persons bearing the greatest responsibility for
the commission of crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations
of international humanitarian law, as well as crimes under relevant Sierra Leonean
law committed within the territory of Sierra Leone.
Pursuant to resolution 1315 (2000), the United Nations and the Government of
Sierra Leone concluded an agreement establishing a special court for Sierra Leone
on 16 February 2002. The Special Court has since prosecuted and convicted eight
persons. One person indicted by the Special Court remains at large; and the Special
Court is conducting its only remaining trial, against Mr. Charles Taylor, former
President of Liberia. The most recent projections indicate that the trial could be
completed around June 2011 and an appeal, if any, around February 2012. In
accordance with article 23 of the Agreement, the Agreement will be terminated upon
completion of the judicial activities of the Special Court.
Some essential tasks must continue to be carried out after the closure of the
Special Court. These tasks are: conducting the trial of the fugitive or referring his
case to a national jurisdiction; maintaining, preserving and managing archives;
providing for witness and victim protection and support; responding to requests for
access to evidence by national prosecution authorities; supervising the enforcement
of sentences of convicted persons; reviewing convictions and acquittals; conducting
contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid; responding
to requests from national authorities with respect to claims for compensation; and
preventing double jeopardy.
These tasks cannot be handed over to national institutions owing to various
legal and practical considerations. Instead, they have to be done by a small and costeffective international residual mechanism established jointly by the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone. It is envisaged that the residual mechanism,
like the Special Court, would be funded from voluntary contributions by Member
States.
For this purpose, I intend to seek to negotiate and conclude with the
Government of Sierra Leone an agreement establishing a residual mechanism for the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and a statute of the residual mechanism.
10-45394 (E) 150710

*1045394*

S/2010/384

I should be grateful if you could confirm that the Security Council is agreeable
to this manner of proceeding. Upon receipt of such confirmation, I will proceed
promptly to open the negotiations with the Government of Sierra Leone with a view
to concluding negotiations and signing the agreement as a matter of priority,
preferably by the end of July 2010.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

10-45394
