United Nations

S/PV.9315

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9315

th meeting
Wednesday, 3 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cassis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Akimoto
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Al Olama
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace
Letter dated 18 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-12524 (E)
*2312524*

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I would like
to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Council, to
recognize the work accomplished by the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April and to
thank His Excellency Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia
and his team.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace
Letter dated 18 April 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/283)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
warmly welcome the Prime Minister, Ministers and
other high-level representatives. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nepal, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Ukraine, Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker Türk,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
Ms. Cynthia Chigwenya, Youth Ambassador for Peace
for Southern Africa; and Ms. ‘Funmi Olonisakin,
Vice-President and Professor of Security, Leadership
and Development at King’s College London.
2/31

03/05/2023

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/283, which contains the text of a letter
dated 18 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Türk.
Mr. Türk: My thanks go to Switzerland for
organizing today’s important open debate. I am
speaking from Nairobi, where I am attending the Chief
Executives Board, after a visit to Addis Ababa and
important discussions with the African Union there.
History offers us a warning, but also a way forward.
The Charter of the United Nations was designed
to futureproof the world against a repetition of the
devastating wars, global recession and imperialism
that preceded the Organization’s foundation. Shortly
thereafter, States adopted the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, underpinning the Charter and
recognizing that the inherent dignity and equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family
are the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world. Full compliance with human rights is the best
antidote to the inequalities, unaddressed grievances
and exclusion that are often at the root of instability
and conflict. An unwavering human rights lens and
strong human rights action, based on tried and tested
norms, lead us away from chaos and conflict, advance
development and build trust.
Trust is the core of peaceful relations among human
beings. It thrives on mutual respect and dependability,
truth, justice and fair and equal treatment. Trust is also
at the core of the social contract between people and
the institutions of the State. People trust the authorities
when they can be relied on to advance their economic,
social, civil, political and cultural freedoms, as well
as their right to development, and to deliver justice.
Trust, no doubt, is the foundation of conflict prevention
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and sustainable peace. It is indeed the comprehensive
advancement of all human rights that builds trust. I have
experienced that time and time again when engaging
with victims, human rights defenders and refugees. It is
their voices that human rights seek to amplify and bring
to the table. It is therefore no surprise that human rights
are essential at every stage of the peace continuum.
First, as the Security Council has acknowledged,
the human rights lens provides early warning and it
points to targeted preventive action. Clear indicators
are crucial for detecting the drivers of conflict and
addressing them. My Office is strengthening its work
on human rights indicators and data in relation to peace
and security, developing solid indicators on killings
of and violence against human rights defenders, civil
society and media personnel, as well as conflictrelated deaths. That work also draws on accessing and
analysing open-source information — for example, to
track Internet shutdowns and other issues of relevance
to early warning.
Let me take the crisis in Haiti as an example,
where early-warning signals pointed persistently to
the profoundly destructive impact of inequalities,
corruption and exclusion on both trust and stability. The
Council acted last year in relation to Haiti by adopting
an arms embargo and targeted sanctions, among other
responses. But more action is urgently needed now.
I visited the country in February. It is dangling over
an abyss. The State’s lack of capacity to fulfil human
rights has completely eroded people’s confidence. The
social contract has collapsed. The current lawlessness
is a human rights emergency that calls for a robust
response. There is an immediate need to support Haiti’s
institutions by deploying a time-bound, specialized
and human rights-compliant support force, with a
comprehensive action plan. The longer-term challenge
is, of course, the building of robust institutions that
deliver on human rights.
Secondly, when conflicts break out, the human
rights perspective brings focus to their effects on people.
Human rights monitoring based on reliable, objective
information and analysis also helps to establish the
facts. It serves to counter misinformation and narratives
that foster hostility and fear. The value of human rights
monitoring and reporting during and after conflicts is
well recognized by the Council, including through the
11 human rights components in peace operations that it
has mandated.

S/PV.9315

The latest country to move towards full-blown
conflict is the Sudan. The human rights impact
of the current fighting has been catastrophic. It
is heartbreaking. On Monday, an air strike by the
Sudanese military reportedly hit the vicinity of a
hospital in the East Nile area of Khartoum. The Rapid
Support Forces have taken over numerous residential
buildings in Khartoum to use as operational bases,
launching attacks from densely inhabited urban
areas. Civilians continue to be placed at acute risk
and are prevented from accessing critical supplies
and assistance. In short, the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution have been trampled by
both of the parties, which I strongly condemn. Trust
has been obliterated. We know that the Sudan’s future
depends on building trust between the Sudanese
people and the institutions that are supposed to serve
them. Ensuring human rights, an end to impunity and
participation by the population — particularly women
and young people — must be the driving forces out of
the current crisis, so that the Sudan can stabilize at last.
Let us not forget that in 2019, the people of the Sudan
rose up to claim their human rights and overthrow
dictatorship, only to be frustrated again by the October
2021 military coup. Even then, the people’s hope was
not crushed. When I visited the Sudan in November of
last year, I was moved by their courage as they worked
yet again to ensure a transition to civilian governance.
There was no question about human rights being a
foreign or elite concept. The universality and power of
the call to freedom, equality and justice was palpable,
which makes the current situation all the more tragic.
Thirdly, the full range of human rights standards
are equally crucial in bringing conflicts to a close and
establishing sustainable peace. In particular, the human
rights principles of accountability, non-discrimination
and meaningful participation are essential for
building and maintaining trust among people and the
State — in short, to sustain peace. Accountability
addresses grievances, both by establishing justice and
the fight against impunity and by promoting responsive
and accountable governance that serves people’s real
needs. Equality and non-discrimination tackle persistent
inequalities, ensuring that no one is left behind. The
Council has witnessed how addressing discrimination
against minorities and the disenfranchised can help
heal and build more resilient societies. Participation in
an open civic space — importantly, by women and girls,
minority groups and young people — builds deeper,
broader trust in institutions. The Council has heard

23-125243/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

many powerful testimonials of the contributions that
women bring to ending violence and building peace.
Their diverse voices, freely raised, bring important
perspectives into a peace process on the key issues of
economic recovery, security and resources — issues
that extend far beyond the tendency of parties to focus
on maximizing their grasp on power. Women must also
participate in the implementation of peace agreements.
Let me make a particular case, on World Press
Freedom Day, for the importance of press freedom and
the protection of journalists in nourishing accountable
governance. More broadly, any restrictions of civic
space exacerbate exclusion, thereby hampering efforts
to build sustainable peace and again laying the seeds
for instability and unrest. By way of example, in
Colombia, participation and other core human rights
principles have been crucial to building trust. The
Havana process included strong elements of dialogue
and inclusion, which ensured that the 2016 agreements
were not simply terms for a ceasefire among armed
actors but also a comprehensive blueprint for a
lasting peace. In January of this year, I observed the
continuing efforts to make that a reality, including
by addressing deep-rooted structural issues around
land reform, discrimination and inequality in order
to advance social and economic progress. Countries
that have undergone conflict or oppression have an
enormous trust deficit stemming from the oftenatrocious violations that have been committed. Those
harmful ruptures need to be repaired in a process that
is often long and challenging. Transitional justice aims
at increasing people’s confidence in each other and in
State institutions. In Colombia, as elsewhere, human
rights and justice will be the best guides on the longer
road towards reconciliation and sustainable peace.
As the United Nations prepares for the Summit of
the Future, including a New Agenda for Peace, I hope
that the Council and all Member States will make
effective use of the trust-building potential of human
rights in addressing peace and security concerns.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Türk
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Chigwenya.
Ms. Chigwenya: A few years ago, I graduated as
a top-performing student in development studies and
immediately secured a scholarship and an internship
at a foreign-affairs think tank in South Africa. After
that, it did not take me too long to find employment
4/31

03/05/2023

with the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, a German
political foundation, which meant that one of the
key challenges of my time — unemployment — was
no longer applicable to me, and I was content. I was
content until a colleague who works for the African
Union insisted that I extend my skills, knowledge and
commitment to the efforts on our continent aimed at
achieving Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, and
the Sustainable Development Goals more broadly. Of
course, I met that encouragement with some resistance,
as I was comfortable where I was, despite the fact that I
had begun to question the extent of my contentment. To
cut the story short, I later applied for the position and
went through a rigorous selection process. Today I am
standing before the Council as the Youth Ambassador
for Peace for Southern Africa, selected by the African
Union to represent the continent’s five geographic
regions and engage with peacebuilders across Africa.
The question that is at the core of today’s open
debate is how we can sustain peace, strengthen trust and
peace processes and foster inclusion and participation.
Harking back to my anecdote, we cannot enhance peace
processes without reviewing and strengthening the
institutions that urge us to safeguard advances beyond
our tenure. In the year that I have been a part of the
African Union’s Youth for Peace Africa Programme,
we proposed conducting a study on immigration and
peace and security in Africa, a recommendation that
was accepted and incorporated by the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council verbatim. We have also
advocated for developing and implementing national
action plans on youth and peace and security, along
with other progress that has been made in advancing
that agenda.
Notwithstanding the progress made — especially
the adoption of normative frameworks, instruments and
policies, such as resolution 2250 (2015) of 2015, which
globally recognizes young people as peacebuilders,
the African Youth Charter of 2006 and the Continental
Framework for Youth, Peace and Security — there
are several factors impeding youth participation in
formal peacebuilding. The Continental Framework
highlights the limited financial resources available
for youth initiatives, the lack of coordination among
stakeholders, the weak organizational and technical
capacities for youth-led organizations and the limited
evidence-based approaches, which is one of the items
we will explore today.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

From personal experience, I know that stereotypes
that represent young people as inexperienced also
limit their inclusion in processes such as conflict
mediation. Preconceived perceptions of youth
as harbingers and instigators of violence hinder
intergenerational collaboration. In the light of those
existing challenges — and amid interrogation not just
of the United Nations but also of the African Union and
of both organizations’ capacity to resolve and prevent
conflict — how best can we ensure that inclusion
and participation can be attained in order to enhance
positive peace?
As we gather here today, the Security Council,
particularly considering its new presidency and the
New Agenda for Peace, has the power to set an agenda
through which existing norms can be reviewed, amended
and gradually shifted. Today’s open debate, which sets
the direction for deliberations, is one example of that.
Secondly, ensuring that our policies are agile and our
practices flexible while not relinquishing our binding
principles will be of the essence as we map out the
newness of the New Agenda for Peace and our approach
to sustaining peace on the continent. With the war in
Ukraine and conflict in the Sudan between its military
factions, the Council is indeed facing challenges, but it
also has an opportunity to set a course for action. My
first two points allude to the potential of our gathering
here today, and I hope that will remain present as we go
back to do the groundwork. The following points are
more specific approaches to inclusivity.
The first is that we should review the operationalization of inclusion to make it a more active, meaningful
and trust-based practice, one that is not only perceptible
but evidence-based and measurable. We must be able to
see it in our various contexts.
The second is that we should invest in the
representation of young people and youth networks
within decision-making processes and institutions, and
I am testament to that today. Through our deliberate
efforts, young people across the globe must understand
that they are not just being included but are co-creators,
essential to shaping the international agenda.
The third is that we should emphasize innovation
and leverage technological advances such as
digitalization to combat hate speech, misinformation
and disinformation. One such example is Mission
55 — Conflict in Anaka, a game that is available on
Google Play and that was developed to inform and

S/PV.9315

educate with conflict scenarios that can be resolved
using tools that are similar to the African governance
and peace and security architecture, providing for the
structures, principles and processes that are related to
the prevention, management and resolution of conflict in
post-conflict reconstruction and development scenarios.
My examples indicate that including young people
in the peace and security agenda does not require us to
reinvent the wheel. Efforts to mitigate violent conflicts
require agile policies that are able, first, to absorb and
mainstream the existing initiatives; secondly, to leverage
young people’s existing peacemaking potential and
thirdly, to promote sustainability through financial and
technological support and by encouraging young people
to be stakeholders in development processes.
In conclusion, although it is possible for us to
become invested in our institutions, trust in those
institutions is dwindling, particularly among young
people, the constituents whom I represent. Many no
longer believe in institutions, and the onus is on us,
those who are in those spaces, to reinvent them so that
they not only become inviting to young people but bring
them in, making them more encouraged to participate in
processes such as those where they find that they have a
stake in development and in conflict resolution.
To sum up, I would like to cite the words of Martin
Luther King, who said that those who prioritize peace
must be ready and even more determined to organize as
effectively as those who love war. We are relying on the
Council’s efforts to ensure that young people across the
globe believe in the credibility of institutions such as the
United Nations and the African Union.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Chigwenya for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Olonisakin.
Ms. Olonisakin: The message thus far has been
clear. Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace requires
inclusive approaches, norms that are fit for purpose
and trusted knowledge on how to think about future
peace. Therefore, to be sure, first of all, norms matter.
So do normative frameworks that drive collective
accountability and predictability and that enhance trust
because they are widely owned. At the end of the day,
they should define the terms on which societies can live
well together and in dignity.
Secondly, knowledge that is trusted, available to all
and transparently governed is an essential ingredient in
futureproofing trust. At the core of all of that, however,

23-125245/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

is an important tension that must be addressed. It is the
tension between understanding our world as it should
be and how it really is empirically. There is therefore a
case for aligning our engagement with three important
realities of our time if we are to rebuild trust and
futureproof the trust that is critical to sustaining peace.
The first of those realities is uncertainty. The current
period of uncertainty in the world carries inherent
risks. The second, which is related to uncertainty, is
distance — the distance between nations, the power
distance between institutions and the majority of
the people in the world and the distance between
leaders and those whom they lead. The third is the
seeming disconnect between science and the agency
of institutions and people, particularly people of the
future. The question that therefore confronts us is how
we proactively engage with those tensions without
retreating to business as usual — that is, the technical,
transactional exercise of engagement that ultimately
does not build trust or facilitate any peace, now or in
the future.
I believe that three interrelated factors warrant
deeper reflection on our part. The first has to do with
norms, science and anticipation. To be sure, norms
enable us to design tools for directing the world the
way we think it ought to be. But the starting point
has to be to understand the world as it really is and to
collectively imagine a new future for sustaining peace.
Of course, there are knowns and unknowns in that
regard. We know, for example, that advances in science
and technology are critical drivers of war and peace for
the future and that the determinants of where power
lies, who has agency and how that agency is exercised
are underpinned by that. But we do not know enough
about how the evolution of science and technology in
the future will change power and agency. We also now
know, for example, that progress in artificial intelligence
is leading to advances in the capacity, or capability, of
systems, and that there is less advancement in humans’
ability to control them.
In that context, the sheer speed of breakthroughs in
science and technology is matched only by the scale of
our inability to anticipate the implications for politics,
society, war and peace. We therefore urgently need to
develop a sense of things to come and to imagine the future
of peace and war in order to avoid being overwhelmed
by the sheer pace of change. For if we are overwhelmed,
our agency will be easily lost, and that is the crux of the
matter. Three organizations, among others, are leading
6/31

03/05/2023

the way in developing methodologies for anticipating
the future of war and peace — the Geneva Science
and Diplomacy Anticipator (GESDA), the Geneva
Centre for Security Policy (GCSP) and the School of
International and Public Affairs (SIPA) at Columbia
University, here in New York City. That work is timely
and requires the active engagement of policymakers.
The second set of factors to consider involves
bringing science and future people together.
Anticipatory
methodologies
for
understanding
peace and war in the future must also seek to bring
science and people together, connecting scientific
breakthroughs with future people, by which I mean
those who will govern the world in 2050. That will
be vital if we are to circumvent the tyranny of now
and the temptation to simply fix power and agency in
expectation of a sequential future that concurrently
succeeds the present. The reality will be different. The
10-year research agenda that I co-lead at the African
Leadership Centre of King’s College London and in
collaboration with the Institute of Development Studies
at the University of Nairobi in Kenya, asks one central
question. How will perceptions of peace and the State
change among those who will govern the world in
2050? The reason is simple — although not that simple.
Studying future people longitudinally is important
in order to understand how they organize, build
community and problem-solve today, and crucially,
how the present technological world and society will
influence their longitudinal maturity. That will enable
us to understand, or at least examine, the unfolding
future consciously, progressively and piece by piece
through the lens of those who inevitably will govern
the world in 2050.
That concept holds much significance, we argue, for
futureproofing trust for sustaining peace. To be clear,
the future is not a singularity or a specific point, nor
is it linear. But in recognizing that our chronological
thinking limits our capabilities to comprehend the
complexities of the intertwined time frames of events,
it is important to see future peace and war not as
isolated events but as part of a broader experiential
continuum. The multidimensional nature of reality will
likely generate multiple futures of peace and war. That
will certainly require bringing into focus the empirical
reality of people and places that are often peripheral to
global policy decision-making on peace and war. I think
we also heard the previous briefers speak about this.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

For example, in cultures that form part of the
majority world, the current, past and future leadership
of opinions on security, war and peace is not readily
under the influence of elites that we can predict. For
example, religious leaders, cultural leaders and dynamic
events determine so much more than scientists and social
laboratories. That is partly why the African Leadership
Centre’s data laboratory, among others, has collected and
analysed hundreds of millions of pieces of social media
data, combined with ethnographies of communities that
are usually excluded, in order to observe the complex
and dynamic ways that peace, development and conflict
are interpreted, reimagined and reinterpreted by
different people across age, gender and social status.
That range of reasons is why the network of institutions I
mentioned earlier — GESDA, GCSP and SIPA — argue
for complementing predictions made accessible through
scientific means with the use of informed imagination
to anticipate a variety of future scenarios, with a
view to understanding how better to prepare for
change, and of course for black-swan events too.
The third and last set of factors has to do with trust
between people and institutions, and we have heard a
lot about that already. But that raises the question as to
what that all means for institutions that will be relevant
to governing the future of peace and war. That is the
importance of the institution at which we are speaking
today. Trust between people and institutions is needed
to undergird peacebuilding. The power hierarchies
between institutions and society and within institutions,
whether global or regional, pose grave risks because they
reinforce inequalities and maintain a dangerous inequity
between the real owners of peace and the distanced
beholders of peace. Despite well-articulated norms and
templated technical solutions, institutions invariably
deny agency to the vast majority of future people.
Already, the report of the High-Level Advisory Board
on Effective Multilateralism, A Breakthrough for People
and Planet: Effective and Inclusive Global Governance
for Today and the Future, which was developed at the
United Nations University Centre for Policy Research,
which also served as the secretariat of the Advisory
Board, includes 10 specific principles of effective
multilateralism, all of which together provide a framework
for rebuilding trust with global majorities. I am not about
to rehash them here, but it is worth noting that the report
underscores the importance of an anticipated reaction,
while calling also for increased transparency on peace
and security, including increased investment in peace.

S/PV.9315

Without a systematic and inclusive connection
between science and people, particularly the future people
I described earlier and without a collective imagining
about the future of peace, there will be less certainty
about the agency of global and regional institutions to
shift the tide towards sustaining peace in future. In order
to be relevant in a future of peace, institutions must
today facilitate an approach that accommodates multiple
futures and enables a seamless connection between
science and future people across their diversities so that
they can unleash their own agency in the pursuit of peace.
Including future people in norm-development, for
example, is an important element in imagining the future
of peace and war, thus connecting the world as it ought to
be with how it really is, empirically. Beyond regulation,
part of the norm-setting task of institutions will include
the facilitation of investments and intervention to make
technology, including artificial intelligence, safer and
peace-leaning.
Returning to where I began, futureproofing trust for
sustaining peace requires the reduction of uncertainty
by anticipating the future of peace, better connecting
science and future people and holding a space, as
was said earlier, that builds an inclusive imagining of
the future. The United Nations would do well to lead
thinking and policymaking about this vitally important
element of futureproofing trust.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Olonisakin for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Councillor and Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of the Swiss Confederation.
At the outset, I would like to thank the three briefers
for their valuable insights.
Recently, I went back to my old school to talk about
foreign policy. The students asked me only questions
about the war and its consequences. That made a deep
impression on me. I realized how different our questions
were when I was a student at that school 45 years ago, in
the late 1970s. My classmates and I were convinced then
that there would never be another war in Europe. Our
teachers and our parents had lived through the Second
World War, and they swore to us that the international
community had learned its lesson.
In 1992, Francis Fukuyama announced the end of
history in his bestseller The End of History and the Last
Man. Globalization was presented there as a factor for

23-125247/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

peace, as if the end of the Cold War and the economic
interdependence would usher in a new era of peace.
Yet today there is still war. How did we get here? How
can we avoid being the ones who failed to react to the
current crises?

us have the courage to question and rethink the system
together in order to make it better. Strengthened by that
conviction, Switzerland welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General, who next month will propose a New
Agenda for Peace.

Seventy-seven years ago, nations united,
cemented by trust and the will to rebuild, said: never
again. And yet, today there is war. Perhaps we were
guilty of arrogance? We have to admit that we have
not sufficiently taken account the frustrations and
changes taking place everywhere on our planet. Yes,
the multilateral system is under stress, but no, it is not
bankrupt. The real failure would be to do nothing.

Today’s debate is a real opportunity to gather
ideas and proposals from Member States and to take
advantage of the synergies that unite us. Trust is earned
through actions, not intentions. It is in that spirit that I
believe in the strength of multilateralism.

It is time for the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and to reflect on its potential for action
in the face of the growing number of crises. It is time to
refine our tools to restore trust and build lasting peace.
That is the objective of today’s debate, organized by
Switzerland — to rebuild the bridges that connect us.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Where there is trust, anything is possible.
International law is based on the Latin phrase pacta sunt
servanda — agreements must be kept. That principle
embodies the mutual trust of parties who pledge their
word and keep it. I am convinced that if we can restore
that trust, we will be able to restore long-term peace.
To achieve that, we need to focus on the areas where
multilateralism has real added value. First, we must
ensure adherence to a common and respected normative
framework, based on human rights and public international
law. Predictability, not arbitrariness, is the basis for
trust. Through trust, we can aim for a lasting peace.
We will also need to consider how the Council can
strengthen the foundations of a broader peacebuilding
architecture, which must be inclusive of all whom the
population has designated as democratically legitimate.
It must also respect cultural differences and care for
the historical heritage that defines us. Imposed peace
is not sustainable.
Finally, trust is built on concrete facts. Science
and new technologies offer us opportunities to better
anticipate and understand the risks of today and the
opportunities of tomorrow. We must respond to the
challenges of the twenty-first century with twenty-first
century solutions.
Injustices and violations of the Charter of the
United Nations do not justify the entrenchment of
each behind their own positions. On the contrary, let
8/31

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Mr. Al Olama (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to our
colleagues from the Russian Federation and congratulate
them on their successful presidency of the Council
last month. I wish the same to Switzerland during its
presidency of the Security Council this month.
We thank Switzerland for organizing today’s
meeting, and High Commissioner Türk, Youth
Ambassador Chigwenya and Ms. Olonisakin
for their insightful briefings. We also thank the
Peacebuilding Commission for its written advice on
this important topic.
Too often, generations do not have a voice in our
policy decisions and discussions. Yet every decision we
make will have an impact on the world that they will
inherit. It is our duty to be good stewards, not only to
focus on current challenges but to set the foundations
for lasting peace. We appreciate the emphasis in today’s
discussion on futureproofing peacebuilding.
The Security Council responds to crises in the here
and now, but exactly how it does so has long lasting
impacts on the sustainability of peace. The lives of
millions of people depend on the cumulative effect of
each decision we take to build peace. Accordingly, I
would like to emphasize four points to inform our
discussions today.
First, inclusion remains critical for peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding must be both for all and by all because
policymakers alone are not the sole drivers of progress.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and the inclusion of youth can ensure that
decision-making processes address actual needs.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Incorporating their input contributes to building and
consolidating trust. Alignment of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts across municipal, national,
regional and international spheres helps engage
communities at different levels. Meanwhile, civil
society actors, and those from academia and the private
sector, have the potential to amplify peacebuilding
efforts from their unique perspectives.
Secondly, institutional reforms must ensure that
the peacekeeping architecture is fit for purpose. By
strengthening the peacebuilding architecture, we can
help address a broader range of long-term challenges,
such as, inter alia, climate change, extremism and
global public-health emergencies. This also includes
linking more effectively the work of peacebuilding and
financial institutions. The United Arab Emirates also
looks forward to discussing the recommendations of the
High-level Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism
in order to preserve global public goods for present and
future generations.
Thirdly, it is crucial to address hate speech, racism,
intolerance, misinformation and other manifestations of
extremism. These forces are threat multipliers, sowing
the seeds of division. They erode the social fabric of
communities in gender instability and undermine
all efforts towards peacekeeping. In contrast, the
promotion of tolerance and human fraternity builds
mutual trust and promotes social cohesion, which
are critical foundations for peace. The emergence of
new, powerful technological tools that can be used to
connect or divide the world makes it imperative for all
of us to pursue a common approach that addresses and
guides the proper use and governance of these tools.
These positive uses can be seen in providing accurate,
informed and reliable data. Digital tools can help
counter narratives of intolerance and hate that fuel
extremist ideologies and undermine peace.
That leads me to my fourth and final point. We
need to harness digital and innovative technologies
to build and sustain peace. Data is key. It can provide
unparalleled insights into the root causes of conflict,
encompassing social, economic and political factors
as well. Data can also function as an enabler for
stopping conflicts in their tracks by using geographical
information systems to predict the outbreaks of violence
and monitor ceasefires.
This speech was written by a human. But soon it
may be written by an artificial intelligence agent, such

S/PV.9315

as ChatGPT, or others. These technologies, which are
progressing at exponential speeds have the ability to
magnify peacekeeping efforts or affect them negatively.
Alongside the infinite potential that these technologies
have, there is also a chance that these tools can be
leveraged by bad actors to manipulate public opinion
and affect peacekeeping in general. It is therefore
imperative that we, as a collective multilateral body,
engage relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, to ensure that we are able to benefit from
its development.
Finally, I would like to mention that the United
Arab Emirates has been a long-time advocate of
anticipatory action that aims to disburse resources
and drive preventive work based on credible forecasts
of climate-change-induced disasters, taking every
action that has the potential to make a difference.
The Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All
initiative could provide a significant boost to scaling
up anticipated reaction. We urge the United Nations
to employ early-warning systems more broadly and
at scale.
Peacebuilding is not simply an effort to preserve
the present. It is also a proactive step required for us
to prevent conflicts before they begin, before they
escalate and evolve into protracted struggles. The
United Arab Emirates will continue to support these
efforts in order to shape peaceful and resilient societies
for future generations.
Mr. Akimoto (Japan): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on Switzerland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the first time in your country’s history. Sir, Japan
highly commends your initiative on this forwardlooking topic. I would also like to thank briefers for
their insightful briefings.
Today trust in the multilateral system and the
United Nations is being tested. Conflict and terrorism
remain a threat and are exacerbated by emerging risk
multipliers. What we need to ask now is whether the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, has
the strong will and capacity to effectively respond to
these challenges.
Sustaining peace requires persistent effort. To
achieve resilient peace, a wide range of actors, especially
women and youth, must be able to actively participate
and be agents of change in their own societies. This
participation can only take place when people feel secure.

23-125249/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The rule of law must be upheld, human rights protected
and issues resolved through dialogue. Institution- and
capacity-building, especially through education, are
key. Japan has been working to realize human security
by investing in people. The Security Council should
serve as a role model for the international community.
Let me emphasize three points.
First, the Council should oversee the implementation
of its resolutions and work towards mainstreaming
the women, peace and security and youth, peace and
security agendas.
Secondly, the Council should deepen discussions
on the rule of law, human security, the protection of
human rights and conflict prevention. The Council
should reflect the outcomes of those discussions in the
mandates of peace operations.
Thirdly, the Council should enhance its interactions
with other actors. In that regard, Japan highly
appreciates the Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC’s)
comprehensive advice for today’s meeting. By fully
utilizing the PBC’s advice, the Council will strengthen
the functioning of the whole United Nations.
The process to develop a New Agenda for Peace is
now under way. This is a historic opportunity to enhance
our collective capacity to achieve and sustain peace.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s unwavering
commitment to promoting peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts in the United Nations and beyond.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
warmly congratulate Your Excellency, Mr. President,
and your country, the Swiss Confederation, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. That is an
important achievement, as it is happening two decades
after Switzerland became a full-fledged member of
the United Nations. We welcome the initiative of
Switzerland to convene an open debate under the theme
“Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace: Futureproofing
trust for sustaining peace”.
We wish to express our deep appreciation to the Russian
Federation for its excellent leadership of the Council last
month. We thank Mr. Volker Türk, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Cynthia Chigwenya,
Youth Ambassador for Peace for Southern Africa; and
Ms. ‘Funmi Olonisakin, Vice-President and Professor
of Security, Leadership and Development at King’s
College London. Their briefings were most enlightening.
10/31

03/05/2023

The notion of peacebuilding is a crucial element if
we need to sustain peace and stability in our countries
for present and future generations. In many instances,
as Council members can see, peacebuilding goes hand
in hand with peacekeeping or peacemaking, one process
reinforcing the other.
We have learned from our short experience that
peace must never be dissociated from development.
Peace must always be linked to the umbilical cord that
binds it with the development dimension and the search
for the well-being of the people. As we strive to build
sustained peace, our efforts should be directed towards
addressing the root causes of conflicts and instability,
including those related to the delivery of basic services
and goods to the people.
We think that countries must assist or be
assisted in sustaining their peace processes through
the strengthening of the resilience of their social
institutions. They must be supported in their efforts to
invest in internal and social cohesion.
As a peacebuilding country, one of the key lessons
Mozambique has learned from its own peace processes
is the importance of addressing the development
challenges to prevent the recurrence of widespread
violence. It is our belief that the central role of
peacebuilding should be to restore trust and rebuild the
State authorities and governance structures. It should
mean the Government’s ability to perform its basic
functions for the benefit of the people.
Building trust is yet another important enabler to
sustain peace and stability. That process requires an allencompassing, inclusive approach. Globally, inclusion
should guide our collective and coordinated actions
to resolve the multifaceted and complex challenges
the world is facing today, such as inter-State wars,
intra-State conflicts, international terrorism, organized
crime and climate change challenges.
In that connection, international cooperation is of
utmost importance. Unilateral and distorting approaches
to the worldview will not serve the cause and purpose
of peacebuilding. An environment of inclusiveness,
fairness and justice at the international level is important
for peacebuilding to prosper around the world. In
the United Nations context, that means, above all,
genuine and constructive attention to the agenda of the
Security Council, including its reform in order to make
that organ more inclusive, fair, just and democratic.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

But we also need to address the thorny issue of the
reform of international financial institutions to serve
the cause of international peace and security, equity
and justice among nations. Private entrepreneurship
is important, but narrow economic gains alone at the
expense of the least developed countries and the least
privileged peoples can only endanger global peace and
perpetuate instability and turmoil at the world level.
In that context, an increase in overseas development
assistance flows, aimed at generating greater economic
growth, is, in our view, of extreme importance. If we
need effective global normative frameworks for all of
us, it is imperative that we be guided at all times by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Mozambique believes that peacebuilding and
sustaining peace should be based on the recognition of
the critical linkages among peace, security, development
and cooperation.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): As this is
the first meeting in May, I would like to congratulate
Switzerland for its very first presidency of the Security
Council, an event of historic significance. Rest assured
of our full cooperation. We welcome the choice of
subject for today’s debate, highlighting the need to
build trust and sustain peace. I thank Mr. Volker Türk,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Youth Ambassador for Peace for Southern Africa
and Ms. Olonisakin for their useful briefings.
(spoke in English)
I would not be able to continue without mentioning
that today is World Press Freedom Day. As we recall the
fundamental principle of press freedom and celebrate
the essential role that a free press plays in promoting
democracy, transparency and accountability, we
pay tribute to journalists who are often threatened,
harassed and attacked for their work. We also take this
opportunity to think of those hundreds of millions who
still live in countries in which the freedom of the press
remains a wish, repression is the rule and censorship
makes — or rather breaks — the news. For us, freedom
and peace go together.
The multitude complex challenges that are listed in
the concept note (S/2023/283, annex) have one thing in
common — cooperation, and if they persist, it is because
of a lack of cooperation or because the solutions provided
are insufficient. Cooperation requires goodwill and
genuine commitment. It requires trust. Trust is the
glue that holds people and societies together. It gives

S/PV.9315

institutions lasting legitimacy and helps individuals and
groups remain engaged in the long and arduous process
of building lasting peace. Its absence, as witnessed
so many times, can result in disruption, violence and
conflict. The recent tragic events in the Sudan show
where the breaking of trust can lead — to a catastrophe
that is tearing the country apart. The frustrating lack
of progress on the political track in Libya is the direct
result of the lack of trust among the main actors. As
mentioned, the lack of unity among stakeholders in
Haiti has left the country in the clutches of gangs.
But let us look closer to home, at ourselves, in the
Chamber. We know that the Security Council will not
be able to discharge its responsibilities successfully
without trust, working in good faith and continued
cooperation among its members. The Council succeeds
every time it comes together, united in purpose to
find adequate solutions to a multitude of crises. It
does not succeed when the Council, unfortunately,
is used as a stage for propaganda and the pursuit of
narrow interests, as we note is the case with regard to
a number of important outstanding issues, not least the
ongoing war of aggression in Ukraine. Equally, we will
not contribute to making the world a better place by
refusing to recognize in the Council the link between
climate change and security, denying that serious and
widespread violations of human rights lead to conflicts,
or shielding totalitarian regimes that oppress their
own citizens and undermine peace and security in the
neighbourhood and at large. The raison d’être of the
Council is to lead the battle for peace and security and
not be taken hostage to contemplate aggression and
drivers of instability in the world.
Wars and conf lict have played a significant role in
shaping world history. Humankind has paid a terrible
price. By learning from past mistakes and precisely
to escape the cycle of violence and anarchy, we have
developed institutionalized forms of cooperation
through the establishment of principles and the
practice of multilateralism. Since the establishment
of the Charter of the United Nations, we have laid
down shared norms and rules to foster trust and
enable ever-growing cooperation. That is how we
have collectively contributed to the advancement
of humankind — through scientific discoveries,
economic growth, the reduction of poverty, cultural
exchanges, peaceful negotiations and increased
cooperation, trade and other forms of interaction, with
respect for each other.

23-1252411/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Nothing can justify attempts to go back and break
that trust in the future because someone has remained
nostalgic for the past. Therefore, our ability to abide
by what we have commonly agreed, with respect for
international law and the United Nations Charter, by
holding transgressors to account, will determine the shape
of the world in the future — a world with cooperation
and understanding and with shared benefits, or a world
undermined by confrontation, division and conflicts. As
we know, the General Assembly has been repeatedly
clear about that choice. Trust is not an abstract idea. It
cannot be forced and cannot be artificially engineered.
Building trust in post-conflict settings and peacebuilding
processes requires continued effort and investment in
human capital, through inclusion and participation.
While we face a multitude of old and new
challenges and look to the future with worry, we
firmly believe that only good, inclusive, representative,
transparent and accountable governance will be up to
the task of addressing inequality, poverty, insecurity,
underdevelopment and climate change, by forging a
contract that is based on trust with the people and for
the people. When people are heard and understood,
they trust and participate. Experience has shown that
respect for human rights, democratic principles and
values, including the promotion of the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and young people in
society, is a better guarantee for futureproofing trust and
ensuring development and sustainable peace.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, let me remind the Council of the
crucial and irreplaceable role of civil society, which must
always have a place at the table, including in our debates
in the Chamber. Its views, often honest, may not be to
everyone’s taste. But there is no doubt that civil society
is indispensable if we are to seriously and honestly draw
closer to the truth and base our discussions on the real
concerns and aspirations of people in order to make
informed decisions.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Switzerland on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. We wish you
success in your first-ever presidency. We also thank the
briefers for their remarks.
As Ghana has often stated and as is widely shared,
the multilateral system remains the best platform for
advancing norms for peacebuilding and forging global
12/31

03/05/2023

solidarity for sustaining peace efforts. We therefore
welcome the focus of today’s debate, which provides us
with an opportunity to deepen discussions on how to
ring-fence trust and preserve space for national, regional
and multilateral efforts to advance peacebuilding and
sustain peace.
When we look at the state of peace around the world, it
is clear that we need to do more. We are living in an era with
the highest number of violent conflicts since the Second
World War. More than 2 billion people are estimated to
be living in conflict zones, and the threats and risks of
insecurity have never been greater than they are now. The
possibility of a nuclear conflict is higher; terrorism has
become pervasive; the effects of the pandemic persist;
climate change vulnerability has worsened the plight of
many; cyberthreats are undermining freedoms, societies
and democracies; and the migration crisis, as well as
food and energy insecurity, has degraded the human
security of many. Those threats have heightened the
complexities, buoyancy and density of global insecurity
and exposed gaps between our agreed norms and the
outcomes delivered. The credibility of our voice is
being marred by the inadequacy of our will for effective
actions, and those threats portend significant danger
ahead unless we make deliberate and concerted efforts
to address them. Against the backdrop of the remarks I
have just made, we would like to share five main points.
First, it is important to sustain the interrelated work
of the three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and development — if we are to
succeed with the peacebuilding and sustaining peace
agenda. It is pertinent to embrace a cross-sectoral
approach to enhance the coordination of efforts across
the pillars and the many organs and bodies in the
multilateral system. That can be done without hindering
the unique contributions that they are expected to make
in accordance with their mandates. As a Council we
need to leverage the strength of other bodies, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly, in deepening our
understanding of specific situations and informing how
our actions can better support the efforts to sustain peace
in those contexts. We also believe that the 2016 twin
resolutions — General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
resolution 2282 (2016), which broadened the concept of
peacebuilding to encompass post-conflict situations and
conflict prevention both in the first place and across the
conflict cycle — must be prioritized for implementation,
particularly at the national and regional levels.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Secondly, a candid recognition of the realities of
our time should reinforce our commitment to respecting
the Charter of the United Nations, including its purpose
of developing friendly relations among nations. That
should also underpin our efforts to embrace dialogue
and deliberate diplomatic action to build mutual trust
consistent with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations. Through such dialogue we can avoid
misunderstandings about strategic intentions while
misjudgments and unhealthy competition, especially
among major military Powers, can be prevented. We
believe that could consolidate the kind of trust required
for sustaining peace at the global level.
Thirdly, in strategically partnering with regional
arrangements under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council can tap into the
science- and data-driven approach to peacebuilding
through the early identification of patterns and drivers
of violence, thereby improving conflict prediction
and strengthening early-warning systems. That costeffective approach helps to improve the allocation of
peacebuilding resources, and we especially recommend
supporting national and regional early-warning systems
such as the 2002 Continental Early Warning System
of the African Union (AU) and the Early Warning and
Response Network of the Economic Community of West
African States.
Fourthly, it goes without saying that prioritizing
efforts to address the root causes of instability is the
surest way to sustain peace. We encourage further
investment in non-kinetic measures in tackling the
underlying causes of instability through the adoption
of a multidimensional approach that empowers critical
agents of change, such as women and young people,
in the processes of development, conflict prevention
and governance at all levels. Commitment to the
implementation of the agendas on youth, peace and
security and women and peace and security is a critical
enabler in amplifying their voices and harnessing their
contribution to that noble cause. It is equally important
to leave no one behind, by embracing at the national and
local level a culture of peace that among other things
broadens awareness-creation and the reinforcement of
traditional and new institutions that can pick up early
signals of conflict and address them. That should include
systems of laws and practices that guarantee the rights
and human security of all citizens.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace provides us with a great opportunity to increase
confidence and build trust towards peace. The promotion

S/PV.9315

of transparency around the use of armaments, as well
as compliance with rules of engagement and prioritizing
the use of diplomatic tools to address evolving threats,
are also useful elements to consider. Additionally,
proposing new ideas for boosting relationships such as
that between the United Nations and the AU, as well as
integrating gender perspectives into decision-making,
are all useful elements that can enhance confidence- and
trust-building in the New Agenda for Peace. We strongly
believe that the provision of adequate resources to the
Peacebuilding Fund should be a key component of the
New Agenda for Peace, since it translates into greater
investment in prevention and peacebuilding. In addition
to encouraging an expanded donor base to the Fund,
we believe that one of the viable means of providing it
with a consistent baseline of funding is through United
Nations-assessed contributions. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General’s aspiration for an annual
appropriation of $100 million to the Peacebuilding Fund
from 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that peacebuilding
and sustaining peace are possible and can be realized if
we adopt a multidimensional approach characterized by
ensuring inclusivity, as well as the strategic deployment
of the tools in the Charter, backed by data and science,
and by demonstrating strong political will in their
implementation.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
Ambassador Nebenzia and his team for their competent
and efficient leadership of the Security Council in April.
I would also like to welcome you, Mr. President, and
the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the presidency
this month, and to pledge our full support to assisting
you. Let me also welcome High Commissioner Türk,
Ms. Chigwenya and Ms. Olonisakin to today’s open
debate and thank them for their insightful briefings.
I am particularly grateful to your delegation,
Mr. President, for the attention you have given to
peacebuilding from the very outset of your presidency,
beginning with a request for the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on this debate on
a topic as important as trust. Our discussion today
provides another opportunity for further reflection
on peacebuilding and the collaboration between the
Council and the Commission. As I have underscored a
number of times, the exchanges between the two bodies
are very welcome and could in fact happen more often.
Furthermore, that cooperation is necessary — even
essential — in order to achieve sustainable peace in

23-1252413/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the face of the complexity of the challenges before us.
We must take the trust between the two bodies to a
higher level, because it rings somewhat hollow for us to
prescribe strengthening trust to the outside world when
we seem unable to strengthen trust between bodies within
the United Nations itself. One relevant example in that
sense is the issue of transitions. Despite the difficulties in
marking the precise moment when peacekeeping should
be evolved into peacebuilding, the PBC can and should
take primary responsibility in overseeing the process
of transition from conflict to development. That would
allow the Council to dedicate its attention and resources
to situations of effective threats to or actual breaches
of international peace and security and enable the PBC
to fulfil the role envisaged for it when it was created.
However, that collaboration can prosper only if the Council
regards the Commission as a full partner that it trusts
and values, working alongside it in a constructive way.
The Council’s endeavours to promote trust in
peacebuilding processes should also rely on close
cooperation and greater participation on the part of
subregional organizations. Their legitimacy, first-hand
knowledge and cultural understanding of the root causes
and contentious issues of conflicts are important assets
in setting conditions that are conducive to dialogue
and sustainable peace. Stronger partnerships with
international financial institutions are equally relevant
in the quest to mobilize resources. The Council must
support inclusivity in peacebuilding processes. We
believe that the participation in those endeavours of all
stakeholders, particularly local leadership and women, is
essential to their success. Exclusion and marginalization
undermine trust and lead to resentment, which can
jeopardize peace initiatives altogether.
We cannot be successful in building up trust without
taking into account the views and interests of all the
relevant parties. That should be a guiding principle in
the Council’s approach to conflict resolution and the
promotion of peace, including in its own deliberations,
during which different actors and points of views must
be heard and understood. Moreover, it lays a sound
foundation for a genuine dialogue that generates
sympathy, trust and eventually peace. President Filipe
Nyusi’s first-hand account of the peace process in
Mozambique, which we heard in March (see S/PV.9299),
was very eloquent in that regard.
My delegation believes that it is imperative to seize
this opportunity to also reflect on the issue of trust
within the Council. Divisions among Member States
have widened significantly, which has had a spillover
14/31

03/05/2023

effect on the whole agenda of the Council. The failure
of the Council to address pressing peace and security
issues leads to the erosion of trust among its members
and erodes its credibility. In that regard, efforts to
expand the tasks of the Council to areas already under
consideration in other forums does nothing to enhance
trust or bolster credibility. We believe that the best way to
rebuild such trust and render the Council more effective
is by improving its representativeness and transparency,
which can be achieved only through comprehensive
reform. That must be an essential element of the New
Agenda for Peace. Trust is also maintained when we
all play by the same agreed rules. The Charter of the
United Nations and international law remain the legal
basis for our action. It falls on each one of us to renew
our commitment to those principles and norms aimed at
promoting a trustworthy and balanced multipolar order.
Lastly, I would like to thank High Commissioner
Türk for highlighting the importance of respect for
human rights in strengthening trust. Let me underscore
that that must include not only civil and political rights
but also economic, social and cultural rights, both within
and among countries, if such trust is to be sustainable.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to begin by
congratulating Switzerland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and by wishing you, Sir, and
the Swiss team all the very best for a successful and
fruitful term. I also thank Ambassador Nebenzia and
his team for steering our work last month. I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate on
futureproofing trust for sustaining peace. And I thank
our briefers for sharing their experience and knowledge
with us today.
We find ourselves in times of increasing turmoil.
Millions of people live in conflict-affected countries
in situations in which the very foundational elements
necessary for trust, both within societies and among
citizens, their Governments and the international
community, are lacking. The Security Council must
increasingly strive to build and engender trust in the
United Nations, in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Respect
for human rights and international law are crucial
pillars for building trust between citizens and the
institutions that serve them. The promotion of normative
frameworks through good-faith negotiation efforts at
the level of various United Nations bodies, including
the Security Council, is essential. A comprehensive
vision for human rights that counters inequalities,
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

prioritizes sustainability and offers human security
must be reflected in the daily lives of individuals
if we are to reinvigorate trust in multilateralism.
Malta calls for further collaboration and cooperation
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
wider United Nations system in order to encourage a
whole-of-system approach to peacebuilding. Enhancing
synergies and the broadening of cooperation between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council will make our work more effective.
Ensuring inclusivity in peacebuilding processes is
also critical to foster trust. The Security Council has
called for ensuring the full, equal, meaningful and
effective participation of women at all stages and levels
of conflict prevention and resolution during peace
processes and the implementation of peace agreements.
That must be implemented and safeguarded. Inclusive
peacebuilding requires adequate financing that
recognizes the specific needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations, including with respect to
their health, education, livelihoods, access to land
and participation in decision-making. Mistrust is a
precursor to conflict. Communities around the world
are becoming increasingly divided by disruptive actors
that stand to gain from division and polarization.
We must address the rhetoric of hate, which often
precedes conflict. Malta underlines that investment
in early-warning systems that help identify the
elements fracturing stability and eroding trust within
fragile communities is critical. That is another area
in which the Council can strengthen cooperation with
the Peacebuilding Commission, increase the gender
responsiveness of peacekeeping operations and engage
more meaningfully with civil society organizations
and independent actors. Similarly, as climate-related
security risks are a reality for many communities,
particularly those in conflict, adaptation and mitigation
efforts could offer entry points for peacebuilding,
thereby helping to foster trust within the society.
It is our responsibility to empower communities
with the tools to identify dangerous rhetoric. Media
information literacy and digital literacy must also be
bolstered globally in order to enable citizens to discern
the truth of the information they are shown, especially
in the burgeoning age of artificial intelligence.
Information and communications technologies are
crucial tools for peacebuilders to mobilize, advocate,
monitor and report violations, raise funds and provide
services. Investing in information and communications

S/PV.9315

technologies, especially among refugees and internally
displaced persons in conflict-affected areas, can
improve protection and increase the diversity of
peacebuilding actors. However, it can also increase
the risks faced by human rights defenders. Genderresponsive legislation and regulation are needed to
explicitly address online hate speech, harassment
and abuse, especially against women human rights
defenders. The modern era continues to generate
increasingly complex challenges that the Council must
contend with if it is to remain relevant. In Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), the Secretary-General identifies
building trust and countering mistrust as our defining
challenge. If we are to achieve a real, sustainable and
lasting peace, we must strive to address that challenge
through a response that takes a human-rights approach
and is underpinned by consistency, equality and
reinvigorated multilateralism.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in congratulating Switzerland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and assure
you, Sir, of our full support. I would also like to thank
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Türk, Youth Ambassador Chigwenya and Professor
Olonisakin for their informative briefings.
It is fitting that the country of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau begin its Security Council presidency by
convening an event on the importance of trust and the
social contract. That Swiss philosopher’s belief that
people could experience true freedom only in a society
that ensured the rights and well-being of its citizens
still resonates more than two and a half centuries later.
And Rousseau’s veneration of Government under law
finds a natural home in this Chamber and the Charter of
the United Nations. Trust in national and international
institutions is central to their legitimacy and to the
fabric of society, as we heard today. Yet that trust in
both has been severely tested. We face complex and
interconnected challenges today to peace, security and
development. In order to overcome them, we have to
rebuild that trust.
Switzerland’s concept note (S/2023/283, annex)
should chime with us all — inclusion is key to building
peaceful societies; global normative frameworks
provide the guardrails for peaceful order; and facts, truth
and transparency are crucial for enabling trust. These
elements are at the heart of the sustaining peace agenda.
How can we build on that? I echo and underline
three themes that were mentioned today.

23-1252415/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

First, the Council and the United Nations system
can do more to anticipate risks and mobilize multilateral
assistance earlier. Harnessing new technologies will
revolutionize the way we understand conflict dynamics,
enabling us to get ahead of crises and mitigate human
suffering. We should nurture the trust and cooperation
necessary to realize that.
Secondly, we should use the full breadth of
peacebuilding tools for more integrated and coherent
responses. The Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Commission can support nationally led prevention
strategies and empower countries to build the trust and
partnerships needed to turbo-charge their peace and
development trajectories.
Thirdly, and critical to building trust and sustaining
peace, is our collective commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda. We need to translate our
commitments into action, strengthening women’s full
and meaningful inclusion in decision-making and in
peace and development processes.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with
all countries to advance nationally owned peace, security
and development objectives. Let us all work — here and
at home — to restore the truth and the trust needed to
realize those goals.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
join others in congratulating the Swiss delegation and
Government on assuming the presidency at a historic
occasion. My delegation looks forward to cooperating
closely in order to ensure that this is a productive month
for the Council. Let me also thank you, Sir, for chairing
this important debate. I also want to thank our briefers
for their thoughtful and very informative presentations.
I think it is clear from the interventions that have
gone before me that there is general agreement among all
of us that conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts are critical to responding to shared
security and development challenges around the world
if we are to reduce the recurrence of conflict. We in the
Security Council can contribute to sustaining peace — in
part, as many have said, through a more ambitious and
structured collaboration with the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The United States reiterates its strong support for
expanding the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
regional settings and on cross-cutting issues, including
human rights and climate-related peace and security
risks. That includes leveraging the Commission’s
16/31

03/05/2023

convening power, particularly in its advisory role to
the Security Council, in order to make peacebuilding
activities integrated, coordinated and responsive to
current dynamics.
As others before me have also emphasized, women,
youth, local actors, marginalized groups and broader
civil society must be actively engaged and sufficiently
empowered to have a meaningful impact on the
decision-making processes intended to achieve peace.
We have said this many times in the Council, but it bears
repeating. Peacebuilding efforts are more effective and
much more likely to achieve lasting, inclusive outcomes
for all of society when women are included. That means
the full, equal, meaningful and safe participation of
women in decision-making, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and sustaining-peace processes.
Youth in conflict settings also tend to be unheard,
even though they are often acutely impacted by
violence and have a right to voice their perspectives on
establishing peace and security in their communities.
Youth engagement serves to enrich conversations
around peace, particularly because they have a vested
interest in long-term peace.
That is why I was so pleased to hear from
Ms. Chigwenya this morning. Her message about
rebuilding the trust of young people across the world
and institutions, especially in the United Nations and in
the Council’s work, makes clear that this is an important
task for all of us.
This moment is particularly ripe for big and some
out-of-the-box thinking, and a New Agenda for Peace
has the opportunity to respond. The New Agenda
for Peace should offer a range of proposals to tackle
these challenges. Some of them, like a focus on youth,
gender, climate adaptation and resilience, conflict
prevention and the intersections among all these issues,
will — hopefully — be quickly and broadly embraced.
For our part, the United States strategy to prevent
conflict and promote stability comprises a new
whole-of-Government approach, with partner nations,
to prevent violence and advance stability in areas that
are vulnerable to conflict. Our strategy aims to address
the drivers of instability and conflict, with a longer-term
view, through partnerships, at all levels, and adaptive
learning to inform decision-making as the dynamics
change. The 10-year country and region plans, under
the United States strategy, represent a meaningful
long-term commitment by the United States to making
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

strategic investments in prevention that are critical to
lasting peace. As President Biden has said, prevention
is hard work, measured not in days and weeks, but in
years and generations. I thank you again, Mr. President,
for bringing us together on this topic.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
take this opportunity to welcome and wish Switzerland
every success in assuming the presidency of the
Security Council, and thank it for convening this
debate on long-term trust in sustaining peace. I thank
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations and
the Peacebuilding Commission for its written advice.
Trust can be sustainable only if the implementation
of solutions proves to be effective. Moreover, for
solutions to be effective, national ownership is central
to identifying the root causes of conflict. Trust-building
among multiple stakeholders is indispensable if we are
to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and
recurrence of conflicts.
A social fabric weakened by deficiencies and mistrust
is more prone to violence. Dialogue is indispensable.
Once established, it must be accompanied by concerted
efforts to strengthen the rule of law and accountability,
eradicate and reduce poverty and inequalities and
promote inclusive societies, within the framework of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In post-conflict contexts, sustainable peace has its
foundations in the process of reconciliation, which is
achieved through transitional justice and reparations to
victims, as well as the demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants. These actions pave the way for a
culture of peace and trust to take hold and endure.
With the twin resolutions of 2020 (General
Assembly resolution 75/201 and resolution 2558
(2020)), the General Assembly and the Security
Council recognized that progress towards achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development required
integrating peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Accordingly, the Security Council has a responsibility
to equip peace missions with the tools needed to
continue strengthening long-term actions to leave no
one behind.
It is necessary to continue deepening the synergies
around peace missions at the earliest possible stage of
integrated planning and coordination of transitions with
all actors on the ground. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the progress made in the use of and access

S/PV.9315

to information systems and accurate data that make it
possible to assess risks and prevent conflicts or their
recurrence. Information is important when it comes
to preventing humanitarian crises, particularly those
related to displacement caused by conflicts or natural
disasters. We highlight the work carried out by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which, since 1951, has kept statistics on
forced displacement. These key data allow efforts to be
focused on a given region, facilitating decision-making
and response measures to provide timely humanitarian
assistance.
The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all spheres, as well as the leadership
role of women in peacebuilding efforts, are essential
measures for ensuring peaceful societies. The Security
Council and the United Nations system must implement
resolution 1325 (2000), particularly by including
women in the mechanisms and processes of negotiating
and implementing peace agreements.
What better way to ensure lasting tools for the
future than by strengthening intergenerational trust?
Young people have creative and adaptable tools whose
effectiveness, based on trust and solidarity, can last
for decades. That is why we must facilitate youth
participation in conflict prevention and resolution
and at all levels of decision-making, in line with
resolution 2419 (2018).
Trust among nations is a crucial element in
building peace. It is the result of a series of conditions
that must be cultivated within the Member States, that
is, by their societies and their leaders. The search for
the foundations for lasting peace has been a longstanding concern.
In this context, I wish to recall the contribution
made by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant in his
1795 essay entitled “Perpetual Peace”. This reference
may sound utopian, but many of his reflections are
extremely topical. In this work, Kant observes that
there are several conditions that would enable the
maintenance of peace among nations, one of which is
that the ideal form of government is republican — what
is known today as constitutional democracy. The
reason for this is that nations that maintain democratic
governments are generally less likely to resort to
violence in their international relations than those that
do not. It is an observation that has had a great influence
on the debate in international relations on peace and

23-1252417/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

security. How a government treats its citizens is a good
indication of how it treats other nations. The trust that
governments manage to engender among their citizens
is reflected in the trust they manage to engender on
the international stage. Indeed, the Council must not
overlook the strong relationship between Member
States’ systems of government and international peace
and security, in other words, the relationship that exists
between democracy and international law.
It is no coincidence that the philosopher Kant wrote
his famous essay on perpetual peace to which we have
referred today, at a time of great turbulence, when great
Powers were crushing weak nations into submission and
enslavement. Nor is it a coincidence that my delegation
has brought these reflections up today, at a time when
we are specifically discussing peace and security and
trust. The New Agenda for Peace must take into account
the lessons learned and the importance of taking this
relationship on board as the basis for peacebuilding.
Funds, including the Peacebuilding Fund, have
a catalytic role to play. They increase investment, in
particular official development assistance. Providing
greater predictability to peacebuilding funding is
therefore an important axis for ensuring that financial
flows do not stop.
Finally, the Security Council must intensify
its efforts to rebuild and strengthen trust among its
members, lead by example and thereby ensure the
protection and preservation of that most precious
asset, peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I congratulate Switzerland on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I thank
the Russian Federation for its work in the presidency
of the Council last month. China welcomes today’s
meeting presided over by Foreign Minister Ignazio
Cassis. I wish to thank High Commissioner Volker
Türk for his briefing just now. I also listened carefully
to the briefings made by the other briefers.
I thank Switzerland for its initiative to
focus the debate on the highly relevant theme of
building trust. In the Foreign Minister’s statement
just now, we see his deep thinking on the issue.
Trust is like air, whose presence is easily taken for
granted but whose absence is life-threatening. Be it
between people or among countries, peace and cooperation
will never be possible without basic mutual trust. Without
18/31

03/05/2023

trust and the rules and order built thereupon, humanity
will once again be subject to the law of the jungle. The
world is now beset with a serious trust crisis. Behind the
various complex issues is a series of intersecting and
deteriorating deficits in development, peace, security and
governance, as well as a long-standing deficit in trust.
Nothing undermines the political trust between
countries more easily than blowing hot and cold or
breaking promises in international relations, playing
around with and not respecting the agreements they
have signed and woefully going back on and hollowing
out the political commitments they have made. Nothing
damages mutual trust in the area of security more
easily than forming exclusive military blocs, stirring
up regional tensions and seeking absolute security for
oneself at the expense of the security of other countries.
Nothing defeats economic mutual trust more easily than
engaging in decoupling, building high walls around
small yards, distorting market rules to seek technological
monopoly and suppressing the development and progress
of other countries. Nothing causes a loss of trust in the
international system more easily than disregarding
the authority of the Charter of the United Nations,
applying double standards and selectively applying
international law.
Reflective of those behaviours are the self-important
and imperious mindsets of those who seek hegemony,
the sour grapes syndrome of those who cannot bear to be
outperformed, the arrogance of those who deal with other
countries “from a position of strength” and the pursuit of
narrow self-interests. Such behaviours and mentality run
counter to the efforts to deepen mutual trust, build lasting
peace and advance global development and progress.
Trust and peace are closely linked with each
other. That applies to relations between countries and
relations within each country. For post-conflict countries
whose internal trust is fragile, inappropriate external
interference would only add insult to injury.
Some external forces use the pretext of human
rights and other issues to interfere in the internal
affairs of other countries, impose their own systems
and ideologies on others, pit factions against each
other within the countries concerned, orchestrate
the escalation of local tensions and create social
division and conflicts, as a result of which the gains of
peacebuilding are lost. The lessons for the international
community, including the Security Council, in that
regard are numerous, and all should learn from them.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We should recognize that, in the world we live
in today, countries are more interconnected and
interdependent than ever before and thus need to join
hands globally to meet the challenges we face. We should
firmly anchor our belief in the concept of a community
with a shared future for humankind, practice genuine
multilateralism, deepen mutual trust and promote and
build global partnerships. Major countries should take
the lead in standing up for integrity, cooperation and the
rule of law; uphold mutual trust, peaceful coexistence
and win-win cooperation; pursue broad-based
consultations and lead by example in building a solid
foundation of trust for the international community to
create the conditions for lasting peace.
We should recognize that building broad-based
and solid trust is key to lasting peace and security in
post-conflict countries. The international community
should respect the development paths and systems
independently chosen by the peoples of all countries,
pursue the political settlement of differences and
disputes, advocate cooperation and dialogue, refrain
from imposing solutions or indiscriminately applying
unilateral coercive measures and help consolidate
mutual trust in the countries concerned instead of
creating chaos.
The United Nations should better leverage
its mediation, good offices and the peacebuilding
mechanism. Peacebuilding efforts should focus on helping
countries concerned to build a system of social trust.
We should recognize that sustainable development
is the foundation of lasting peace and a firm safeguard
for the promotion and the protection of human
rights. All countries should pursue a people-centred
approach to development that benefits everyone. The
international community and the United Nations should
sharpen their focus on and increase investment in
development and help developing countries overcome
current economic difficulties, in particular financing
bottlenecks. International financial institutions, with
their serious moral deficit, face the risk of a gradual
loss of global trust.
We should act immediately on the appeal of SecretaryGeneral Guterres by promoting the building of a more
open, fair and inclusive multilateral financial system
that can better benefit people of developing countries.
We should also recognize that the rapid development
of information technology and the extensive
application of new media and social platforms have

S/PV.9315

also created negative repercussions for trust among
peoples and among countries. One country uses its
own technological edge to build extensive matrix-like
hacking networks and conduct surveillance on and
steal secrets from other countries, including its allies
and heads of international organizations. Those actions
seriously undermine international mutual trust and
poison the international atmosphere.
Emerging technologies have both pros and cons.
The key is to maximize the positive impacts while
minimizing the negative ones. We maintain that
technology companies and online platforms should
uphold the concept of science and technology for
good, enhance self-discipline, spread positive vibes
and take effective measures to combat disinformation.
Governments should regulate and supervise them, in
accordance with the law, to defend public interests.
The United Nations should play a coordinating role by
building a multi-stakeholder platform and facilitating
an intergovernmental process to develop and improve
universally accepted rules and norms.
The Chinese people always keeps their promises.
Chinese diplomacy always honours its commitments
and promotes amity. Under the United Nations flag, we
stand ready to deepen mutual trust with other countries,
pursue friendly cooperation, promote the building
of a community with a shared future for humankind,
advanced common development and safeguard common
security for a common future.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
Switzerland on its historic presidency of the Security
Council and on the initiative of holding this important
debate on strengthening trust to ensure sustainable
peace. I thank the briefers who introduced the debate,
High Commissioner Volker Türk, Ms. Cynthia
Chingwenya and Ms. ‘Funmi Olonisakin, for their
enlightening briefings.
Since the end of the Second World War, very few
structures built by humankind have led to as much hope
as the United Nations. Despite the imperfections that
are inherent in any human endeavour, it is difficult
to imagine the state of the world without the United
Nations. The ambition, enshrined in the Preamble
of the Charter of the United Nations, to prevent war
and promote lasting peace is an admirable goal that
inspires trust, which must be constantly reinforced.
It is obvious that we can indeed have the trust to free
ourselves from the cycle of crises — solidarity crises,

23-1252419/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

security crises, humanitarian crises, health crises and
identity crises — that dims aspirations and hampers the
prospects of peace between and within nations.
The debate to which you, Mr. President, have invited
us today has the merit of encouraging a renewed ownership
of the goals of the Charter of the United Nations and
promoting a reconciliation between our Organization
and the aspirations of the peoples of the world.
For peace to be sustainable, we must reconfigure
the social contract among nations independent of
their size or stature, with the peoples of the world, in
all their diversity, at the centre, and with the clear
understanding that all peoples count and every life
counts. Brutal force or power without morals must and
cannot be the determining factor in the international
community’s coexistence. Above all, we must recast
our identity as peoples of the world, as truly united
nations, not competing poles of influence. If we do not,
we run the risk of continuing to inevitably dig trenches
for battlefields where the lifeless bodies of our young
people will continue to fall, at the mercy of birds of prey.
The crucial confidence that we need to achieve lasting
peace demands a genuine structural transformation of
our Organization’s peace and security architecture and
the adaptation of our peace and security mechanisms to
a global context of ever-changing crises and conflicts.
While it is clear that the efforts of the United Nations are
extraordinary, we are compelled to realize that the everincreasing and unrelenting threats to international peace
and security often take on new forms, which at times
fuel feelings of frustration with our collective will and
our international institutions and mechanisms.
Gabon will continue to affirm that prevention is a
critical tool that should be central to our actions if we want
consolidated and lasting peace. So far our prevention
efforts have been slow, ill-adapted and underfunded. In
fact, the inadequacy of the resources allocated to our
Organization’s prevention and peacebuilding efforts has
greatly contributed either to a resurgence of crises in
transition periods or to the emergence of new conflicts.
In that regard, it is clear that the most important
weapons for peace are, first, supporting United Nations
prevention and peacebuilding mechanisms with adequate
and predictable funding; secondly, strengthening
the synergy between the United Nations pillars of
sustainable development and peace and security and
thirdly, addressing the root causes of conflict, including
inequality, poverty and youth unemployment.
20/31

03/05/2023

Conflicts destroy trust. They undermine
sustainable development and, conversely, an absence of
development can and often does lead to serious social
crises that can create unrest in a country or an entire
region. Financial, material and technological support
for the implementation of sustainable development
programmes is a genuine imperative for sustaining
peace, especially in developing countries in general and
African countries in particular. Adequate funding for
Africa’s Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year implementation
plan, as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals,
must be viewed as a necessity for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. Taking effective account of new
challenges in this process of restructuring the United
Nations peace architecture should strengthen it and
enable a more comprehensive approach. The effects
of climate change and environmental degradation,
combined with population growth, considerably reduce
the access of the majority to existing resources and are
a particular source of instability in a number of regions.
Within the United Nations system, the architecture
for building and sustaining peace must be more
inclusive. Needless to say, it is a recognized fact that
exclusion and marginalization are dangerous enemies
of trust. Africa must find its rightful place as a fullfledged player on the international scene and not
simply as a geopolitical issue for the powers that be.
Our approach to peace must be integrated and coherent
in order to advance the sustaining peace agenda and
counteract today’s drivers of conflict and insecurity.
That means strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
have the advantage of being the most concerned and
the best placed to take action. Above all, they are
more familiar with the environment and the volatile
complexity of issues on the ground. Concerted action
and the implementation of common strategies in crisis
situations are essential if the action is to be effective
and produce the hoped-for results.
The clear linkages between peace, security and
development have been duly acknowledged. It is a fact
that many countries dealing with armed conflict are
also facing obstacles to their sustainable development,
because their institutional and governance capacities are
easily overwhelmed. Conversely, countries struggling
with persistent underdevelopment face challenges in
providing security and remain prone to tears in their
social fabric, while negative forces such as terrorism,
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

violent extremism, intercommunal violence and
organized crime thrive easily in that environment. The
emergence of new risk factors, such as pandemics and
the ever-increasing threat of climate change, add further
complexity to that difficult security environment.
Those overlapping and interconnected challenges can
be effectively addressed only with comprehensive and
coherent strategies.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, but to fulfil
its mandate more effectively, it must work closely with
other organs and agencies of the United Nations system
in order to address the root causes of conflict in a
holistic and systematic manner. Given the increasing
interdependence of the various fragmented parts of the
international community, and the changing linkages
connecting the political, socioeconomic, health and
environmental contexts, it is unreasonable to expect
that the challenges of peace, security and development
can be addressed in a sustainable manner in isolation
from one another. If we are to deal with that, we must
renew our confidence in the United Nations so that it
remains at the centre of the process of safeguarding
the fundamental principles of international law while
promoting peace, security and development for all. For
its part, the Council must find answers to the security
implications of today’s factors driving conflict and
insecurity. That must lead us to further engage the entire
multilateral system in addressing our multifaceted
challenges. In that crucial task, we must be able to
revisit the tools of our collective security system and
consider the prospects for closer collaboration with
the United Nations development system to ensure that
the Sustainable Development Goals remain within the
reach of fragile States coping with cyclical crises.

S/PV.9315

At a time when there is an obvious deep-seated
divide between the positions of Member States and joint
efforts are required to overcome the crisis and create
a renewed, more sustainable international security
architecture, the trust deficit and lack of a unifying
agenda become particularly relevant. Speaking of trust,
I feel compelled to mention the treacherous actions
of our former Western partners, who over the past 15
to 20 years have managed to consistently destroy the
green shoots of mutual understanding and cooperation
that emerged after the end of the Cold War. I refer to
the broken promises concerning NATO’s eastward
non-expansion, the promotion of the so-called colour
revolutions and the attempt to impose a so-called rulesbased order instead of international law and respect for
the Charter of the United Nations. As a result of their
efforts, today we live in a world in which truth means
nothing and misanthropic and utterly false attitudes
are imposed through the collective Western-controlled
media, through which white is passed off as black and
vice versa.

In any case, I will conclude with this point. The
Security Council must be able to strengthen its
integrated approach along the entire peace, security,
humanitarian and development path in order to promote
people-centred solutions.

I refer above all to the situation in Ukraine, a
country whose role, as a result of the efforts of the
United States and its allies, has been relegated to that
of a bargaining chip in the geopolitical confrontation
between Russia and the West. It is for that purpose that
over the past eight years they have installed on our
borders a Russophobic neo-Nazi dictatorship, declaring
war on everything Russian and everything that once
objectively connected us. The situation has come to
the point that NATO now wages a proxy war against
Russia, raising the spectre of the most devastating
consequences for all of humankind. How can there be
any talk about trust in such circumstances? It is also
clear that the actions of the West have a direct impact on
the potential for cooperation among the leading world
players in the context of resolving regional crises. For
Western countries, which project that on a competition
with Russia and China, this is a zero-sum game, and we
categorically disagree with such an approach.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome you to today’s meeting,
Mr. President, and congratulate Switzerland on its
leadership of the Security Council. A country’s maiden
presidency of the Council is indeed a historic event,
and we wish Switzerland every success. We thank
Mr. Volker Türk, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Chigwenya and Ms. Olonisakin
for their briefings.

That state of international affairs undoubtedly
affects the work of the Security Council and other
international platforms. As such, we see deep-seated
disagreements on a large number of issues discussed
in the General Assembly. All of that seriously tests the
resilience of the United Nations system and affects its
capacity to effectively carry out its core mandate of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping. One clear sign
of that situation is the crisis in the implementation

23-1252421/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of existing agreements and deals and the resolutions
of the principal United Nations organs. When those
instruments no longer serve the interests of Western
States, their non-compliance with them is dissimulated
and they are declared irrelevant or simply rejected. The
crisis of trust also directly affects mediation efforts.
That trend is most glaring in the case of the Minsk
agreements on Ukraine and Germany and France’s role
in concluding them. Not only have Paris and Berlin
failed to get Kyiv to implement the Minsk agreements
but they also subsequently admitted that the purpose of
signing them was to give the Ukrainian regime time to
prepare for war.
Unfortunately, those trends are not limited to
individual States but are also reflected in the work of
the entire United Nations. Recently, we have seen an
erosion of trust in the United Nations — an Organization
that is supposed to represent the interests of all Member
States and to be a model of impartiality and integrity,
whose staff are obliged to act in strict compliance with
Article 100 of the Charter. We see that erosion not only
on the political track — and even more so on the human
rights track — but also on the ground, in the countries
in which United Nations missions are deployed, at
the very level at which agreed political decisions are
implemented. The increasing disinformation and
misinformation concerning the United Nations is
a problem that deserves special attention and has
recently been actively discussed in various forums of
our Organization. In our view, that problem requires
a comprehensive approach, since negative comments
about the United Nations are not always attempts to
tarnish its reputation. Some of those criticisms reflect
the frustrations of host States and their populations and
should not be ignored. On the contrary, United Nations
peacekeeping missions need to respond by clarifying
their mandates, reaching out more to ordinary people via
media outlets and implementing a range of local quickimpact projects. That could help to build constructive
engagement and trust with the host country, thereby
strengthening the credibility of the United Nations.
Inclusivity and taking into account the views of all
actors are elements of trusting relationships, both at
the international and country levels, especially where
conflicts rage. The domestic crises of countries cannot
be resolved without taking into account the interests
of all the groups in their populations. That process
is complex, painstaking, often long-term and, most
important of all, must be nationally led. There is no
22/31

03/05/2023

one-size-fits-all solution; we need to seek out unique
recipes based on the specific social, ethnic, cultural,
civilizational and historical characteristics of each
given society. Only the Governments of States can
ensure such a sustainable social contract. The role of
the international community is to provide appropriate
political support, share experience and provide
humanitarian and economic assistance. All of that must
be done with full respect for the sovereignty of the
host State. Interference in the internal affairs of States
has never led to sustainable results. Moreover, such
interference may not only become an insurmountable
obstacle to trust between the main actors but might also
lead to the dissolution of States.
That brings me to another important manifestation
of that crisis of trust, which is the dilution of the role of
national Governments in representing the interests of
their own populations. Frequently, we have seen that the
information provided by the authorities of a number of
countries is questioned almost by default. It supposedly
needs to be confirmed by the opposition, civil society
or other bodies. At the same time, data obtained from
certain kinds of non-governmental organizations is
accepted without question. Moreover, the more a given
Government’s seeks to chart an independent course,
and thereby invokes the resentment of former colonial
Powers or the self-proclaimed world’s policeman, the
more that approach is seen.
In the Security Council we hear from dozens
of different representatives from within and outside
the United Nations system in order to get as much
information as possible. But it is important to understand
that no amount of testimonies from representatives of
non-governmental organizations can substitute the data
provided by Governments; to argue otherwise would be
to attack the inter-State nature of the United Nations.
We are convinced that regional integration bodies,
which know at first hand the problems of their member
States, can play a constructive role in supporting the
efforts of States to ensure the well-being and security
of their citizens. In particular, we note the efforts of
the African Union and the countries of that continent
to build an inclusive and diverse African society that
remains united in its common history and culture.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the only
way to build confidence is through equitable dialogue
and a willingness and readiness to listen and to hear,
as well as to consider each other’s positions and
interests in good faith, understanding that the security
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of one cannot be strengthened at the expense of the
other. It is also important to return to the culture of
consensus-building, which in recent times has been
seriously undermined. We outlined that position in our
contribution to the Secretary-General’s New Agenda
for Peace and hope that our approaches will be reflected
in it.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): Allow me to join my colleagues in
congratulating Switzerland on its historic assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and wishing
it every success. It goes without saying Mr. President,
that you can count on France’s full support in that
regard. I thank the briefers for their very informative
presentations. My thanks also go to you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate on a key condition
for ensuring lasting peace: trust. I would like to
highlight three points.
First, it is primarily up to Member States to
build trust by upholding commitments and inclusive
institutions and processes. Respecting international
law, refraining from the use of force and ensuring
the peaceful settlement of disputes are the necessary
conditions for trust and cooperation among States.
Violations of those principles — Russia’s current
war of aggression in Ukraine particularly comes to
mind right now — undermine the international order
based on agreed rules. Respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and effective multilateralism must be
our collective goals, and international law must be
respected everywhere. That is why France consistently
defends its application in the context of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and calls for the restoration of a
political horizon, which is the only way to restore
the trust between the parties needed to enable the
implementation of a two-State solution. It is also up to
States to strengthen confidence in their own institutions,
and that is predicated on respect for human rights and
the rule of law, the fight against corruption and good
governance. Justice and the fight against impunity are
also prerequisites for lasting peace.
Freedom of expression and opinion and freedom
of the press contribute to fighting misinformation,
restoring confidence in the facts, which are so vital,
and preventing incitements to violence. Stakeholders
must ensure women’s participation in political and
peace processes. I am thinking in particular about
Afghanistan, whose recovery will never come without
the participation of half of its population. In the Sudan,

S/PV.9315

when the time comes, all political forces must engage
in a peaceful and inclusive process. The commitment
of young people is also fundamental, and in that regard
I sincerely welcome the participation of Cynthia
Chigwenya, Youth Ambassador for Peace for Southern
Africa, in this meeting.
The United Nations must forge ahead to create
the necessary conditions for lasting peace. Conflict
prevention, which has been mentioned often this
morning, must be a cross-cutting priority for the
Organization, as exemplified by the successes of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia. The Peacebuilding
Commission must continue to build confidence through
its partnerships and operational approach with all
States concerned. The United Nations must help restore
trust where it has been lost. The Secretary-General and
his Envoys and Special Representatives should do their
work as directly as possible on the ground through their
good offices. It is also up to peacekeeping operations to
support confidence-building measures. I am thinking of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should
continue to support the Contact and Coordination
Group for non-military measures in the Great Lakes
region. I am thinking of Cyprus, where the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus must encourage
the establishment of confidence-building measures to
shore up trust between the communities. Trust also
depends on the follow-up and effective implementation
of commitments. Special political missions have
their role to play, especially with regard to verifying
compliance with commitments and agreements. I am
thinking of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, which should monitor the consolidation
of the ongoing ceasefire among several armed groups
when the time comes.
Lastly, trust must be based on reliable and
predictable partnerships. The European Union and
its member States stand ready to respond to crises.
Altogether we have deployed more than 5,000
personnel to peacekeeping operations. In the Middle
East, for example, the European Union and its member
States have provided €27 billion in humanitarian
aid to the most vulnerable Syrians in Syria and the
entire region since 2011. Lasting peace must also
be built on trust in our partners. I am thinking in
particular of the solutions that have been promoted
by the African Union. That is why France supports

23-1252423/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Prime Minister of North Macedonia.

recognition of North Macedonia as an independent
and sovereign State. During the wars in our immediate
neighbourhood, we had our own national agenda for peace,
which necessarily implied ensuring internal consensus
but also close cooperation with the United Nations,
as well as with regional organizations, primarily the
States of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union. That was how the
necessary conditions were created for the success of
UNPREDEP. We prevented a spillover of the conflict
and peace and stability were preserved, saving countless
lives and preventing unnecessary destruction. It was also
very important that trust was created, while a culture of
dialogue was slowly but surely developing as the only
way to overcome even the most serious challenges.

Mr. Kovachevski (North Macedonia) (spoke in
Macedonian; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): I would like to congratulate Switzerland on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
first time, and I welcome your call, Sir, to emphasize
the importance of issues related to peacebuilding.
Today’s debate reaffirms the traditional and flawless
commitment of the Swiss Confederation to the noble
cause of peace, the peaceful resolution of conflicts
and international law. I am especially pleased to be the
first Prime Minister of North Macedonia to address
the Security Council and to have an opportunity to
participate in this discussion today.

It is through that culture of open dialogue that 30
years later, North Macedonia has become an exemplary
country in terms of resolving outstanding issues both
at home and with its neighbours. We have tackled an
abundance of difficult decisions that had to be made
over those 30 years. We made difficult but imaginative
and courageous choices that have enabled us to become
a NATO member and begin negotiations with the
European Union with a protected and acknowledged
Macedonian language, identity and culture. From a
country that 30 years ago was hosting peacekeeping
missions, we have become a source of stability and
ourselves host international negotiations.

I believe that our current attitudes should be
based on past successes in which the United Nations
and the multilateral system have demonstrated their
effectiveness. As we have a moral obligation to
contribute to the New Agenda for Peace today, we
cannot help but reflect on the experiences of the
previous Agenda for Peace, in 1992, as well as the
beginning of the long-standing first and only preventive
United Nations mission to our country of 30 years
ago — the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force (UNPREDEP) — which was widely regarded as
a successful preventive action.

It is crucial to strengthen trust in our institutions,
the United Nations and justice. In our actions, we
should be guided, above all, by the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, solidarity and the importance of active and
permanent engagement wherever it is needed to reduce
suffering. In that regard, the accomplishment of the
Sustainable Development Goals is fully complementary
to the insistence on securing a more peaceful, stable
and just world for all. Unfortunately, today we are quite
far from realizing that vision. The ongoing Russian
military aggression against Ukraine has changed global
relations to such an extent that there is an urgent need
to reaffirm the legal framework of reference adopted
by our founders, whose clear intention was to avoid
the horrors of war. This time, as many times before,
the Republic of North Macedonia firmly stood on the
right side of history, on the side of the democratic and
free world, on the side of the right of every country to
self-determination. Today all of us together must again
stand on the side of peace and recommit ourselves to
respect the Charter of the United Nations.

the operationalization of the African Union Peace
Fund and the ramping up of African peacekeeping
operations. And we stand ready to resume discussions
on that vital topic in the Security Council.
Confidence-building must be at the heart of our
work on the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace. In that regard, France has submitted 20 proposals
to strengthen the authority of the collective security
system and update its response by rethinking the role of
the United Nations in guaranteeing international peace
and security. Together we can build and reinforce the
paths leading to lasting peace.

The foundation for peace is strengthened by
cooperation and prevention, and we, the Governments of
the States Members of the United Nations, are responsible
for that. That has been said many times, and in our case
it has been proven in practice. During the difficult years
of war in the former Yugoslavia, our first President,
Kiro Gligorov, showed his wisdom in demonstrating his
responsibility and commitment to peace, enabling us to
peacefully achieve our independence and international
24/31

23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As an equal part of a federation that was among the
founders of the United Nations, but also as a country
that 30 years ago acquired its own independent place
in the Organization, the Republic of North Macedonia
raises its voice and shares its concern regarding a crisis
that is weighing on the United Nations, as well as the
international legal order, world peace and stability.
Aware of the growing risks, we must use the
Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace as an
opportunity to create conditions for united action.
Tomorrow will ask us what have we did today, just as
today we wonder why we did nothing yesterday. We
need peace now and immediately.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Lührmann (Germany): I would like to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
debate on how to build trust to foster sustainable peace.
I would also like to thank the briefers for their valuable
analysis and recommendations.
People around the world put trust in the United
Nations. They see us as a beacon of hope. Particularly
in times of darkness, it is the United Nations and its
agencies that remain on the ground, providing food and
shelter when it is most needed and fostering trust when
hatred prevails. Trust is vital for building and sustaining
peace, not only in conflict-affected countries, but also
within the multilateral system.
To foster trust within the multilateral system, all
States Members of the United Nations must adhere to
the Organization’s principles. We need to agree on a
coherent and value-based framework for our joint,
multilateral efforts to build and sustain peace worldwide.
The Council has a particular responsibility to build and
sustain peace based on agreed core principles.
I will focus on two main points — trust as a core
element for successful peacebuilding and concrete
steps to strengthen trust in our common efforts towards
building and sustaining peace.
First, in your statement, Sir, you rightfully
identified trust as a central element and prerequisite for
successful peacebuilding efforts. At the United Nations
level, that implies adherence to the jointly developed
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda, as
formulated in the 2016 twin resolutions of the General
Assembly and Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/262). Both the

S/PV.9315

General Assembly and the Council adopted this agenda
by consensus. It should therefore continue to serve as
the main framework for United Nations peacebuilding.
The agenda is clear about the interlinkage between
security, development and human rights. It is also clear
about the importance of prevention, by specifying that
sustaining peace:
“encompasses activities aimed at preventing the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflict (and) addressing root causes” (resolution
2282 (2016), eighth preambular paragraph)
In that context, we are glad to see that the
Peacebuilding Commission’s written advice to this
debate contains a clear reference to the importance of
prevention, referencing the rule of law, transitional justice,
accountability, democracy, gender equality and respect
for, and protection of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms as key aspects for sustaining peace.
At national and local levels, trust and prevention
necessitate broad inclusion and participation. To be
successful, peacebuilding efforts should recognize the
positive force of diversity. They need to address the
causes and consequences of conflict and also respond to
the needs of diverse communities.
Peacebuilding efforts have to respect the dignity of
all people and groups. For instance, in Mozambique, as
recently discussed in the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, the peace process has ultimately been
successful thanks to its inclusive nature and the
recognition of the country’s diversity.
In acknowledgement of the particularly important
role of women, children and marginalized groups in
peacebuilding, Germany advocates their systematic
inclusion. Our recently published guidelines on feminist
foreign policy offer an orientation in that respect. It is a
proven fact that the inclusion of women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding has contributed to more peaceful
post-conflict societies.
Together with other Member States present today,
Germany supports the Principles for Peace initiative,
which advocates the establishment of a shared
frame of reference and common standards among
peacebuilding actors.
Secondly, let me now outline concrete steps to foster
trust in our joint efforts towards building and sustaining
peace. Following up on recent open debates in the

23-1252425/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Council and ongoing discussions in the Peacebuilding
Commission, the entities should collaborate further in
order to better address existing challenges.
To overcome those challenges, we need full
political ownership for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace from all Member States. An agreement on the
introduction of assessed contributions for the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund would underline that joint
political ownership.
As current Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and main voluntary contributor to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, Germany will
remain committed to promoting the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda.

03/05/2023

The world today is ushering in a new era of turmoil,
with new conflict hotspots that are threatening peace
and development, particularly with food shortages,
spikes in energy prices and growing poverty as a result
of consecutive economic crises. These all push us to
shoulder our responsibility to attempt to find practical
solutions that lead to building sustainable peace.
Building trust is the best way to futureproof a culture
of trust for sustainable peace to overcome the complex
and intertwined turmoil accompanied by various longterm causes and effects.
We would therefore like to highlight several points
that could constitute a general framework to futureproof
trust for sustaining peace.

In order to advance and deliver on the prevention
aspects of the peacebuilding and sustaining peace
agenda, data-based early warning and anticipatory
action, including climate adaptation, play a key role.
For that reason, Germany supports several projects,
such as the Organization’s Complex Risk Analytics
Fund and the African Union’s early-warning and
climate-mitigation initiatives.

First, we stress the importance of promoting links
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
That will contribute to tackling the root causes of
armed conflict and strengthening peace, security and
development, especially in Africa. Under the leadership
of its President, Egypt attaches great importance to
this issue, especially with regard to the post-conflict
reconstruction and development dossier in Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace offers
a great opportunity to develop and agree on ways to
strengthen trust in our joint efforts towards sustaining
peace. Together with Namibia, as Co-Facilitators of
the Summit of the Future, we stand ready to actively
support and engage in discussions to identify a
common approach.

Second, the importance of continuing to pay
attention to African issues and try to stave off conflicts.
We must strive to prevent the current global geopolitical
situation from leading to less attention being paid to
African issues.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate Mr. Ignazio Cassis, Federal Councillor
and Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
of Switzerland, and the delegation of Switzerland on
your presidency of the Security Council. We thank you
for organizing this critical debate.
We agree with all the previous speakers that building
and sustaining peace will never be achieved without
building trust among States and their institutions,
peoples and their Governments, and regional and
international organizations and their Member States.
Building trust is the foundation needed to ensure the
flexibility and ability to address the current turbulent
times and crises.
26/31

Third, the need to fight terrorism and extremism
through an integrated and robust international
cooperation, to confront all risks of terrorism all over
the world, especially in Africa. We must tackle terrorist
groups, cut off their sources of financing or cause them
to dry up, while countering extremist ideologies.
Fourth, the need to pay further attention to
peacebuilding component and provide necessary and
adequate financing in that area as a primary condition
for ensuring the success of our efforts. We must
seriously address options for peacebuilding in the light
of the current international challenges where financial
allocations for programmed peacebuilding activities
are reduced. We have to provide a minimum level of
capability to build resilience in the countries that host
peacekeeping operations, and we call upon Member
States to ensure that peacebuilding efforts will also be
financed through assessed contributions, including via
the Peacebuilding Fund.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9315

Fifth, the need to support the efforts of various
States in building their institutions and national
capacities, and strengthen good governance, which
would prevent them from falling into cycles of violence
in national contexts where national institutions identify,
plan and implement their priorities.

The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.

Sixth, the importance of mobilization resources to
create an environment conducive to economic growth,
foreign investment, opportunities for job creation in
accordance with priorities of national ownership of
sustainable development.

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is my great
pleasure to address a Swiss presidency of the Security
Council on behalf of Liechtenstein for the first time.
We hope it will be the first of many.

Seventh, the linkages between implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
achieving sustainable peace must be done in accordance
with the importance accorded by the Agenda to the
goal of elimination of poverty, ensuring sustainable
development without leading to any imbalance in the
achievement of any of the objectives.
Eighth, the importance of promoting efforts aimed
at ensuring the participation of women and youth in
peacebuilding efforts by empowering women and
including youth in all fields. This must be translated into
policies that will overcome socioeconomic challenges
faced by them.
Ninth, the importance of promoting partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), especially by continuing the consultative
meetings between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council, in order to explain African
perspectives in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and
enhance synergy, coherence and complementarity in the
efforts of both entities, while relying on the important
role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Before concluding, I wish to commend the role and
welcome efforts of the Secretary-General in putting
forward the general framework in the New Agenda
for Peace, which includes many valuable suggestions.
We look forward to seeing a focus in the New Agenda
on investment in conflict-prevention efforts and the
provision of sustainable financing for such efforts. We
must also counter terrorism and extremist ideologies
by directing the Agenda towards the actual needs of
African states, while taking into consideration national
ownership and implementing the priorities and needs
of African States. All of the foregoing are elements of
an effort to develop multilateralism and strengthen its
effectiveness in the achievement of sustainable peace.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.

Our starting point in our reflections today must
be the existing structures in multilateral frameworks,
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
at the centre. Sustainable Development Goal 16
frames accountable institutions and the rule of law as
indispensable for the predictable environment needed
to build trust and sustain peace. In international human
rights law, we have also set minimum expectations for
the treatment of marginalized groups. A predictable and
rights-respecting environment creates the opportunity
to take approaches to conflict resolution that are
themselves sustainable and preventive. Engagement
by relevant actors must take place to varying degrees
through the conflict cycle. Peacebuilding and trustbuilding require sustained political attention and
investment. This morning, I will offer brief comments
on the dimensions of inclusion and of justice.
Building a broad coalition for peace must be
something for which we are constantly striving.
Inclusive settlements are longer-lasting and more
rights-respecting. We know that negotiating teams and
mediators that reflect society as a whole are more likely
to generate sustainable results. But inclusion is not only
about who is consulted; it is also about how those inputs
are reflected. Stakeholders must not only be at the table;
they must also see stakeholder engagement reflected in
resulting documents, processes and missions for them
to be truly sustainable.
That means, of course, as has been said many
times, that women should be meaningfully included
in prevention and peacebuilding. For more than half
the population, this should be an expectation, not an
aspiration. We know gender equality offers a path to
sustainable peace and conflict prevention, but nearly a
quarter of a century after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are moving in the opposite direction, with
the reversal of generational gains in women’s rights in
many parts of the world. A painful recent example is the

23-1252427/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

Sudan. When mediation efforts prioritize persuading
armed men to lay down their guns rather than building
a broad, inclusive and resilient peace, we run the risk of
reinforcing the patriarchal power dynamics that are at
the root of many of today’s conflicts.

Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): We would like to
commend Switzerland for holding the presidency of the
Security Council for the first time and for convening
today’s timely and important debate. I also wish to
thank the briefers for the briefings we heard today.

Inclusion should also reflect minority groups as
well as and in particular indigenous peoples. The work
of the Special Rapporteur on minority issues deserves a
mention in this debate and further reflection by relevant
bodies and actors. The creation of self-government,
federalism and autonomy regimes for minority groups,
implemented with great success within the Swiss
Confederation, are positive models for addressing
potential conflict and finding a modus vivendi for
relevant communities.

Trust requires transparency, communication
and inclusion. How, then, can we foster trust in
sustaining peace and peacebuilding processes?

The rule of law is underpinned by the promise
of justice. It is also a crucial aspect of sustainable
peace. This means reconciliation and accountability
for the most serious crimes under international law.
The truth of this statement has been illustrated many
times e contrario; the lack of accountability for the
aggression against Ukraine in 2014 is just one of the
most recent cases in point. It was undoubtedly a key
driver for the full-scale invasion in 2022. As relevant
situations move through the conflict cycle, transitional
justice is essential to creating a sustainable political
settlement and for building trust among those involved
and affected by conflict. Criminal accountability is
one important aspect of transitional justice; other
forms of truth-telling, such as truth and reconciliation
commissions, can be just as important in ensuring that
victims are able to address the harms done to them on
their own terms.
While Council mandates should set the stage
for transitional justice processes, the Peacebuilding
Commission must be at the forefront of considering
transitional justice in the context of sustaining peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund have addressed issues of transitional justice,
notably in the Gambia, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Colombia,
and we would like to see a significantly enhanced
role for the Peacebuilding Commission on transitional
justice in future — a dynamic that we hope to see
reflected in the upcoming New Agenda for Peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
28/31

As we see it, communities are more likely to
have trust in the process if the conflict or situation
it is aimed at addressing is identified as an emerging
threat in a transparent and timely manner, including
through early warnings and strategic foresight; if the
solutions to respond to it are designed in consultation
with those communities; and if their implementation
is carried out in close contact and coordination with
the communities. Their voices are necessary not just to
design the measures, but also to determine whether the
process is effective or needs to be amended.
Let me also make two points concerning communication.
First, I would like to commend the recent strategic
review by the Secretariat of strategic communications
across United Nations peacekeeping operations,
acknowledging the need for the United Nations system
and the Member States to perform better in that area of
crucial importance.
Secondly, as today is World Press Freedom Day, it is
worth recalling that trust requires a social environment
in which people can express themselves freely, in
which Human Rights are respected in their entirety,
and in which free and independent media contribute to
promoting democracy and to ensuring that institutions
are accountable to the people they serve.
Beyond transparency and communication, we
also need inclusion. One important step to ensure the
Security Council contributes to fostering that inclusion
and participation is to make the Council itself more
representative. The most direct way of ensuring that
would be through its reform, broadening the scope of
countries represented in it. Meanwhile, other steps
can be taken, such as increasing consultations with
stakeholders — regional organizations, the private
sector, academia and civil society, local actors such
as grassroots women’s groups, youth and youth-led
organizations — thereby fostering efforts in conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In that context, allow me to commend Switzerland’s
commitment to giving a voice to civil society in
the programme of work during its presidency of the
Security Council.
The New Agenda for Peace will be an opportunity
to identify ways to bolster trust in peacebuilding
processes, and we look forward to the policy brief to be
published in the summer. In that context — and many
have said it before me — we need to put women and
girls at the centre of security policy. We need to take
into consideration a holistic view of peace anchored
in human rights and development for all. We need
to ensure greater cooperation between the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council, as well as with
the Peacebuilding Commission. We need to strengthen
trust among the United Nations bodies that deal with the
complexity of preventing, building and sustaining peace.
In conclusion, let me recall that the concept note
(S/2023/283, annex) for this debate rightly points out that
trust is also about expectations and predictability. However, the misuse of the veto in the Security Council can
be greatly detrimental to fostering predictability. The
veto initiative (resolution 76/262), adopted one year ago,
showed the interest among the wider membership in ensuring further accountability on the use of the veto and
reinforcing the role of the General Assembly. The wide
support of the Franco-Mexican political declaration and
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct shows there is a growing consensus on
the need to restrict the use of the veto in certain circumstances. We should continue discussing the implementation of those specific instruments and their efficacy. The
New Agenda for Peace should recognize that and call on
permanent members to refrain from using the veto.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): We thank the
Russian Federation for presiding over the Security
Council last month and congratulate Switzerland on
assuming the Council presidency this month. Having
been personally present here in 2002 when Switzerland
joined the United Nations as its 190th Member, it is
gratifying to witness this historic occasion. I wish to
commend Your Excellency, Federal Councillor Ignazio
Cassis, for presiding over this important and timely
open debate on “Futureproofing trust for sustaining
peace” against a backdrop of growing conflict across
the globe. I thank the briefers for their insights.

S/PV.9315

We recall a report by the World Bank and the United
Nations, issued in 2018, entitled “Pathways for Peace”,
which underscores the high costs of conflict and the
importance of prevention. It found, for example, that
countries experiencing violent conflict were estimated
to experience a 2 to 8.4 per cent loss in annual gross
domestic product growth; conflict prevention, on the
other hand, was expected to generate costs savings of
between $5 billion and $70 billion.
It is clear to all: there must be a stronger and more
sustained investment in peace. And let us not forget
that the establishment of the United Nations itself was
an investment in peace. So finding effective ways to
sustain peace, by investing in peace, should remain one
of the United Nations core priorities.
The concept note (S/2023/283, annex) rightly refers
to risk multipliers. The corollary is also true: we need
to promote peace multipliers.
I will focus on peace multipliers — the three
Cs — conditions, catalysts and a culture of peace.
First, on cultivating the conditions for sustainable
peace, we need a people-centred approach, ensuring
that people’s interests and rights remain front and
centre. That is why any effort to sustain peace must
include promoting sustainable development, and that
is why locally driven development projects must go
hand in hand with peace initiatives, as practiced by
Thai peacekeepers under the United Nations in the
Sudan. That is why the rescuing of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) is an urgent priority, to
be operationalized through a successful SDG summit
this September.
Equally important is the cultivation of human
security and the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. When people’s
basic needs and dignity are respected, the conditions
are more favourable for peaceful societies to endure.
With those conditions, there will be enhanced trust and
confidence, and that helps sustainable peace.
Secondly, with regard to developing catalysts to
sustain peace, inclusivity and participation are important
catalysts. At the national level, all stakeholders,
from women and girls to people with disabilities and
vulnerable groups, should not only be consulted but also
actively engaged in sustaining peace, as well as policy

23-1252429/31

S/PV.9315

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

development. That is why Thailand fully supports the
women and peace and security agenda and sees the
importance of women in not only peace processes but
also in development processes.
Another critical catalyst is active engagement by
regional actors, especially regional organizations.
Regional contexts matter. Regional wisdom counts.
That is why we commend the Secretary-General’s ideas
on supporting regional actors in sustaining peace,
as suggested in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
And that is why we find of interest the suggestions
of the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism on promoting a
framework of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations on human security and
sustainable development.
That brings me to one of the most important
catalysts of all and that is strengthening the instruments
for peaceful means, especially diplomacy, here at the
United Nations, not only in this Chamber but also
throughout this building. The United Nations role as
a trusted, impartial platform, with strong convening
power to bring parties in discord together to resolve
peacefully their shared problems, should be enhanced
through efforts that range from reinforcing the role of
the Secretary-General to building synergies between
various actors in the United Nations system and
developing better strategic foresight here at the United
Nations, as suggested in Our Common Agenda.
But this can happen only if there is trust and
confidence here at the United Nations. So, perhaps that
should be our priority as well, in tandem with building
trust and confidence in areas around the globe where
sustainable peace is threatened. As you, Mr. President,
said earlier this morning, let us rebuild the bridges that
connect us. Let us indeed.
Thirdly and lastly, on promoting a culture of
peace, if we all practice a culture of peace, anchored in
tolerance and respect for diversity and abiding respect
for international law, norms of behaviour and peaceful
means in addressing problems, then sustainable peace
everywhere has a better chance.
In conclusion, reinforcing peace multipliers will
help to strengthen trust and confidence and sustain
peace. All those endeavours contribute to preventive
diplomacy, which remains an important ingredient in
our investment in sustainable peace — an investment
that we not only have to protect but also expand. And we
30/31

03/05/2023

certainly hope that this investment will be an important
part of a New Agenda for Peace anchored in the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the first time in your country’s history.
Switzerland and Austria, two neighbouring
countries that are not members of any military alliance,
with a long-standing tradition of supporting dialogue
and peacebuilding, both of which are home to one of the
United Nations four duty stations and are unswervingly
committed to effective multilateralism, are pursuing
similar, if not identical, priorities in the area of
international peace and security. I believe Switzerland
will bring added value to what we all expect from the
Security Council, and I wish you, Mr. President, all the
best in this important task.
(spoke in English)
I commend Switzerland for choosing a topic for
today’s debate that addresses the core of building
peaceful and inclusive societies, but also the lifeline of
multilateralism that we live here at the United Nations:
trust. I also acknowledge today’s briefers, among them
Mr. Volker Türk, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, particularly as we will mark the
thirtieth anniversary of the World Conference on
Human Rights next month in Vienna.
As time is short, I will focus on three very brief
points: first, inclusive and just societies as a prerequisite
for peace; secondly, networked multilateral institutions;
and thirdly, the rule of law as a guarantor of trust.
In recent years, we have come a long way in
understanding that only inclusive and just societies can
be a sustainable basis for peace. The respect for human
rights, the rule of law and sustainable development are
the best guarantors of peace. The women and peace
and security agenda and the youth, peace and security
agenda provide a useful lens in this regard. Austria also
advocates for the inclusion of marginalized groups such
as minorities and internally displaced persons. There is
more to be done to better understand how climate change
affects peace and security, and we call on the Council
to further the climate, peace and security agenda.
23-12524

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is important to recall that prevention does not
only concern “fragile” countries — prevention concerns
all of us. Just as human rights are universal and the
Sustainable Development Goals must be implemented
by every country, so every country also must do its
share to build inclusive, just and peaceful societies.
Mechanisms such as the Universal Periodic Review and
the voluntary reviews under the High-Level Political
Forum provide useful tools in this respect. Ultimately,
they serve to advance peace worldwide.
Secondly, trust also stems from reliable partnerships
and cooperation. Leveraging and complementing
each other’s strengths is the only viable way to
tackle the challenges that we face. Austria therefore
advocates for a new networked multilateralism on
a global level — a United Nations that relies on and
cooperates more closely with regional and subregional
organizations. Sustainable financing of the operations
of regional partners, including of the African Union
peace support operations mandated by the Security
Council, plays a key role in this regard. Regional
organizations themselves serve as trust-building
entities. Tomorrow there will be a meeting on the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), so allow me to mention briefly that the OSCE
was never a club of like-minded countries, but much
rather served as a platform for trust-building measures
and dialogue to advance collective security. Even in
these very challenging times, we must not abandon this
core idea, however difficult that may be.
Thirdly, let me address the trust deficit on an
international level. Trust is about expectations and
predictability — that was expressed very eloquently
in the concept note (S/2023/283, annex). The respect
for international law and the rule of law guarantee
predictability on an international level and help
to foster trust. When this trust is broken, global
cooperation wanes. We see that in every field of

S/PV.9315

international cooperation: core security regimes, such
as that of nuclear disarmament, only function with trust
enabled through international treaties and agreements.
For years, therefore, Austria has advocated for the
strengthening of the rule of law and for more effective
mechanisms to ensure the respect for our global norms,
including the Charter of the United Nations. Let me be
clear: it is not a question of a lack of norms. It is the lack
of adherence and implementation that is of concern. If
we no longer respect the law, we lose a key instrument
in peacefully regulating our international relations, the
most effective instruments with which to build trust
among nations.
I will make one final point, if I may. Trust is also
closely linked to truth, to facts and evidence-based
information. It is very timely to say this, on the day
that we mark the thirtieth anniversary of World Press
Freedom Day. We need to remember that independent
and pluralistic media are preconditions for advancing
peace and security based on facts and evidence.
Polarized political and societal discourse, crackdowns
on critical voices and independent media, attacks
against journalists and media workers, and hate
speech undermine the access to accurate and reliable
information. Trust needs truth, and truth needs free
media and journalists who can work in safety to ensure
its dissemination.
Once again, I would like to thank you, Sir, and
Switzerland for putting trust at the centre of our
discussions today and for the opportunity to share our
perspective in this open debate.
The President (spoke in French): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on the list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

23-1252431/31
