S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6870th meeting
Monday, 26 November 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vinay Kumar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Ms. Liu Bing
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Eick
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Taib
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Filimonov
Ms. Sabelo
Mr. Yagninim
Mrs. Weekley
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Working methods
Letter dated 19 November 2012 from the Permanent Representatives of India and
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/853)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-60646 (E)

*1260646*

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Mr. President, I wish to
commend you for the efforts made to engage the wider
membership on this important issue of improving
the working methods of the Security Council, at a
time when the Council is perceived to be in a state of
paralysis in terms of finding a lasting solution to the
pressing events that are currently taking place in the
Middle East, in particular in the occupied territories of
Palestine and Syria. I wish also to align my statement
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Malaysia welcomes the efforts made by the Security
Council in enhancing the efficiency of its work, as well
as interaction and dialogue with non-Council members.
In that connection, the note by the President of the
Council (S/2010/507) and Japan’s subsequent efforts
in 2010 as the Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
in producing the Handbook on the Working Methods
of the Security Council, known as the “green book”,
are landmark efforts. These are steps that are pushing
forward the reform process of the Security Council, to
which Malaysia stands ready to contribute.
Article 30 of the United Nations Charter stipulates
that the Security Council shall adopt its own rules
of procedure. On that basis, the Council adopted its
provisional rules of procedure (S/96) in 1946. The
provisional rules of procedure were later modified on
several occasions, with the last revision being made in
1982, through S/96/Rev.7. It has therefore been 30 years
since those provisional rules were last amended.
The provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council are in many ways a relic of the Second World
War and the days of the Cold War. While other major
organs of the United Nations have made their fair share
of changes to their rules of procedure, regrettably the
Security Council has refused to evolve with the times.
More positive changes could be made to the Council’s
working methods if its members interpreted Article 30
of the Charter with a view to making the Council more

2

democratic and to further improving the efficiency of
its work. Members have to rise above their entrenched
national interests and move forward so as to make the
Council an organ that serves the wider membership as
a whole.
How can we further improve the working methods
of the Security Council so as to make it much more
effective in the current situation? While presidential
note 507 was indeed a positive move, the Council
should also consider favourably General Assembly draft
resolution A/66/L.42. Many, if not all, of the elements of
change proposed in that draft resolution could be taken
on board by the Council with a view to helping to move
the reform process ahead and without the need to amend
the United Nations Charter. It is time for the Council to
move beyond the weak arguments put forward by States
with the sole intention of maintaining the status quo
on working methods and indirectly ensuring that their
national interests continue to be protected.
The world today is extremely disappointed by the
fact that the Council has not been able to do what it
was mandated to do: maintain international peace
and security. Let us look at what is happening in the
Middle East today. Can the Council claim that it has
been at the forefront in dealing with the tragedies in
Palestine and in Syria? Has the Council moved beyond
national interests in stopping the ongoing violence
that has led to the deaths of 30,000 people in Syria
and a rising number of casualties in Palestine? Were
non-members of the Council, as responsible members
of the international community, allowed to present their
views during the Council’s meeting on the attack on
Gaza held on 14 November (see S/PV.6863) and during
the one held on 21 November (see S/PV.6869)?
Unfortunately, the answer to all those questions
is a resounding “no”. Why is that so? Clearly, it is
because the provisional rules of procedure and thus
the working methods of the Council have failed the
international community to the extent that there
was recourse to the format of a private meeting on
14 November and to restrictions on the speakers’ list
for the open meeting held on 21 November, so as to
deny non-members the opportunity to condemn the
illegal occupier and aggressor in Palestine. We have to
search our consciences and ask ourselves if that was the
right thing to do. To get a clear answer, we have to put
ourselves in the shoes of the victims of that aggression,
be they children, women or the elderly.

12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

In this debate, it would be remiss of me not to
address the issue of the use of the veto. Malaysia
has been consistent in its views on the veto. The use
of the veto has led us all into a deadlock on how the
international community should address the bloodshed
in various regions, especially in the Middle East. The
irony is that the veto is a double-edged sword. The
permanent members of the Council are finding that
the veto, time and again, is being used against them
by other permanent members. The adage “what goes
around, comes around” could not be more true in the
context of the current deadlock faced by the Council
on issues relating to the Middle East. The world is told
that country “X” is blocking action to resolve the crisis
in a certain country through the use of the veto, but the
complainant then does the same when action is taken in
another country in the region.
Let me reiterate once again that the use of the veto
should be prohibited in situations involving genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. If the reform
process can start with an agreement on this issue, then
the working methods of the Council will have actually
improved tremendously. Until such time, the working
methods of the Council are still the ones agreed in
1946. The Council today seems to operate in a time
warp, refusing to acknowledge the changes that have
taken place since the end of the Second World War.
In conclusion, it is clear and known to all that
the national interests of the members of the Council
and their close allies are hindering the improvement
of the working methods of this important organ. The
political courage should be found to move beyond
those entrenched interests and to make the Council
more democratic and bring it in line with the current
situation so as to make it reflective of geopolitical
realities. Only then would the Council regain the
respect of the international community, and the reform
process of the United Nations, including reform in the
working methods of the Council, would see some real
and meaningful improvements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important debate to discuss the
working methods of the Security Council. My thanks
also goes to the Portuguese delegation for their extensive
work in chairing the Informal Working Group on

12-60646

Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
has been instrumental in moving that issue forward.
With regard to the implementation of the note by the
President contained in document S/2010/507, we believe
that the Council has undertaken commendable efforts
to enhance the participation of the wider membership
in its work over the years. We are particularly pleased
to note that the number of open meetings has been
steadily increasing, while other forms of interaction,
such as the monthly briefings for non-members by
the presidency and meetings with police- or troopcontributing countries, have helped to promote a better
dialogue with the general membership.
Presidencies have also promoted useful practices
aimed at increasing efficiency and expediency, such as
holding video conferences in open briefings in order
to provide updates from the field. I would also like to
recognize the Secretariat’s work in reorganizing the
Council’s webpage and in enhancing the availability
of information, including on mandates, reporting
cycles and an analytical and statistical overview of the
Council’s activities over the past years.
While my delegation welcomes the progress made
thus far, we believe that more can be done. Let me
focus on three key areas outlined in the concept paper
(S/2012/853, annex) for today’s debate: transparency,
interaction with non-members and efficiency.
First, we cannot emphasize enough the importance
of enhancing transparency in view of the growing
interest of the general membership in the work of the
Council. The Republic of Korea hopes that the Council
will strengthen its efforts to provide regular public
briefings and ensure an updated forecast of its upcoming
activities. At the same time, the relevant Council
documents should be made available to non-members
in a timely manner, so as to keep them informed of the
Council’s activities. Such actions by the Council would
be helpful in assisting interested members to contribute
to the work of the Council in meaningful ways.
Secondly, we believe the Council should endeavour
to make greater use of formats that allow for enhanced
interaction with the general membership and regional
stakeholders that may play a crucial role in resolving
a specific conflict. Informal interactive discussions
and meetings with troop- and police-contributing
countries should continue to form an important part of
Council activities. That would allow greater interaction
with concerned parties and garner meaningful input

3

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

from them. The Council can also make better use of
Arria Formula meetings, so as to allow civil society
and non-governmental organizations to enter into
meaningful dialogue with the Council. The Council
should also work on expanding its relationships and on
enhancing coordination with regional and subregional
organizations. Cooperation with regional institutions
has become all the more essential for finding
appropriate solutions to crises and conflicts and for
making optimal use of resources and capacities. The
annual consultation mechanism between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council is a good example that could be replicated with
other regional organizations.
Thirdly, to deal with the ever-increasing volume
and diversity of its workload, it is imperative that the
Council undertake greater efforts towards increasing
its overall efficiency. My delegation notes that Council
members have reaffirmed their commitment to
enhancing the Council’s work in the president’s note
contained in document S/2012/402 of 5 June 2012.
We welcome the fact that the Council has agreed to
continue its efforts with a view towards having more
focused discussions by minimizing the delivery of
pre-prepared statements and by increasing interactivity
within the Council’s negotiation process. Moreover,
we believe that planning its work better by adjusting
mandate renewal periods and aligning the timing of
reports on related issues would enable the Council to
work more efficiently. Cost-saving measures, including
avoiding regularly scheduling formal Council meetings
on Fridays or avoiding the translation of documents
over the weekend also merit continued consideration.
All in all, my Government would like to stress that
improving the working methods of the Security Council
is indeed an important component in bolstering the
effectiveness and overall legitimacy of the Council’s
work. As a non-permanent member of the Council
for the next two years, let me assure the Council that
the Republic of Korea will remain deeply committed
to improving the Council’s working methods and will
work strenuously to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to thank the Indian presidency
for convening the fifth open debate on improving the
Security Council’s working methods. We would also
like to welcome and highlight the work carried out by
4

Portugal as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
One year ago, Costa Rica attended a similar debate
(S/PV.6672) aimed at reiterating our commitment
to and interest in this matter and at proposing ideas.
At that time, the Small Five Group, of which we
were a member along with Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore and Switzerland, had already circulated
draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 aimed at providing
new impetus to the improvements. The draft resolution
referred to the existing Security Council, not the
Council that could potentially exist at some point if we
succeed in achieving its comprehensive reform. Thus,
the suggestions contained in the annex to the draft
resolution are still valid. They lay out a clear road map,
which is always subject to change, for improving the
Council’s transparency, accountability, distribution
of tasks and fulfilment of responsibilities through a
stronger use of our Organization’s legal and political
instruments. In other words, the recommendations
aim to further improve what we are already doing,
and are based on Articles 10 and 25 of the Charter,
which confers responsibility for and authority over the
Council’s performance on all Member States.
Unfortunately, opposition to the proposal was
fierce, particularly on the part of the five permanent
members and those countries that believed that the status
quo best protected their interests. Furthermore, that
opposition did not, unfortunately, rely on substantive
arguments, but rather on procedural legalism, which
was unjustified but institutionally legitimate and which
forced us to withdraw the draft resolution. Nevertheless,
the countries that are united in that effort — both within
and outside of the group of five small nations — have
not wavered in our commitment. Therefore, Costa Rica
would like today to insist on the need for the Security
Council to commit to the recommendations found in
the annex to draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2.
In addition, we would like to emphasize the following
proposals. First, an action plan must be adopted for the
complete and systematic implementation of presidential
note S/2010/507 and its updates. Secondly, transparency
in the work of the subsidiary bodies and the selection
and independence of the panels of experts must be
improved. In addition, the process leading to the
election of the chairs of the subsidiary bodies must be
more inclusive. Thirdly, the Council’s actions in relation
to the codification and development of international
law must be limited. That is something that, in addition

12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

to being outside of the Council’s jurisdiction, has a
negative impact on the Council and its mandate for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Fourthly, cooperation with the International Criminal
Court must be strengthened. That cooperation should
be guided by impartial and general principles that
scrupulously respect the independence of the Court and
the respective jurisdictions of both bodies. Fifthly, the
Council’s relationship with the Human Rights Council
must be strengthened, above all because of the role that
the independent commissions of inquiry established by
the Human Rights Council play in several situations on
the Security Council’s agenda.
Collective security is everyone’s security, by all
and for all. But the main responsibilities fall to the
Security Council, which is, among other things, the
basis for its enormous importance and the need for it
to be more efficient, transparent, inclusive and open.
Much progress can be made by improving the working
methods of the Security Council. All that is missing is
the political will to do so. We hope that this debate will
succeed in fostering it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Netherlands and
Belgium.
First of all, I would like to thank India, as President
of the Security Council, for convening this debate and
for preparing, together with Portugal, what we consider
to be an excellent concept note (S/2012/853, annex). We
would also like to express our gratitude to Portugal,
and in particular its representative Ambassador Moraes
Cabral, who organized the previous open debate in 2011
(see S/PV.6672) and has been a driving force behind
this important subject as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
Belgium and the Netherlands attach great
importance to this open debate, which provides the
wider United Nations membership with an opportunity
to interact with the Security Council members on this
matter. We feel a strong sense of urgency to make
progress on the improvement of the working methods
and on broader Security Council reform, for that
matter. As has been said, we think it is high time to
enhance the Security Council’s accountability to the

12-60646

wider membership and to increase the transparency,
legitimacy and effectiveness of its decisions.
In our view, concrete results on this issue can only
be achieved through a meaningful dialogue between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. That
is the path we should follow, and today’s debate is
an excellent example of how we should proceed. We
fully agree with the statement at the very beginning
of the concept note that working methods “concern
the States Members of the United Nations as a whole”
(S/2012/853, annex, para. 1).
Moreover, as is also explained in the concept note,
real and encouraging improvements have already been
made in recent years. The debates on the working
methods have already produced results, and it is good
to remind ourselves that today the Council is operating
under other, better and more transparent working
methods than before. The Netherlands and Belgium
would like to commend both the permanent and the
successive elected members of the Council for their
efforts in that regard.
The Netherlands and Belgium want to stress that
fact because we do not want the further development
of better working methods to become hostage to a lack
of progress on the wider debate about Security Council
reform. In May, we witnessed the withdrawal of the
initiative of the group of five small nations (S-5) on the
improvement of the working methods of the Security
Council. At that point in time, the permanent members
of the Security Council indicated that they were ready
to seriously consider the recommendations put forward
in the S-5 draft resolution (A/66/L.42/Rev.2). Belgium
and the Netherlands hope that they will do so.
We studied the Indian-Portuguese concept note
that was sent to us in preparation for this debate, as it
contains an interesting overview of recent events and
repeatedly stresses the right principles. This debate
should lead us to real and concrete measures that
simultaneously enhance transparency, efficiency and
interactivity within the Council and with the wider
membership.
In the concept note, Mr. President, you invite the
wider membership to come up with a range of practical
suggestions that could make a real difference in the
day-to-day business of the Security Council. You, Sir,
then sum up a list of concrete and operational ideas
and suggestions, some of which were actually been put
forward by the Netherlands and Belgium during the

5

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

previous debate in November 2011, and I thank you for
that.
We welcome those different suggestions in the
Indian-Portuguese paper aimed at increasing the
involvement of States and other parties non-members of
the Security Council in the Council’s work, especially
the suggestions aimed at enhancing the participation
of the chairs of the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission and of the troop- and
police-contributing countries in relevant debates and
discussions. We also support the proposal of a more
flexible use of available meeting formats, such as Arria
Formula meetings or informal interactive dialogues.
Furthermore, we support the suggestions on increasing
the transparency and inclusivity of the work of the
Security Council’s subsidiary bodies.
We would also like to repeat our plea to improve
country-specific debates by inviting the country at stake
in the discussions. Countries that are being debated, but
that are not members of the Council, should be given
the opportunity to contribute to Council debates at the
moment when they really matter and under a formula to
be decided on an ad hoc basis. By doing so, the Council
would give a fair and decent chance to countries to put
their points of view forward. After hearing from such a
country, the Council could still discuss the issue at stake
in a restricted debate among its members, without the
country concerned being present. We also see merit in
the proposal to promote more and more interactive open
debates. The suggestion to invite non-Council members
to speak among Council members is noteworthy.
At the same time, we would like to receive further
clarification on some of the other suggestions. The
suggestion to enhance the role of the Military Staff
Committee is thought-provoking. It would be interesting
to explore whether the Military Staff Committee could
provide military advice when the Security Council
considers the mandate of a military operation.
Belgium and the Netherlands truly appreciate
the efforts that have been made so far to improve the
working methods of the Security Council. The long list
of ideas and suggestions in the concept note deserves
our careful attention; some of them could, and should,
be swiftly implemented. Let me add that, in addition to
those ideas, we would like to underline the importance
of the Council giving continued attention to the cases
it referred to in the International Criminal Court and to
improve its cooperation with the Court, as has just been
argued by our colleague Ambassador Ulibarri.
6

We count on the Security Council members, in
particular the permanent members, to make a joint
effort together with the wider membership to continue
enhancing the transparency, legitimacy, effectiveness
and interactivity of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
Let me first of all thank India for organizing this
important and timely open debate. The working methods
of the Council affect not only Council members, but the
United Nations membership as a whole. Therefore, we
much appreciate this opportunity to discuss the issue.
There have been improvements in the Council’s
working methods over the past years. We note that
since the last open debate on this topic (see S/PV.6672),
in November 2011, there has been increased attention
to this matter.
The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has intensified its
work under the excellent stewardship of Portugal. The
Council has also held consultations on how to improve
the management of the Council’s programmes and
sessions. Those are all positive developments.
That momentum has not only applied to the
inner workings of the Council. The draft resolution
(A/66/L.42/Rev.2) introduced to the General Assembly
by the so-called group of five small nations (S-5) at the
sixty-sixth session fostered a thorough discussion on
central aspects of working methods. The S-5 countries
deserve much credit for their dedication and longterm commitment. We look forward to their continued
contribution to this debate.
The key aspect of any discussion on working
methods is transparency. We would therefore like to
underscore the need for regular, informative briefings
to non-members of the Council. Interactive wrapup sessions at the end of each presidency enhance
information-sharing and openness. We encourage
Council members to consider organizing such briefings
on a regular basis.
Making the Council’s annual report more analytical
and forward-looking would also enhance transparency.
A closer connection between the monthly reporting and
the annual report is encouraged. It is also important to
12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

share regular updates on the scheduling of meetings of
the subsidiary bodies in order for the wider membership
to stay better informed about the matters they address.

renewals. In addition, troop- and police-contributing
countries should be more closely engaged at all stages
of decision-making about peacekeeping operations.

The Nordic countries are eager to contribute
to a culture of transparency. In that regard, we fully
support the work of Security Council Report, which
provides valuable insight and analysis about Council
activities to the wider membership. Furthermore,
the Finnish workshop, which celebrates 10 years this
year, aims at giving new members of the Council an
in-depth orientation to the practice, procedures and
working methods of the Council. The reports from
those workshops are distributed to all United Nations
Members as official documents of the Council.

The Council has made good progress in developing
cross-cutting thematic issues, for example, women and
peace and security. The Council should now go further
and systematically link country-specific situations
and horizontal themes. That is important both from
an operational point of view and a normative one. The
Nordic countries welcome the significant progress
achieved in enhancing due process both for listing
and delisting procedures of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. We
recommend that those fair and clear procedures be
extended to other sanctions regimes also. While the
mandate of the Ombudsperson has been strengthened,
we suggest it be extended for an unlimited period.

Efficiency in the Council’s work is important.
Conflicts today are more complex, and the Council’s
agenda is increasingly stretched. Therefore, we welcome
the note issued by the President of the Council in June
(S/2012/402). The agreement to change the periodicity
of mandate renewals is positive in that regard. We also
welcome the ongoing discussion on penholders and the
appointment of chairs to the subsidiary bodies.
The quality of open debates could be further
improved by ensuring that outcome documents reflect
input from all participating countries. Concept papers
could direct the focus of the debates to the questions
on which the Council would like to consult the larger
membership. We also welcome the discussion on the
order of speakers. We welcome the Council’s increasing
use of videoconferences for briefings from the ground,
and we encourage the Council to develop the concept
further.
The Council should continue to actively seek
ways to improve its ability to prevent conflict and to
solve long-term conflicts on its agenda. We encourage
the Council to put special emphasis on prevention
and to find new, innovative ways to tackle emerging
conflicts at an early stage. We welcome the use of
horizon-scanning and encourage the Council to further
develop and regularize the practice.
Enhanced cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and partner organizations, including the Bretton
Woods institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, is essential. For example, the Council
should regularly seek the advice of the chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission configurations by inviting
them to participate in relevant Council meetings,
including in connection with mission mandate

12-60646

Much has been done to improve the work and the
working methods of the Council, but much remains to
be done. We call on the Council to start implementing
the two presidential notes, S/2006/507 and its update
S/2010/507, and the innovations contained therein, in
a more systematic manner. In that light, we strongly
encourage the Council to continue holding annual open
debates on its working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Indian presidency for convening today’s open debate
and also to thank the Indian and Portuguese delegations
for the detailed concept note (S/2012/853, annex) for our
discussion. It is timely that after one year we continue
debate in an open format on this important issue.
If we want to improve the Council’s efficiency,
enhance its legitimacy and strengthen its role as a
body entrusted by the Charter with the maintenance
of international peace and security, we must consider
improving its working methods and, most importantly,
its transparency vis-à-vis the wider United Nations
membership. In recent years we have seen some progress
towards the realization of those goals. We welcome the
initiatives by the group of five small nations in that
respect. The Council should represent the interests
and address the concerns of the entire United Nations
membership.
All United Nations Members have been constantly
confronted with an increasing number of Security
7

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

Council decisions with notable security, legal and
financial implications for each Member State. For that
reason also the Council must ensure better transparency
and engagement with non-Council members in its
decision-making processes on a more regular basis.
The holding of open briefings and debates remains of
particular importance. The wider membership should
have an opportunity for its views to be heard and, to
the extent possible, reflected in the outcomes of those
debates. Consideration could be given to the order
of speakers, while also allowing some time between
the meeting and the adoption of a possible outcome
document. That would demonstrate that the Council
is willing to reflect on views presented by the wider
membership before taking a final decision.
The distribution of concept papers that include
guiding questions should be guaranteed well in
advance, so that delegations can adequately prepare for
their interventions. We should also not underestimate
the role of regional and subregional organizations,
which not only possess knowledge about specific
threats affecting their regions but also are better suited
to ensuring a more coordinated approach at the local,
national and regional levels.
To enhance the Council’s capacity for prevention
we support regular open briefings by the Secretariat,
the Special Representatives of and Special Advisers to
the Secretary-General on the situations on the Council’s
agenda and those of emerging concern, including by
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society play a crucial role in raising awareness. Regular
thematic Arria Formula meetings could effectively
complement the work of the Council on more specific
issues, in order to make better use of information
available from the NGO sector.
The Security Council should emphasize the
importance of the rule of law in dealing with matters
on its agenda. That includes references to upholding
and promoting international law and ensuring that its
own decisions are firmly rooted in that body of law,
including the Charter, international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
criminal law. Special attention should be paid to the
protection of civilians and those most vulnerable. We
urge the permanent members to refrain from the use
of the veto in the event of genocide, crimes against

8

humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
Slovenia remains convinced that Security Council
reform needs to address both enlargement of its
membership and improvement of its working methods.
In that context, it is crucial to ensure that the Council
continues to regularly assess how its practice matches
the goals set out in the note by the President contained
in document S/2006/507, with all updates, and that it
continues to collect and build on valuable input from
the whole membership on ways to further improve its
working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to start by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I also thank you for your concept
note (S/2012/853, annex), which gives us sensible
guidance for the development of our debate.
As the note points out, the working methods
of the Security Council concern all United Nations
Member States. It is indeed in the interest of the whole
membership that the Council becomes more efficient
in order to meet satisfactorily the functions assigned
to it by the Charter. The greater the possibilities for
involvement of all Members in the work of the Council,
the greater the authority and influence of this body,
which is called upon in a very particular manner to
confront the threats to international peace and security.
The road taken during the past few years has had
positive developments in increasing transparency in the
Security Council. I wish especially to acknowledge the
role played by Portugal during the last two years at the
head of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, building on the basis
of the previous work of Belgium, Japan, Slovakia,
Panama and Bosnia and Herzegovina, just to mention
their predecessors in that endeavour.
The role being played by the group of five small
nations, composed of Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore, and Switzerland, also deserves to be
highlighted. Their ongoing contributions are an impetus
to the necessary collective discussion. I support and
endorse the remarks made by the Ambassador of Costa
Rica this afternoon and thank him for them.

12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

The members of the Security Council are committed
to implementing the measures contained in the note by
the President contained in document S/2010/507. Some
of the measures are being well implemented. That is
the case, for example, of those concerning the Council’s
monthly programme of work, such as the tentative
forecast, the briefings of the incoming presidency and
the regular updates of the programme of work. Other
measures could be put into practice in a more consistent
way, such as the proposals contained in paragraph 28
on open debates, paragraph 44 on draft resolutions
and draft presidential statements or press statements,
paragraph 59 in fine on informal or interactive
dialogues, and paragraph 65 on the Arria Formula.
We believe that we should continue to update and
expand note 507 with additional measures. Some of
these were set out in the 25 March 2011 letter by the
group of five small States. I reiterate our support for
the following three points in particular — first, the
outgoing presidency’s briefings on the implementation
of the Council’s programme of work; secondly, the
establishment of a working group on lessons learned
that would assess compliance with resolutions and
propose mechanisms to improve it; and thirdly, the
inclusion of a specific section on the implementation of
working methods in the annual report of the Council to
the General Assembly.
As an additional measure, we believe it would be
advisable to update information on the composition of
the different groups in charge of writing the first drafts
of resolutions. We believe that such drafts should be
circulated before they are discussed by all Council
members in informal consultations.
It is a fact that there are no specific measures about
the veto in note 507. Spain is in favour of including
such measures in future updates of the note. We see
no drawback to permanent members of the Security
Council committing themselves to the implementation
of such measures, especially when these are supported
by the vast majority of Member States. Such measures
would include explanations of the reasons for using
the veto, which is equivalent to explanations of vote,
or the waiver of the veto in cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We believe that the guidelines set forth in the
concept note are very timely. We trust that they will
be developed so that the ideas put forward in today’s
debate will be used as a basis for the development of

12-60646

proposals in the targeted areas in order to improve
transparency and effectiveness of the Security Council
and its subsidiary bodies. Those proposals, when duly
worked out, could be incorporated into note 507, which
I propose should be regularly updated — for example,
every four years.
To conclude, we believe that it is the responsibility
of all Member States to contribute to the objective of
making the Security Council a more transparent and
inclusive organ, as well as more efficient and effective.
We are certain that today’s meeting will bring new
impetus and lay down valuable tracks leading to
progress towards that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal): I have the honour to deliver
the following statement on behalf of the Group of
African States. I congratulate India on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I thank it for including this very
important aspect of Security Council reform in the
Council’s programme of work.
We welcome the concept note (S/2012/853, annex)
circulated in a letter by the Permanent Representatives
of India and Portugal, and take note of the efforts made
by the Council towards improving its working methods.
We welcome the improvement we have seen in the
working methods of the Council, including the use of
informal interactive dialogue to interact informally
with individual Member States, the Peacebuilding
Council and subregional and regional organizations,
and to address such issues as penholders, chairs of
subsidiary bodies, preparation of the annual report and
monthly assessments, all of which are, in our view,
modest but meaningful steps towards improving the
work of the Council.
We urge the Council to continue building on the
important advances made through further improvement
of the working methods. However, we remain convinced
that cosmetic changes to the working methods do not
respond to the fundamental need for reform of the
Security Council and an expansion of its membership
in both the permanent and non-permanent categories.
Those values continue to be inconsistent with having a
Security Council in which Africa remains unrepresented
in the permanent category and underrepresented in the
non-permanent category.

9

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

Our participation in today’s debate is firmly rooted
in our commitment to the African Common Position
articulated in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration on the reform of the United Nations. We
remain convinced of the need for a comprehensive
reform of the United Nations system that takes into
account the principles, objectives and ideals of the
United Nations Charter for a fairer world based on
universalism, equity and regional balance. We are
convinced that the reform of the United Nations should
be all-inclusive, encompassing all components of the
United Nations system, including the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In that regard, we continue to
call for a comprehensive reform of the Council as called
for in General Assembly decision 62/557, and in that
regard we continue to stress the interconnectedness of
the five clusters of Security Council reform.
On the question of the two clusters related to the
relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and to the working methods, we have
at all times maintained a principled position on those two
issues, underscoring the need to uphold the primacy of
and full respect for the provisions of the United Nations
Charter appertaining to the powers and functions of the
General Assembly. The two clusters are inextricably
interrelated, and there has been some emerging
convergence among general views as the key elements
have not given rise to any controversy — except among
the permanent five, which maintain that reforming the
working methods of the Council is a responsibility of
the Council itself. Notwithstanding that point, several
concrete proposals on how to improve the transparency
of and access to the Council, including adopting set
rules of procedure, remain actively on the table.
Our proposal on those two clusters, transmitted
in our letter dated 23 December 2009, is reflected in
the compilation text. In that regard, we maintain that
the two organs must work closely together within their
respective spheres in seeking solutions to the plethora
of challenges confronting the international community,
with the Security Council focusing on issues mandated
under the Charter in order to foster harmonious
interaction, ensure a cooperative relationship between
the Council and the General Assembly without
encroaching on each other’s mandates spelled out in
the Charter, and find the correct constitutional balance
between them.
The relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly remains a matter of paramount

10

importance on the reform agenda, in fulfilment of
what was agreed in the World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1), which called for the full and speedy
implementation of measures adopted by the General
Assembly with a view to strengthening its role and
authority and the leadership role of the President of
the General Assembly. It also called for strengthening
the relationship between the General Assembly and the
other principal organs to ensure better coordination on
current issues requiring coordinated United Nations
action pursuant to their respective mandates.
It is essential to maintain a balance among the
principal organs of the United Nations, and particularly
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in order to enable the Organization to meet
existing and emerging threats and challenges. The
role of the Assembly, including on issues relating to
international peace and security, as provided for in
the relevant Articles of the Charter, must not only be
enhanced but strengthened in order to enable it play its
proper role as the most representative, democratic and
deliberative policymaking body of the United Nations.
Regarding the Council’s working methods, Africa
favours a more accessible, democratic, representative,
accountable, transparent and effective Security Council
that is and must be able to respond in a timely manner.
We commend the improved cooperation between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council, which has resulted in more structured
and effective annual consultations between them. We
will continue to urge enhanced coordination between
them, as well as more predictable and sustained
sources of funding for African Union peacekeeping
operations and to support post-conflict reconstruction
and development in Africa. Sustained cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations will
unquestionably be immensely helpful in addressing
current and future challenges to international peace
and security. Despite such positive developments, we
remain concerned about inconsistency in the Council’s
decisions, as demonstrated by its growing selectivity
in addressing issues of grave concern to regional
organizations.
In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council is an integral part of the reform
process. The fact that the Council itself has been
seized of the review of its working methods and that
its rules of procedure have been provisional for the past
63 years or so is a clear indication of how imperative
12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

it is to address this issue. We note that the main thrust
of all the various groups’ and stakeholders’ positions
is that we should ensure that the Security Council is
transparent, inclusive, accountable and accessible in its
working methods.
In that regard, the Council continues to fall short of
the African Common Position on its working methods,
and we stress that more is expected of those methods
in terms of inclusivity, transparency and accountability
if the Council’s decisions are to be seen as legitimate
and effective. We should therefore like to reiterate
Africa’s readiness to work with all interested groups
and Member States to achieve decisive progress in this
area, but in the context of a comprehensive package
within the reform process, not in isolation from other
clusters, since the issue of improving working methods
is also very much tied to that of the expansion of the
Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is especially grateful for the convening of
this debate. Efforts to improve the working methods
of any entity with a view to making it more efficient
and transparent are always welcome and should be an
ongoing objective, especially as we are talking about the
organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
We have always maintained that improving the
Security Council’s working methods is a valid and
necessary exercise. The Council needs improvements
that will make it more transparent, inclusive, effective
and accountable for its actions — improvements that
cannot be postponed in the times we live in. This is both
feasible and necessary, even in the short term, so long
as the political will is there, as the progress made in
previous years has shown, including in the recent work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions chaired by Portugal.
There is much room for improvement in the
Council’s working methods. The recommendations
contained in draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 are a
good example of what can and should be done. Most
require no substantive modifications and yet would still
have positive effects both on practical issues and on
outside perceptions of the Council. Others, such as those
relating to the use of the veto, will undoubtedly require

12-60646

a thorough debate, particularly among the permanent
members, but we believe that debate is inevitable.
As a country that is deeply committed to the
peacekeeping system of the United Nations, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to all issues relating to
the establishment and development of peacekeeping
operation mandates, and especially to the interaction and
transparency that should characterize relations between
the Council and troop-contributing countries, which is
not only an end in itself but also a way of enhancing
the mandates’ effectiveness. Uruguay acknowledges
that we have seen significant improvements in this area
in recent years, but we believe that they have not been
consolidated and that their implementation has been
uneven. Much remains to be done in this area.
It is important that we not lose momentum on this
matter. We hope this debate will be a catalyst for the
prevailing desire of the majority in the United Nations
and the international community as a whole for this
organ to be more effective, transparent, and capable of
rising to today’s complex challenges. Uruguay is ready
to play a proactive and constructive role in those efforts
for the benefit of all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the important subject of the working methods of the
Security Council. We also thank you for your helpful
concept note (S/2012/853, annex).
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
At the recent debate in the General Assembly on
the annual report of the Security Council (A/67/2)
and Security Council reform, an overwhelmingly
large number of countries once again underscored the
need for a more transparent, democratic and effective
Council. Indeed, the Council is entrusted with the heavy
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security — a responsibility that requires its constant,
vigorous and even-handed oversight, as well as the full
support and cooperation of all United Nations Member
States. The Security Council has risen to the occasion
during many challenges, and Indonesia commends its
role, but there is no doubt that the Council would be
able to discharge its responsibilities more effectively

11

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

through modified working methods that enhance
its transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and
efficiency.
Indonesia welcomes the Council’s efforts to
improve its working methods over the years, including
by holding a significant number of open meetings with
the countries concerned, troop and police contributors
and other stakeholders. Those efforts need to be
intensified. We hope that there will be comprehensive
improvement in all aspects of the Council’s workings.
Allow me, in this regard, to put forward the following
observations.
First, the Council should be more accessible,
transparent and efficient, particularly for non-member
States. Greater transparency in the Council’s
workings and more meaningful interaction with the
non-permanent members and non-mmbers would
enrich the Council’s decision-making and strengthen
support for its actions.
Secondly, there should be greater consultation,
especially with members with a special interest in
substantive matters under consideration by the Council.
Thirdly, Member States, in particularly those
affected by sanctions, should, at their request, be given
the right to participate and offer substantive inputs in
the meetings of relevant sanctions committees.
Fourthly, draft resolutions, presidential statements
and other draft documents tabled at informal
consultations of the whole of the Council should, if so
authorized by draft authors, be promptly made available
to non-Council members.
Fifthly, the Council should hold regular, timely
and meaningful consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries, host countries, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, financial
contributors and other countries directly concerned
by a peacekeeping operation throughout all its
stages. Substantive interaction with all peacekeeping
stakeholders is necessary to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are effectively enabled to
achieve their mandates.
Finally, States must explain their reasons for
using the veto when they do so, and a copy of such
explanations should be circulated to all Member States.
The Council is entrusted on behalf of all United Nations
Members, and its actions and reasoning must be fully
clear to everyone.

12

Indonesia thanks you, Sir, for this opportunity
to present its views. We will continue to support the
Security Council in its efforts to tangibly improve its
working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
One of the principle problems and challenges facing
the United Nations 67 years after its founding is that it
has failed to profoundly reform the Security Council
into a transparent, democratic and effective body.
Cuba underscores once again that the Security Council
requires comprehensive, urgent and far-reaching
reform. There can be no true reform of the United
Nations until the Security Council is reformed. Council
reform must necessarily include the modification of its
working methods. The changes introduced in recent
years to the working methods of the Council have been
modest and limited. They do not guarantee the genuine
participation of the membership in the work or meetings
of the Council. Most changes have been formal.
The most important decisions, especially regarding
highly topical issues, remain the purview of the
permanent members of the Council and, at times, not
even all of them. Most members of the Security Council
have little scope to influence important decisions.
Those of us who are outside the Council have even less.
The open debates that ocassionally accompany
the adoption of presidential statements or resolutions
are mere formalities, and we have repeatedly seen the
Council adopt decisions before all speakers inscribed on
the list have been heard. The Council must act on behalf
of all Members of the Organization, in conformity with
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
requires the guaranteed and genuine participation of
the 193 present Members of the United Nations in its
work and decisions. Cuba reiterates its view that the
following urgent changes must be made to the working
methods, as a minimum.
The number of public meetings must be increased
and become the norm, in keeping with Articles 31 and
32 of the Charter. Closed meetings and consultations
should be held only in very exceptional cases. States
concerned should be allowed to participate in the
deliberations of the Council on questions directly
12-60646

S/PV.6870 (Resumption 1)

affecting them, in keeping with Article 31 of the
Charter. Resolutions and presidential statements
should reflect the views expressed by Member States
in public debates. Non-Council members should have
guaranteed access to subsidiary bodies, including the
right to participate in their discussions. The rules of
the Council, which are still provisional after almost
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve
transparency and accountability.
We are concerned by the growing trend on the
part of the Security Council to consider topics and
assume functions that are not within its mandate,
thereby usurping the roles assigned in the Charter
to other organs, in particular the General Assembly.
Such violations of the mandate established by the
Charter of the United Nations must end immediately.
We again urge the members of the Council to review
the agenda of this organ with a view to aligning it with
the functions to be carried out by the Security Council
under its mandate.
The Council must strictly abide by the provisions of
the Charter and all resolutions of the General Assembly
as the principal deliberative and most representative
policymaking body of the United Nations. The Council
must give adequate account before the General
Assembly, presenting annual reports that are truly
analytical, as well as special reports, as called for in
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter. Unfortunately, such
special reports have yet to be seen.
The question of the veto is intrinsically linked
to that of the working methods of the Council, in
particular its decision-making mechanisms. The veto

12-60646

is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that
should be eliminated as soon as possible. Until it is,
it will be important as a first step to consider various
options for limiting the use of the veto, such as
restricting it to measures adopted by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter; establishing the option for
the veto to be overriden by the affirmative votes of a
certain number of members of the Council, depending
on the number of members of an expanded Council; or
establishing the option for a two-thirds majority in the
General Assembly to override the veto.
A more transparent Council would be a more
legitimate Council. A more inclusive and accessible
Council that truly takes the opinions of Member States
into account would be a more effective Council. Let us
dispense with the rhetoric and usual ritual in discussing
this important item. We are not lacking ideas or
proposals. What is needed is action.
Let us eliminate once and for all the secrecy and
lack of transparency in the work of the Council and
the exclusion of the vast majority of members of the
United Nations from its work and its decisions. Let us
discuss proposals on reforming the working methods,
such as those reiterated today by my delegation, and
those of the Non-Aligned Movement, which Cuba fully
supports. Let us not delay that exercise any further.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

13
