S/PV.7347

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7347th meeting

Thursday, 18 December 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahamat/ Mr. Mangaral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2014/876)

14-70247 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1470247*

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

significant progress has since been made. A political
agreement has been signed, the winning candidates of
the presidential and Provincial Council elections have
been announced and the Government has committed to
an ambitious programme of governance reforms.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2014/876)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Canada, Finland, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this briefing: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/876, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: On behalf of the United Nations family
in Afghanistan, I would like to begin by expressing my
most sincere condolences to the people of Раkistап,
who two days ago suffered a cruel national tragedy. An
attack on school children is an attack that can never be
justified.
At the last Security Council briefing (see
S/PV.7267), the results of the elections had yet to
be announced and the country was in the midst of a
protracted political crisis. I am pleased to report that

2/36

18/12/2014

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been greatly encouraged
by the peaceful political transition. While the electoral
process was prolonged and challenging, the result
is a leadership that is legitimate, freshly mandated
and broadly supported. President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah are to be commended for
their ongoing commitment to make the national unity
arrangement work. In their stated commitment to the
partnership they have created, they have indicated that
the partnership is one of their own choosing and not an
imposition. Their sense of common purpose and clear
commitment to reform, to combat corruption and to
promote sustainable economic growth has given rise
to renewed hope and a palpable sense of expectation
among the Afghan people.
The political agreement was brokered following
an unprecedented 100 per cent audit of a paperbased election. That difficult exercise, not without its
flaws, was designed to be comprehensive, thorough,
independent and transparent. Conducted in conformity
with available international best practices, the process,
however imperfect, was neither biased nor arbitrary and
laid the foundation for the negotiations of the political
agreement that followed.
UNAMA remains convinced that there was no
better way forward than a National Unity Government.
The agreement between the two candidates ended a
political crisis that would at best, if unresolved, have
left the country divided and that could at worst have
reignited past cycles of conflicts. President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah recognized that the
moment called for statesmanship over gamesmanship.
They themselves suggested that the choice they faced
was to swim together or to sink sеparately. I would
nonetheless now urge the political leaders to conclude
the process for the appointment and approval of senior
Government officials. A politically representative yet
merit-based Cabinet can strengthen the population’s
confidence that the Government intends to deliver on its
election promises. It will demonstrate the workability
of the National Unity Government arrangements and
signal that the new Government is ready to govern.

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Prior to the London Conference on Afghanistan,
many in the international community asked themselves
how its success would be measured. The broad
consensus was that it would need to deliver a clear
pledge to critical reforms by the Government as well as
a reaffirmation by the international community of its
enduring commitment to Afghanistan. I am pleased to
report that both those objectives were met.
The Government’s paper entitled “Realizing SelfReliance — Commitments to Reform and Renewed
Partnership” sets forth a thoughtful, bold and muchneeded programme of reforms. The paper’s emphasis
on public accountability, transparency and human
rights mirrors many of the issues for which Afghan
civil society has long advocated. To maintain the
momentum created by the London Conference, the
Afghan Government will need to take action to
overcome its current budgetary difficulties. Due to a
further drop in revenue collection, the fiscal situation
seems to be graver than that portrayed in рoliсy
discussions in London. The receipt of emergency donor
support in November has helped the Government cover
key expenses up until December. The fundamental
problem, however, has not been resolved. Significant
arrears will need to be carried into the next budget. That
is not sustainable, and risks derailing the Government’s
development agenda and the country‘s path to stability.
The international community needs to work with
the Government of Afghanistan on concrete measures
to implement the Government’s reform agenda in
time for the forthcoming post-London meeting of
senior officials. The new Administration has pledged
to make the legal, institutional and policy reforms
needed to sustain hard-won gains made in regard to
women’s rights during the last 12 years. UNAMA will
continue to emphasize that upholding and advancing
women’s rights is an essential step on the road to peace
and development. To that effect, I welcome President
Ghani’s commitment to appointing a substantial number
of women to senior positions in the Government.
Initial steps taken by the Government to соmbаt
corruption must also be acknowledged. They have
signalled the National Unity Government’s will to put
an end to impunity for those who have appropriated
the nation’s resources for themselves. Those efforts
will need to be combined with measures to diminish
the corrosive social and political impact of the growing
illicit economy and the narcotics trade. I leave further
comments on that to the Executive Director of the

S/PV.7347

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov.
As evidenced by the President’s recent regional
engagements, the new Government recognizes
the importance of strengthening relations with its
neighbours. Afghanistan, by virtue of its geographical
location, has an important role to play in the region’s
growth and stability. The country can serve as a
potential land bridge between Central Asia and South
Asia. UNAMA will advocate with Afghanistan’s
northern neighbours that their security concerns are
best promoted through connectivity and trade with
Afghanistan rather than by hardening their borders.
We are confident that recent agreements with
Azerbaijan, China, Pakistan and Turkey and an
expanding regional energy and transportation network
can lead to increased trade and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. That in turn will
bolster employment and Government revenues, and
ultimately lead to greater stability. Creating such
opportunities is not charity; it is in the self-interest of
all of Afghanistan’s neighbours.
The recent Beijing Declaration put on record the
region’s support for timely Afghan-led reconciliation. It
is a recognition that the support of regional stakeholders
is essential to any peace process. China’s renewed
engagement in that regard is to be welcomed. President
Ghani’s visit to Pakistan, followed by an exchange
of visits by senior officials to and from Kabul and
Islamabad, has paved the way for a more productive and
forward-looking dialogue, and may lay the groundwork
for closer cooperation between the two countries.
Stability and prosperity can simply not be achieved
in the absence of a durable peace. Ultimately, the
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan is political
rather than military. President Ghani himself has made
that clear, and has extended an invitation to those who
oppose the Government to enter into an inter-Afghan
dialogue to resolve the conflict. That commitment to
direct dialogue between the Government and the armed
opposition through an Afghan-led peace process is to be
welcomed. UNAMA stands ready to support Afghanled and owned reconciliation and political processes,
and will engage all parties in support of that, in full
consultation with the Government.
The necessity for a peaceful resolution to the
conflict is underscored by the appalling human cost
borne by ordinary Afghans. As of 30 November,

14-702473/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

UNAMA had recorded more civilian deaths and
injuries this year more than in any other year since
2008. Civilian casualties increased 19 per cent overall
from last year, with a figure of 33 per cent in respect
of children. Those casualties resulted mostly from
ground engagements between parties to the conflict,
improvised explosive devices, and suicide and complex
attacks carried out by anti-Government forces.
The increased targeting of marketplaces, deminers
clearing unexploded ordnance, and various sporting
and cultural events suggests a shift in approach by
anti-Government elements. By way of example, the
23 November suicide attack on a large crowd watching
a volleyball match in Paktika killed at least 53 civilians,
including 21 children. As Afghan security forces
assume the lead in protecting the civilian population,
international forces must remain engaged with the
Afghan National Security Forces in mitigating the
devastating effects of conflict on civilians. I can report
that UNAMA continues to engage with the Taliban on
the critical issue of responsibility for and avoidance of
civilian casualties.
With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission, I would want to recognize
the contribution of all contributing Member States and
honour those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in
the pursuit of a peaceful and sovereign Afghanistan.
The Government has now taken full responsibility
for the security of the country. The Afghan National
Security Forces are meeting the challenges of the
insurgency with determination and courage, but at
great cost. In that regard, the joint decision taken by
NATO and the Government of Afghanistan to launch
the Resolute Support Mission as of 1 January 2015,
and resolution 2189 (2014) in support of the Mission,
are vitally important. Sustained and predictable
international security assistance is vital. The recent
surge in security incidents is cause for concern. It is too
early to assess whether the surge is timed to coincide
with the withdrawal of international military forces,
or is the new normal. UNAMA itself is reassessing its
security measures, but is not curtailing its activities.
When they voted in such large numbers in the
presidential and provincial elections, Afghans acted on
their belief that elections would deliver a better future
The ensuing political stalemate, however, has left
many questioning the value of the democratic process
It is therefore the responsibility of the Government
to convince the Afghan electorate that duly adopted

4/36

18/12/2014

reforms will deliver less fraudulent elections. One of the
first steps will be for the Government to bring certainty
to the electoral calendar by announcing realistic dates
for the holding of parliamentary and District Council
elections. We note that the political agreement signed
between the two parties provides for comprehensive
electoral reform prior to the Wolesi Jirga and District
Council elections envisaged for 2015. We strongly
encourage the Government to use the opportunity
offered by the reform process to engage the Afghan
people in a transparent and consultative manner as a way
to improve their confidence in electoral institutions.
I would like to thank my predecessor, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš, for
his leadership of UNAMA during a most challenging
period of transition. He has left a mission held in
high regard by the Afghan population. For the past
13 years the international community has rendered
unprecedented support — military, financial and
political — to Afghanistan. With the conclusion of the
political and security transitions, the means and form
of support will necessarily evolve and change — more
specifically as the Council reconsiders the UNAMA
mandate next year. What will not change, however, is
the shared goal of a peaceful, sovereign and increasingly
prosperous Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I would like to start by expressing
my most heartfelt condolences to the Government and
the people of Pakistan. We are deeply shocked by the
horrific terrorist attack on a school in Peshawar that
resulted in the death of so many innocent people,
including children. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) remains committed to
supporting the Government of Pakistan in its efforts to
promote peace and security. Pakistan is a key partner of
UNODC in the region in addressing the challenges of
drugs and crime.
This time of transition has had a clear impact on
drug control efforts in Afghanistan. The new leadership
and the international community face formidable
challenges posed by illicit drugs. Nevertheless, the
transition also presents an opportunity to assess
counter-narcotics strategies and to ensure that our
responses are strong and effective. Since I reported to
the Council in June (see S/PV.7208), UNODC released

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2014 last month. The
report, unfortunately, confirms the negative trend
of the continued increase in opium cultivation and
production. The total estimated area under cultivation
rose to 224,000 hectares in 2014, an increase of 7 per
cent over the record level of last year. Eradication
decreased from 7,348 hectares in 2013 to 2,692 hectares
in 2014. As a result, production has climbed as much
as 17 per cent to 6,400 tons. Average opium yield rose
9 per cent. I will stop quoting figures and numbers, as
they are contained in the Secretary-General’s report
before the Council (S/2014/876).
All in all, the illicit opium economy and related
criminality, money laundering and corruption continue
to threaten security, social and economic development,
governance and health in Afghanistan, the region
and beyond. That has been repeatedly recognized
by the Security Council, including in its presidential
statement of June (S/PRST/2014/12). The question
before us remains: what can we do to stop illicit drugs
from undermining the fragile progress, imperilling the
future of Afghanistan and causing global harm?
First and foremost, the lessons of the past decade
strongly suggest that counter-narcotic efforts must
be fully integrated into development and security
strategies, and delivered as part of unified assistance.
We must do more to ensure that action to weaken the
stranglehold of drugs and crime goes hand in hand with
efforts to strengthen the licit economy. The importance
of integrating counter-narcotics responses is reaffirmed
in resolution 2145 (2014). It is further reflected in the
continuing discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda, as well as in the preparations for the 2016
special session of the General Assembly on drugs.
Our responses must be long-term and adequately
resourced, and they cannot be allowed to fall victim
to silo mentalities or piecemeal approaches that cannot
produce sustainable results.
I was in Kabul in November to meet President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah.
In our meetings, three priorities for comprehensive
drug control were identified, which can guide us as we
move forward: first, enabling alternative development
as part of a broader and more comprehensive and
more ambitious effort to modernize the agricultural
sector; secondly, improving prevention, treatment, care
and rehabilitation services; and, thirdly, countering

S/PV.7347

organized crime and drug-trafficking through enhanced
regional and interregional cooperation.
Let me begin with the first point. Farmers need
viable, licit livelihoods as a sustainable alternative to
opium cultivation. As experience in other countries
facing drug cultivation and production challenges has
shown, eradication can be successful if fully supported
by meaningful alternative development programmes.
Reducing the vulnerability of farmers and communities
must also include addressing the issue of access to
irrigation and local markets, as well as access to
education and health care. UNODC’s World Drug
Report 2015 will feature a special thematic chapter
analysing the available evidence on the implementation
of alternative development programmes, which can
also help to inform efforts.
Afghan opium accounts for 80 per cent of global
production. The devastating impact on health and
communities that illicit drugs have had in many
countries is well known. But Afghanistan also pays
a terrible price. The prevalence of opiate use in
Afghanistan is among the highest in the world.
It is increasingly recognized that a balanced
approach to the world drug problem must address
demand reduction, with prevention and treatment
services, including for HIV, based on scientific
evidence and respect for human rights. Supporting and
expanding such services must also be a priority in drugcontrol efforts in Afghanistan. UNODC is developing
and piloting new programmes for drug prevention and
treatment services for children exposed to drugs at a
young age.
Shared responsibility is the guiding principle of the
international community’s support and involvement in
Afghanistan. The importance of regional cooperation
has been reaffirmed by the Security Council.
Nevertheless, we must do more to ensure that that
shared responsibility become better operationalized
so as to control drug-trafficking networks. We must
reinforce cooperative action against corruption and
money laundering, strengthen governance and promote
effective criminal justice responses to stop impunity.
UNODC is also supporting Afghanistan’s efforts
to engage with its neighbours and the broader region.
Through a three-tier, national-regional-global approach,
UNODC is helping to weave together cross-border law
enforcement, cooperation in criminal matters and drugprevention responses, based on sound research of opiate

14-702475/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

18/12/2014

trade trends. That interregional approach connects
West and Central Asia, South-East Europe, the Gulf
region and Eastern Africa — regions affected by the
illicit trafficking of opiates and precursor chemicals
from and into Afghanistan.

his briefing. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to Ambassador Quinlan and
the Permanent Mission of Australia for their support
and great efforts as penholder on Afghanistan on the
Council for the past two years.

UNODC’s “Networking the Networks” initiative
has facilitated a number of joint intelligence-led drugcontrol operations that are currently under way. We
are also working with several countries through the
Maritime Crime Programme to address the growing
problem of heroin-trafficking on the high seas of
the Indian Ocean, the so-called southern route. The
Container Control Programme, which has been
extremely effective in countering all forms of illicit
trafficking, is now expanding beyond sea ports and
dry ports to develop airport capacities, starting with
Pakistan’s Karachi airport.

The international military combat mission in
Afghanistan, authorized under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations 13 years ago in the
aftermath of the 911 attacks, will officially end in 14
days. Just a few days ago, the Council adopted resolution
2189 (2014), which reaffirms the completion of the
mandate of the International Security Assistance Force
and welcomes the Resolute Support Mission, aimed at
training, advising and assisting the Afghan National
Security and Defence Forces on the basis of agreements
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, NATO
and the United States. This is a historic step towards
a new beginning in Afghanistan and a key marker of
the country’s transition to a new chapter in its relations
with the international community.

The importance of enhanced coordination also
applies to the efforts of the United Nations system. The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Afghanistan for 2015 to 2019 provides a solid
platform for a joint United Nations response, including
on counter-narcotics. Coordinated action also helps
to ensure the efficient use of the available financial
resources and international aid.
President Ghani, at the recent London Conference,
affirmed Afghanistan’s readiness to overcome the past
and face the future with full unity and with confidence.
We must support Afghanistan in this momentous task
and begin the decade of transformation with courage
and determination.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Republic of Chad for its leadership
of the Security Council this month and for having
convened this debate. I thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2014/876). I also welcome the statement
of Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and congratulate him on his
recent appointment. I would like to thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his presence here today and for

6/36

This monumental achievement comes on the
heels of another significant moment in the history
of Afghanistan, and another major victory for the
transition agenda: the presidential elections. While
complex and challenging, the elections culminated in
the first peaceful transfer of power from one elected
leader to another in the country. The agreement of
Afghanistan’s leaders to put the country’s successful
future ahead of political division and establish a
National Unity Government fostered an environment
of hopefulness, inclusivity and political consensus
and cemented the foundation for lasting peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan.
While the people and leadership of Afghanistan
are confident that the country is moving in a positive
direction, the challenges Afghanistan faces are
formidable. Insecurity remains the main impediment to
progress across the country. In the past several months,
terrorists and insurgent groups have intensified attacks
in an attempt to deplete national confidence in the new
Government and to intimidate the Afghan people. As
they commit acts of violence and brutality against
innocent men, women and children, extremist armed
groups should know that the courageous Afghan
security forces stand ready to fight for the future of
Afghan democracy, peace and security. Their resilience,
particularly during the election period and throughout
the past year, demonstrates their commitment to

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7347

protecting the lives of Afghans and the future of the
country.

girls, and undertaking comprehensive reforms of
electoral laws and institutions.

In the months and years ahead, the sustained support
of the international community, including through the
NATO-Afghanistan Enduring Partnership and the
Resolute Support Mission, as well as the commitments
made at the Bonn Conference; the Chicago, Lisbon
and Wales Summits; and the recent NATO ministerial
meeting in Brussels, will continue to be essential to
enhancing the capacity and capabilities of the Afghan
forces in the years ahead. At the same time, the
Government of Afghanistan recognizes that a political
solution is essential to stopping the violence and the
continuing terror campaign. To that end, an extensive
reconciliation process with the armed opposition is
high on the Government’s agenda.

The third is promoting economic and fiscal
stability. Afghanistan is committed to enhancing
productivity, mobilizing domestic revenue and
expanding private-sector investment, growth and
employment opportunities with the ultimate aim of
reducing Afghanistan’s dependence on donor support
and achieving long-term sustainability and prosperity
in the country. The illicit drug economy is a grave
concern, and to this end the Government is committed
to a comprehensive response to combat this menace,
in collaboration with our regional and international
partners.

As Afghanistan takes steps to overcome security
threats, the country faces immediate economic
challenges, including a looming fiscal crisis. The
protracted election process triggered uncertainty
and negatively impacted revenue collection, donor
confidence and economic growth, making it difficult for
the Government to mobilize adequate revenue to meet
its financing priorities. We call on our international
partners to fulfil their commitments to supporting the
country so that the Government can close the longrunning fiscal gap and deliver on its reform promises.
The National Unity Government has devised a
comprehensive reform agenda aimed at addressing
both the immediate and the long-term challenges
Afghanistan faces and at enabling the country to make
progress towards self-reliance, sustainable growth,
peace and stability. Today, I will highlight a few
key aspects of the new agenda that the leadership of
Afghanistan presented in full to international partners
at the London Conference on Afghanistan earlier this
month.
The first is fighting corruption. By recognizing
the corrosive effects of corruption, the Government
of Afghanistan has already taken steps to tackle that
endemic scourge and its underlying drivers. In its first
days in office, the new Administration reopened the
Kabul Bank case and made plans to reform a number of
key oversight bodies.
The second is advancing good governance. The
Government is committed to strengthening democratic
institutions, promoting the rule of law, enhancing
human rights, particularly the rights of women and

The fourth is strengthening regional cooperation,
which will set Afghanistan firmly on the path
towards peace and security and will enhance growth,
prosperity and stability in Afghanistan and across
the region. President Ghani’s State visits to China,
Pakistan and Azerbaijan and his engagement with other
neighbouring countries, as well as his attendance at
key regional meetings — such as the seventeenth South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit
in Kathmandu and the fourth Heart of Asia/Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference in China — indicate
the priority that the new Government is giving to
regional integration. The Government has also taken
steps to increase transit, trade, investment and energy
and power projects, such as the Central Asia South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project and the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
Pipeline,
and to utilize Afghanistan’s geographical advantage as
a hub connecting Central, South, West and East Asia.
The fifth is enhancing the development partnership.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
delivering on its commitments as set out in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. At the same time, it
is crucial that donors reaffirm mutual commitments to
aid effectiveness principles, including the importance
of building Afghan capabilities, delivering more
aid on budget, and aligning development initiatives
with Afghan national priorities. We look forward to
deepening these mutual commitments at the senior
officials meeting in 2015 in Kabul and at the next
ministerial meeting in 2016.
The National Unity Government has already taken
significant, positive steps to advance its reform agenda
and to lay the foundation for lasting peace and stability

14-702477/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

in the country. Its decisive actions in the areas of
governance, security, economic and social development,
regional and international relations and human rights,
and its successful achievement of key milestones in the
transition process have sent a powerful message to the
people of Afghanistan and the international community
that, as President Ghani has said, a successful
Afghanistan is entirely within our reach. At the same
time, we recognize that a great deal of hard work lies
ahead of us, including the formation of a merit-based
Cabinet, which the leadership of Afghanistan aims to
accomplish in the coming weeks. Moving forward, the
Government is dedicated to sustaining the optimism of
the Afghan people and to building a successful future.
At this critical juncture in the country’s history,
the National Unity Government is determined to
build upon the enthusiasm of the Afghan people and
the successes of the past 13 years to take bold steps
towards self-sufficiency, peace and prosperity for all
Afghans. As it does so, the enduring support of the
international community is essential to the success of
the Government’s comprehensive reform agenda, to
the country’s efforts to achieve the objectives of the
transformation decade, and to enduring peace, stability
and prosperity in the years ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Chad.
We congratulate Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his
appointment as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and thank him for his briefing. We also thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing.
Chad commends the President-elect of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, and Chief
Executive Officer Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, for their
leadership, which has allowed the country to emerge
from the political impasse in the post-electoral period.
We encourage them to maintain this momentum of
solidarity in order to address the major challenges faced
by the country. We also welcome the unflagging efforts
of the international community, notably UNAMA, and
of Afghan civil society and traditional and religious
leaders during this crucial phase of Afghanistan in its
history.

8/36

18/12/2014

The current post-electoral environment should
not serve to mask the challenges that the country
faces. The situation requires the ongoing support of
the international community, especially in terms of
security, the humanitarian situation and the combat
against drug trafficking, terrorism and extremism.
Along those same lines, Chad takes note of the
commitments entered into by President Ghani and
of the call made on all political, traditional, religious
and military groups, including the Taliban and Hezb-e
Islami Gulbuddin, to join the process of the political
resolution of the crisis, so as to bring stability and
prosperity to Afghanistan.
Chad welcomes the signing of the cooperation and
military assistance agreements between Afghanistan
and the United States on the one hand and NATO on
the other, aimed at filling the gaps that will emerge
with the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), whose mandate will conclude
on 31 December.
We wish to pay a resounding tribute to ISAF
for the role that it has played and for the tremendous
sacrifices that it has made, and we hail the memory of
fallen ISAF personnel. Chad welcomes the political and
diplomatic efforts made regionally and internationally
to build peace and security in Afghanistan, and we
encourage those efforts to continue. Chad believes that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is criminal
and unjustifiable, whatever the motives might be. We
condemn all violence and terrorist acts perpetrated
by the Taliban or linked to Al-Qaida or other armed
groups. Such inhumane and cruel acts represent serious
crimes against humanity, and their perpetrators must
be pursued and prosecuted.
We remain concerned at the tenor of the most
recent report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, which shows an increase in drug trafficking,
including opium and other narcotics, whose negative
consequences for national security are incalculable. We
encourage neighbouring countries and the international
community to step up their efforts in order to ensure
greater coordination in the fight against the crossborder traffic in drugs and illicit substances.
The implementation of joint and mixed patrols
with neighbouring countries will allow for improved
surveillance of common borders. We are concerned
at the deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
particularly that of internally displaced persons, and call

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

on the international community to make greater efforts
to assist them. We would also recall the call made by the
Secretary-General to increase humanitarian assistance.
We condemn the attacks perpetrated by armed groups
against humanitarian workers and the obstacles of all
kinds that are hindering the delivery and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need.
To conclude, we pay homage to outgoing President
Karzai for the efforts he deployed in endowing
Afghanistan with a Constitution and in fostering the
democratic transition of power, for the first time in the
history of that country. We wish the current Government
every success. We commend Ján Kubiš, the outgoing
Special Representative, for his tireless efforts and the
courage that he has shown throughout his time at the
helm of UNAMA.
Lastly, we commend and encourage all United
Nations and humanitarian agency personnel, who,
despite the difficult conditions in which they are
discharging their duties in Afghanistan, continue to do
their very best to help the people of Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Nicholas
Haysom for his first briefing to the Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and I
welcome him to the role. I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov
for his briefing and acknowledge Afghanistan’s
Permanent Representative, Zahir Tanin, for his central
and always very persuasive role in Afghanistan’s
engagement with the international community. The
year 2014 — Afghanistan’s year of transition — is
drawing to a close. Despite the many challenges facing
the country, it has been a successful year.
Afghanistan has taken the lead for security across
the country, historic presidential elections were held,
and important economic reforms are under way. The
millions of Afghans who participated in elections this
year, under the threat of violence, cast an uninhibited,
unambiguous vote in favour of democracy. The
formation of President Ghani’s and Executive Officer
Abdullah’s National Unity Government is a historic
achievement, marking the first democratic transition of
power in Afghanistan. Appointing an inclusive cabinet
will be an important first step, and we look to President

S/PV.7347

Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah to do this
without delay.
Drawing on the lessons of the presidential elections,
and as set out in the National Unity Government
agreement, we look to the Government to implement
important electoral reform ahead of parliamentary
and district council elections. President Ghani has
demonstrated his Government’s commitment to
stronger regional relationships. The region needs much
closer, serious cooperation on security, including in the
fight against terrorism and to counter narcotics.
Afghanistan’s security transition will be complete
at the end of 2014, when the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) mission concludes. Over the
last 13 years, ISAF and the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have substantially reduced the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. We all pay tribute
the many men and women, both military and civilian,
who have given their lives in pursuit of this mission.
The ANSF is now assuming full responsibility
for securing the country. The ANSF has grown from
scratch in 2001 to a professional force capable of
providing security across Afghanistan. Its performance
in securing two rounds of presidential elections is
testament to this. Of course, it faces challenges from
increasingly violent anti-Government forces — forces
responsible for most of the very worrying increase in
civilian casualties.
As Afghanistan assumes security responsibility,
the international community remains committed. The
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission will continue to
train, advise and assist the ANSF. My own country,
Australia, will contribute personnel to Resolute
Support and provide $100 million a year from 2015
to 2017 to sustain the ANSF. Resolution 2189 (2014),
adopted unanimously by the Council last Friday, was
an important reaffirmation of international community
support for Afghanistan’s transition and for the Resolute
Support Mission.
Since the fall of the Taliban in 2001, Afghanistan
has made impressive progress on development. Eight
million children are now in school, including 3 million
girls. Forty women sit in the Afghan parliament. Life
expectancy is up, and infant mortality is down. A total
of 15 million Afghans now own a mobile phone.
It is clear that Afghanistan’s new Government is
determined to achieve self-reliance. Key to self-reliance

14-702479/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

will be economic growth, which will ensure strong
Government revenues. At the London Conference on
Afghanistan earlier this month, donors and the new
Afghan Government focused on development priorities
and mutual accountability. We are reassured by the
Government’s commitment to deliver on its ambitious
reform programme. Australia will support this and
continue to provide substantial development assistance
in support of economic growth, empowering women
and girls, and humanitarian assistance.
Much progress has also been made on human
rights. The new Government has demonstrated that it
is committed to advancing the position of women and
girls in Afghan society. Full implementation of the law
on the elimination of violence against women and the
finalization and implementation of a national action
plan on women, peace and security must be priorities.
An inclusive peace and reconciliation process that
recognizes the role of women will have a much greater
chance of success. As I have said consistently, along
with others, progress on women and girls will be and
must be a decisive indicator by which Afghanistan’s
progress will be measured by all of us who want to
support Afghanistan’s successful transition to the
future.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been a serious partner in
Afghanistan. That was made clear through its central
role facilitating the resolution of the protracted political
election process this year. Australia looks forward to
UNAMA, with adequate resources, continuing its focus
on good offices, human rights, donor coordination and
humanitarian assistance. A strong UNAMA with a
strong partnership with the new Afghan Government
will be vital, as will a continued UNAMA role across
the country and in the provinces.
To conclude, 2015 will mark a new and
hopefully decisive chapter in Afghanistan’s history.
Afghanistan’s transformation decade will be period
of great opportunity, but axiomatically also one of
great challenge. Afghanistan has made extraordinary
progress following the collapse of the Taliban. It
has established a democratic Government, created
functioning State institutions, built an effective
security force and achieved remarkable — if not
complete — gains on human rights. Australia, like
the rest of the international community, is committed
to supporting Afghanistan — an Afghanistan now

10/36

18/12/2014

ultimately in the hands of the Afghan people and their
Government.
It has been an honour to serve as penholder on
Afghanistan in the Council. I appreciate the close
cooperation of all Council members, Member States
and of course Afghanistan itself. I thank Ambassador
Tanin and his team for their own strong leadership
in so diligently working for the success of the new
Afghanistan. The Council has been united in its support
for Afghanistan, and that reflects the international
community’s resolute commitment to Afghanistan’s
future.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I wish him
a warm welcome to the Council in his new role. I also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Yury Fedotov, and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for their statements.
I align myself with the statement to be made during
this debate by the observer of the European Union.
Afghanistan has come a long way since 2001. The
path has been strewn with hardships and sacrifices,
but also remarkable advances. That is evidenced by the
progress made in the fields of education and health. It is
also evidenced by the regular holding of elections and
the first democratic transfer of power. The international
community must recognize the progress that has
been made and the credit that is due to the Afghans.
Nevertheless, it must not lose sight of the challenges
that remain.
Today it is absolutely necessary that the Afghan
ruling class put itself fully at the service of its people
and quickly agree on the formation of a National
Unity Government that reflects the diversity of the
country. Otherwise, the destabilizing effect of political
uncertainty will strengthen the power of those looking
to return Afghanistan to its old demons.
To meet the huge challenges ahead, the National
Unity Government, once formed, will need the
continued support of the international community,
which is willing to provide that support. At the London
Conference on 4 December, donors reiterated their
commitment to staying at the side of the Afghan people.
On the security front, the NATO Resolute Support
Mission, heralded by the unanimous adoption of

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

resolution 2189 (2014), will provide advice, training and
assistance to Afghan security forces. The international
community’s support will continue to be manifested
through UNAMA’s work on the ground. I will say more
on that in a moment.
While security efforts are essential to the stability
of the country and the protection of civilians, efforts
to improve human development will be critical to the
long-term stabilization of Afghanistan. Respect for
human rights is, in this respect, a crucial element,
and improving the status of women is an absolute
necessity. We are encouraged by the fact that President
Ghani Ahmadzai has expressed his support on many
occasions for the respect of human rights. For our part,
we would like to call on the new authorities to spare
no effort to prevent, report and denounce violence
committed against Afghan women. We also advocate
that the progress made in terms of the status of women
not be sacrificed on the altar of a possible national
reconciliation agreement.
In human development, the fight against poverty
must be another priority. The proportion of the Afghan
population living below the poverty line is still too
high. National resources must be allocated in a more
equitable manner. Large-scale economic reforms are
needed and will also have to address the growing
dependence of the country on the illicit economy linked
to drug trafficking.
Another key area is that of child protection. We
welcome the fact that the National Assembly has
passed a law criminalizing the recruitment of children
by the Afghan National Security Forces. That is an
important step in the implementation of the action
plan to counter the recruitment and use of children.
We encourage the authorities to persevere in those
efforts. We are nonetheless concerned at the continuing
reports of boys arrested and detained because of their
alleged association with armed groups or on charges
related to national security. Those children must first
be considered victims and immediately transferred to
child protection specialists.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our
appreciation for the outstanding work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In the coming years, with the withdrawal of international
combat troops, the support role of UNAMA will
become even more important. Supporting the Afghan
authorities in strengthening the rule of law, shoring up

S/PV.7347

democracy and protecting human rights will continue to
be a the heart of the Mission’s mandate. The important
role that the United Nations has to play in terms of good
offices and international assistance coordination should
also be taken into account. UNAMA should have the
adequate means to fulfil its mission in order to ensure a
field presence throughout all of Afghanistan.
There are many areas in Afghanistan that require
work. Some will lament that the progress made is not
being made fast enough or not going far enough. That
may be true. But not going far enough is still moving
ahead, and that alone is encouraging for those Afghans
who have demonstrated that they want to take their fate
into their own hands to shape a better future for their
country.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and Executive
Director Yury Fedotov for their presentations. As this
is the first time that Special Representative Haysom
has briefed the Council since his appointment, I would
like to extend him a warm welcome. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
Today, Afghanistan stands on the threshold of the
transformation decade, looking towards a self-reliant
and sustainable future. We have seen some positive
signals, including the aspirations of the Afghan people
who cast their votes in the elections, defying the threat
of terrorism in the first-ever democratic transfer of
power in Afghanistan’s history.
Still, there are numerous challenges ahead. Afghanled efforts, supported by international assistance,
are essential to bringing about a more peaceful and
prosperous country. In that vein, we recognize the
firm determination of the newly launched Afghan
Government to improve governance, democratic
institutions and the rule of law. In particular, we
recognize its recent reform agenda, namely, realizing
self-reliance, commitment to reforms and renewed
partnership, as a comprehensive framework in which
to tackle the challenges facing Afghanistan. We ask
the Afghan Government to make strenuous efforts to
implement this reform agenda. While we stress the
importance of the inclusiveness and representativeness
of the new National Unity Government, the formation
of its Cabinet should be expedited.
With regard to the security situation, we are deeply
concerned about ongoing violent terrorist activity by

14-7024711/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups. We
condemn in the strongest terms the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including those committed with
improvised explosive devices. Given the assumption
by the Afghan National Security Forces of full security
responsibility at the end of this year, continuous
international support to strengthen its capabilities is
critical in the struggle against such terrorist activities.
In that regard, we appreciate the sustained support
of NATO and contributing partners to Afghanistan
beyond 2014, including through a Resolute Support
Mission to train, advise and assist Afghan forces. We
also welcome the Council’s adoption of resolution 2189
(2014) in that connection.
Afghanistan’s illicit economy, which depends
mainly on increasing opium cultivation and production,
is another source of concern. As indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/876), opium
production, which accounts for roughly four per cent
of the country’s gross domestic product, is linked to
insecurity, as 89 per cent of opium cultivation was
concentrated in the most insecure provinces. Noting
the strong connection between drug trafficking and
terrorist activities carried out by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other extremist groups, strengthened and resolute
efforts by the Afghan Government, supported by
international and regional partners, are essential to
fight this scourge.
The London Conference on Afghanistan, held early
in December, which my Foreign Minister attended,
served as an important opportunity to reaffirm the
international community’s commitments to support
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade. The
Republic of Korea has played its part in the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan through its provincial
reconstruction team in Karwan from July 2010 to June
2014 and its financial contribution of $500 million over
the past five years. We will continue to honour our
commitment by disbursing $100 million up to 2016 for
the socioeconomic development of Afghanistan, and
$100 million through a separate multilateral basket for
the Afghan National Security Forces from 2015 to 2016.
The stability of Afghanistan is in the shared
interests of the international community. We support
the stability and development of Afghanistan based on
a National Unity Government characterized by genuine
partnerships and inclusiveness. We look forward to
the key role played by the United Nations Assistance

12/36

18/12/2014

Mission in Afghanistan and the sustained commitment
of the international community for this purpose.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
briefing. I also wish to thank the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their
commitment and devotion. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their statements.
The Afghan people are witnessing their first
democratic transition in modern history. Political
leaders have moved beyond the impasse. That shows
the people’s willingness to work tirelessly for peace
and stability on the path of democracy. We hope that
these positive developments will be followed up by
the creation of a Government that is in a position to
tackle the political, economic and security challenges
that Afghanistan has always faced — a Government
that allows for an acceleration of the reform agenda,
ensures the electoral timetables and promotes the rule
of law, as well as human rights, in particular the rights
of women and the fight against violence against women
and crimes against women in general.
Afghanistan’s efforts should be supported by the
active and sustained engagement of the international
community, in particular by the donor nations. Jordan
commends the holding of the London Conference on
Afghanistan, in which the Afghan leaders presented
their new reform agenda, which is a very responsible
plan in the area of development.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
difficult. We are concerned about the ongoing
terrorism that the people of Afghanistan suffer. Jordan
condemns in the strongest terms all terrorist attacks
against civilians, the Afghan National Security Forces
and international workers in Afghanistan. I note the
terrorist attack against the French Institute and the
attack on a British vehicle, as well as other cowardly
terrorist acts, not to mention the killing of Afghanis,
including children. We reiterate the importance of
providing lasting support to the Afghan National
Security Forces, especially in the light of the reduction
in the international presence in Afghanistan. We
welcome the support provided by NATO, which will

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

provide training, advice and assistance to the Afghan
defence forces.
We are pleased with the Afghan Government’s
commitment to improve its relations with its neighbours.
We hope that regional cooperation will be improved and
that a climate of understanding will reign between and
among the countries of the region. We also hope that
the security situation and the tensions that exist will be
responsibly addressed. We support the regional forums
aimed at strengthening peace and security and regional
stability and at increasing economic opportunities.
We commend the holding of the Asia-Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference, and we support the
commitment of the United Nations and other partners
to promote dialogue and confidence-building.
Regional cooperation plays a key role in the fight
against the production, trafficking and sale of illicit
narcotics, which threaten the socioeconomic future of
the country as well as international peace and security.
It would be advisable to also bear in mind the worrisome
indicators that opium production has increased this
year, which will fuel terrorism and extremism. Jordan
welcomes all regional initiatives aimed at combatting
narcotics, controlling the borders and promoting
cooperation between and among law enforcement
agencies and legal institutions. We also welcome the
Afghan Government’s efforts in the fight against drug
trafficking and support its efforts to launch its plan to
fight this scourge.
Jordan reaffirms the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and of the need for the
Security Council to stay informed of the most recent
developments in such matters.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his first briefing
to the Security Council. I extend my delegation’s
congratulations to him on his appointment to this post.
We wish him and the entire United Nations family on
the ground best success in ensuring continuous support
to Afghanistan and wish that they may all stay safe. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
briefing and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union later on.

S/PV.7347

In a few days, Afghanistan will turn another
page in modern history. As of 1 January 2015, the
responsibility for security in the country will be fully
in the hands of the Afghan people. It is time now to
quickly capitalize on the gains made during the last 13
years and advance in tackling the ongoing challenges,
be they in political, peace and security, human rights
or economic realms. Robust, visionary leadership from
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah Abdullah will be essential. Lithuania, as a
partner of Afghanistan for almost 10 years, was happy
to see the reform package presented by the National
Unity Government at the London Conference. It lays
a firm foundation for the country’s development
during the transformation decade. We encourage the
two leaders to proceed promptly to appointing and
confirming senior Government officials. A strong
and truly united Government is needed to meet the
formidable challenges that lie ahead.
The economic situation, corruption and growing
levels of opium production in Afghanistan remain issues
of grave concern, challenging efforts to strengthen
the country’s stability and spur its development. We
welcome President Ghani’s initial steps, including
investigation into the Kabul Bank fraud case, which
show his determination to advance the rule of law.
Immediate action on the part of the Government is
needed to promote legal livelihoods and strengthen
Afghanistan’s social, economic and political fabric.
That includes passing a credible budget, implementing
measures to increase revenues and pursuing specific
reforms aimed at improving the conditions for private
sector investment.
The past few weeks have once again been marked
by murderous attacks all over the State that have killed
Afghan soldiers and civilians, including one in Kabul
on the Institut Français d’Afghanistan and Isteqlel High
School. We strongly condemn such brutal attacks on
the Afghan population, including children, offer our
deepest condolences and sympathy to all families of
the victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
The anti-Government elements attacking civilians
with improvised explosive devices and on ground
engagements, by means that include small-arms fire
and suicide and complex attacks, must not be allowed
to escape their responsibility under international
humanitarian law. All perpetrators of such acts of
violence must be brought to account.

14-7024713/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

We commend the Afghan National Security Forces
for the strong willingness they have demonstrated to
respond to the challenge of anti-Government elements.
Continued international support and commitments are
necessary to ensure that their capabilities are sustained.
As the mission of NATO’s International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) winds down, we welcome the
recent ratification of both the United States bilateral
security and NATO status of forces agreements, which
form a legal basis for post-2014 security assistance
to Afghanistan, and the Council’s adoption on
12 December of resolution 2189 (2014). The resolution
constitutes a significant support to Afghanistan and
the post-2014 allies’ engagements there. My delegation
thanks Australia for its leadership of the negotiating
process for the resolution.
Lithuania supports and remains committed to the
new NATO-led non-combat Resolute Support Mission.
My country’s contribution to the Mission will be one
of its major commitments to the Alliance in 2015. My
Government had already confirmed a contribution of
$500,000 to the Afghan National Army trust fund for
2015, according to the financial pledges recorded for
the period 2015-2017. Lithuania is also contributing
national experts to the European Union Police Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We believe it is
important for UNAMA to take into consideration the
consequences of ISAF’s withdrawal from the provincial
centres, as well as the changing security environment.
We expect the safety of personnel to be assured in the
new circumstances.
A strong security sector alone does not guarantee
lasting peace and prosperity, however. The fact that
President Ghani is emphasizing and prioritizing an
Afghan-owned and -led reconciliation process is a
welcome and much-needed step. The full inclusion of
men, women, young people, civil society and minorities
is key if reconciliation is to succeed. The meaningful
participation of women, in particular, in Afghanistan’s
political and peace processes must be ensured. My
delegation welcomes the outcome of the elections to
the provincial councils, in which female candidates
won 21 per cent of the seats. President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah’s meetings with
women representatives of civil society are a positive
step towards women’s greater inclusion in the country’s
social, political and economic life.

14/36

18/12/2014

During her visit to Afghanistan, Special Rapporteur
Rashida Manjoo noted with appreciation the political
will evident in the attitude to promoting and protecting
women’s rights. Lithuania welcomes the launch of
the first gender-based violence treatment protocol for
health-care providers, as well as the training planned
for medical personnel on survivor-centred care in
Afghanistan. Despite such positive trends, deadly
attacks, such as that on women’s rights activist Shukria
Barakzai, prove that there is still a long way to go before
women can become truly free and secure in exercising
their human and civil rights. Violence against women
remains a major source of concern. Comprehensive
and coherent data collection, as well as the effective
implementation of laws and adequate resources for
supporting women’s shelters as a protective remedy,
should be ensured without further delay.
In a final point, which Ambassador Tanin himself
just raised, the positive engagement of Afghanistan’s
regional partners, both bilaterally and by way of
regional initiatives such as the Istanbul Process, is
crucial to building a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
We welcome President Ghani’s emphasis on regional
cooperation. The continued support of the international
community through the efforts of UNAMA remains
essential if the transformation decade is to bring a
better life to each and every Afghan citizen.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their presentations. I also thank the Ambassador Tanin
of Afghanistan for the statement he has just made, and
associate myself in advance with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/876)
emphasizes, Afghanistan has entered a decisive phase
in its history. After a period of intense electoral activity,
we can only applaud the success of the first democratic
transition in the country’s history. I too hope that
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
can quickly come to an agreement on forming a National
Unity Government. The establishment of a new team
will be crucial to achieving the reforms the country
needs, and we took note of the priorities Ambassador
Tanin just described — combating corruption, good
governance and the promotion of economic and
financial stability, in particular. This is encouraging,

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

and those intentions must now be translated into reality
on the ground. In that regard, we would welcome the
involvement of UNAMA, which gave the Afghan
authorities exemplary support in order to enable it to
bring the electoral process to a definitive conclusion.
On the political front, we would like to welcome the
very encouraging recent developments. However, that
should not let us forget that many challenges remain
during a transition period marked by changes in the
international community’s support for Afghanistan. The
main challenge is, of course, security. The insurgents
are trying to make Afghans and their partners doubt the
progress that has been achieved. The terrible attacks
of the past few weeks are a disgusting attempt to
destabilize the process under way. Like some previous
speakers, I have in mind in particular the 11 December
attack on the French cultural centre in Kabul, which
targeted a place of culture and creativity well known
to and much appreciated by Afghansm. But we believe
that Afghanistan is on the right track and that nothing
can undermine the positive developments the country
has seen. We will not renounce the values for which we
fought alongside the Afghans for more than 10 years,
and I am thinking in particular of the place and rights
of women in Afghan society, as the representatives of
Luxembourg and Jordan just emphasized.
In the context of security, featuring an insurgency
that remains resilient, it is vital that regional partners
continue to support Afghanistan. In that regard,
we welcomed the recent Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference in the framework of the Istanbul Process, held
in Beijing in October, as a springboard for encouraging
further regional cooperation on Afghanistan. The
London Conference in early December also sent a very
positive signal by enabling the new National Unity
Government to present its economic programme and
its reform plans, to which the international community
has decided to give firm support. The support of the
Alliance partners is evolving along with Afghanistan.
Starting in 2015, NATO’s advisory, training and
assistance Resolute Support Mission that the Security
Council recently welcomed in resolution 2189 (2014),
will be present in order to continue to train Afghan
forces.
I would like to conclude by raising a key challenge,
namely, the fight against drug trafficking. We are
particularly concerned by the continuing rise in opium
production, as confirmed by the latest report of the
Secretary-General and highlighted earlier by Mr. Yuri

S/PV.7347

Fedotov in his briefing. This trend must be reversed.
We encourage the Afghan authorities to implement all
the means necessary to combat drug production and
trafficking, which represents a major threat to stability
in Afghanistan, public health and development. We
must not allow an illegal economy to prosper at the
expense of the country’s development.
We believe that UNAMA should play a major role in
leading and coordinating the dialogue with the Afghan
authorities on this topic of importance to the country’s
future. We are convinced that all United Nations entities
involved in Afghanistan must consider the fight against
drugs in designing and conducting their respective
actions to ensure the necessary synergy in fighting that
scourge in all its aspects. We particularly commend the
actions of UNODC in that context.
Finally, I likewise wish to pay tribute to Mr. Kubiš
for his work and commitment and to all UNAMA
personnel working in what are well recognized as
difficult conditions. The United Nations and UNAMA
will play a major role in Afghanistan in the coming
years on the front line of the commitment of the
international community. Mr. Haysom can be assured
of our continuing full support in his future work.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of today’s meeting by the
Chadian presidency. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
The year 2014 is crucial in terms of Afghanistan’s
political, security and economic transition. Since
the beginning of the year, Afghanistan has smoothly
concluded its presidential election and the formation
of a new inclusive Government. It has been steadily
promoting economic and social development.
The Afghan people are facing a new opportunity
of unity and stability, peaceful reconstruction and
development. A solid foundation has been prepared
for a transformation that will begin in 2015. China
congratulates the Afghan Government and the people
on their achievement.
At the same time, a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan with all of its ethnic groups living in
harmony requires a continuing unwavering effort on
the part of the Afghan Government and people and
sustained attention and assistance on the part of the

14-7024715/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

18/12/2014

international community. I would like to emphasize the
following points.

view to further integration in the regional economic
sphere.

First, the promotion of the national reconciliation
process is key. In order to achieve peace and stability
Afghanistan must commit to broad-based, inclusive
political reconciliation. Chinese President Xi Jinping,
in meeting with President Ghani Ahmadzai in October,
emphasized that all parties should support an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
It is China’s hope that all parties in Afghanistan will
demonstrate wisdom and sincerity, place the interests
of the Afghan people before anything else and actively
participate in the Afghan reconciliation process.
Together with the international community, China
intends to provide constructive assistance to promote
the Afghan reconciliation process.

We support the continued leading role of the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in coordinating
international assistance on behalf of Afghanistan.
It is China’s hope that UNAMA will strengthen
communication, coordination and cooperation with the
Afghan Government and enhance the confidence of
the international community in Afghanistan’s smooth
transition process.

Secondly, maintaining a stable security situation
is a prerequisite. At present, the Afghan security
situation remains grim, with frequent violent attacks.
The international community must continue to assist
Afghanistan in the capacity-building of its national
security and police forces. It must support the efforts
of the Afghan security forces in maintaining domestic
security and stability and effectively responding to
any security threats or challenges in order to ensure
conditions conducive to achieving Afghanistan’s
socioeconomic development and its citizens’ wellbeing.
Thirdly, the realization of sustainable socioeconomic
development is fundamental. Poverty is the breeding
ground of extremism. China will increase its support
to Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction efforts, help
Afghanistan in formulating national socioeconomic
development plans, train professionals in various fields,
strengthen infrastructure construction and facilitate
local economic development. The international
community must also fulfil its commitment to assist
Afghanistan in developing self-sufficiency capacities
aimed at independent development.
Fourthly, strengthening international and regional
cooperation is a priority. Afghanistan cannot realize
development and prosperity without the support and
assistance of the international community, especially
the countries in the region. The international
community should resolutely support Afghanistan’s
good-neighbour relationship with the countries in
the region and support Afghanistan’s participation in
international and regional cooperation efforts with a

16/36

China is a good neighbour of Afghanistan. China
is also a good friend of Afghanistan. China hopes to
see a unified, stable, well-developed and friendly
Afghanistan. China is firm in supporting active efforts
to ensure Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction
process.
During President Ghani Ahmadzai’s visit to China
at the end of October, China and Afghanistan issued
a joint declaration on strengthening their strategic,
cooperative partnership. The Chinese Government has
decided to provide Afghanistan with grant assistance
in the amount of ¥500 million in 2014, and ¥1.5 billion
over the next three years.
To support capacity-building in Afghanistan, in
the next five years China will assist Afghanistan in the
training of 3,000 professionals from various fields and
hold counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics training
seminars.
China also hosted, in Beijing, the fourth Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference. China
is actively committed to facilitating Afghanistan’s
regional cooperation and pushing for an early resolution
of the issue of Afghanistan, with a view to achieving
long-term peace and stability and economic and social
development in the region.
China looks forward to working with the
international community in its steadfast efforts to
jointly support Afghanistan in its early realization of
political reconciliation, economic recovery and longterm development and the security and prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom and Executive Director Yuri Fedotov for their
briefings. Let me also take the opportunity to welcome
Mr. Haysom upon his new assignment.

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Our appreciation goes to the entire team of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their continuous support to the Afghan
Government and people. I also thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement. Let me also pay tribute to Australia
for its leadership during its two years as penholder on
Afghanistan.
As we all know, a few months ago Afghanistan
teetered on the brink of violence, following the
disputed election result. We commend President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Mr. Abdullah, Chief Executive Officer,
for their brave decision and for preventing the country
from slipping into violence. It was very possible for
the country to have remained in crisis, had the two
contenders not taken the right decision in parallel. In
the same light, we commend the UNAMA leadership,
the United States Government and the international
community for their tireless efforts in bringing together
both sides to end the political impasse for the benefit of
the Afghan people and the entire region. We note and
continue to encourage the positive working relationship
between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah.
Rwanda welcomes the reform agenda of President
Ghani’s Government. Extending an invitation
to political opposition and armed groups to join
an inter-Afghan dialogue is indeed timely and a
cornerstone for the stability of Afghanistan. However,
we are discouraged by the Taliban’s rejection of the
formation of the National Unity Government and its
call for a continuation of the conflict.
We continue to encourage the Afghan leadership
to maintain the spirit underlying the formation of an
inclusive National Unity Government with the full
participation of women. We echo President Ghani’s call
for Afghanistan’s international partners to support the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We also
further urge religious leaders to play an active role in
bringing peace to the country.
In less than 13 days, the Afghan National Security
Forces will assume full security responsibility for
the country. We believe that, since June 2013, the
Afghan National Security Forces have demonstrated
the capability of maintaining the country’s security.
Accordingly, the Bilateral Security Agreement signed
on 30 September between the Afghan Government
and the United States, as well as the status-of-forces
agreement with NATO, are commendable. They will

S/PV.7347

provide the legal framework for continued military
assistance to build the capacities of the Afghan national
defence and security forces.
Meanwhile, Afghanistan has been facing and
continues to face security challenges caused by
insurgent terrorist groups that have caused many
deaths including of innocent women and children.
Multiple attacks have been taking place almost every
day, increasing the number of civilian casualties. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/876) notes, this
year alone has been one of the most violent since 2001.
Rwanda strongly condemns the barbaric acts that have
continued to claim Afghan lives. There can never be any
justification whatsoever for that. We pay tribute to the
Afghan security forces for demonstrating courage and
bravery and countering the insurgency in that regard.
The economic situation in Afghanistan continues
to have an adverse impact on the Government budget.
However, we welcome President Ghani’s announcement
of a robust agenda, including commitment for reform
to ensure the realization of Afghanistan’s self-reliance.
We commend the renewed partnership and its plan to
refresh the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
It is important to strengthen governance, fight against
corruption and implement policy reform.
We continue to appeal to the donor community
to remain engaged, as witnessed at the London
Conference, in fulfilling its commitment to support
the new leadership as it strives to achieve a peaceful
and prosperous future for the people of Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation and regional integration are
imperative for bringing much needed foreign investment
to Afghanistan, ensuring its economic viability and
spurring economic growth.
In conclusion, the challenges that Afghanistan
is facing today in its aspiration to be a self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous country for all
Afghans require a serious commitment from the new
leadership, the region and international partners. We
fully support UNAMA and its partner agencies in
fulfilling their mandates by providing assistance to
the peace and rebuilding of Afghanistan. Rwanda will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people
and will continue to contribute to a stable, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his first

14-7024717/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

briefing to the Security Council this morning, and to
welcome him into this important new role. I also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his briefing
this morning, as well as Ambassador Tanin for his
comments.
I will focus my statement today on three areas:
the importance of international support for the new
Government and its reform agenda, the launch of the
Resolute Support Mission, and the United Nations
future engagement in Afghanistan.
As Afghanistan prepares to enter the transformation
decade, I applaud the new Afghan Government for its
reform agenda as set out by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah at this month’s London
Conference on Afghanistan. The agenda provides a
credible framework for delivering economic security by
tackling corruption, maintaining progress on national
security, delivering political reform and consolidating
progress on human rights. Those are the right priorities.
At the London Conference, the international community
demonstrated its clear commitment to Afghanistan’s
future and to the implementation of the reform agenda.
We also commend President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah for their work to establish a National
Unity Government. We now encourage the swift
confirmation of Ministerial appointments to ensure
that the momentum is maintained.
This is the last time the Security Council will meet
before the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission to Afghanistan. I want
to pay tribute to the courage of the servicemen and
servicewomen who have served to bring peace and
security to Afghanistan, particularly, to those who
sacrificed their lives in that task.
The recent attacks in Kabul against Afghan security
personnel, international workers and innocent Afghan
civilians bring home to us the gravity of the security
challenge, as does the increase in civilian casualties,
including, especially, children. But they also illustrate
the courage and perseverance of those who have strived
to achieve security and development in Afghanistan.
Those men and women can take great pride in the fact
that Afghanistan has seen its first ever peaceful transfer
of power between elected leaders.
As the Afghan National Security Forces continue
to bravely combat the insurgency, it is vital that we
continue to provide support. We therefore welcome the

18/36

18/12/2014

establishment of the NATO Resolute Support Mission
to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security
Forces from the start of 2015. The Council showed its
support for that Mission with the adoption of resolution
2189 (2014) last week.
A political settlement remains the best way to
secure a sustainable peace in Afghanistan. We therefore
welcome the recent dialogue between the leaders of
Afghanistan and Pakistan and look forward to further
progress. Afghanistan’s neighbours will be central to
that effort. We welcome the support of countries engaged
in the Heart of Asia Process and other initiatives to
promote security, trade and economic prosperity.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will play an ever more important
role in Afghanistan next year, working to support the
reform priorities of the new Afghan Government. Its
provision of good offices to assist with Government
formation, preparation for parliamentary elections and
protecting the gains made on human rights must be
central to its mandate. To do so effectively, UNAMA
must also have the resources it needs to maintain its
presence in the provinces.
In conclusion, we are entering a new chapter
in our ongoing partnership with a sovereign and
independent Afghanistan. There is no doubt that 2015
will be a challenging year, but it is heartening to see
the commitment of the Afghan people and Government
and the international community to building a stable,
democratic and prosperous future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom. We congratulate him on his
responsibilities and thank him for his briefing. We also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, for his presence and briefing, and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.
My country applauds the successful creation of
a National Unity Government and the first peaceful,
democratic transfer of power in Afghanistan. We
welcome the end to what was a prolonged electoral
process and call particular attention to the role played
by President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah Abdullah. We also appreciate the good

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

offices of former President Mr. Hamid Karzai in the
democratic process.
We wish to remind the new Government that in
order to effectively address the political, economic and
security challenges set out in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2014/876), it will be necessary to name
and confirm other high officials of the Government.
We hope that that part of the process will be resolved
swiftly and without difficulties.
Chile supports a process of national reconciliation
guided and led by all Afghans. In that context, we hope
that the new Government will continue to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels in order to guarantee
the participation of women in decision-making. We
also hope that women’s needs will be duly addressed.
We stress the importance of continuing to promote
dialogue, inclusion and consensus among Afghans, an
essential factor when it comes to building a country
capable of standing on its own — a country with solid
democratic institutions and subject to the rule of law.
We are concerned by the ongoing impact of the
country’s security situation on the Afghan civilian
population, in particular on women and children.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, this has
been one of the most violent years since 2001, and we
are disturbed by the high number of civilian casualties
and displaced communities.
Chile reiterates the need to strengthen the
protection of civilians and condemns the use of
force against unarmed civilians, by both pro- and
anti-governmental elements. We recall that it is the
fundamental responsibility of the new authorities to
ensure the due protection of civilians and to prevent
anti-Government forces from undermining confidence
in the new Government before it has fully established
itself.
In that regard, we commend the increase in the
capacities and competencies of the Afghan national
defence and security forces in preparation for the
conclusion of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force at the end of 2014. We hope that
the Afghan authorities will be able to effectively
take over responsibility for their country’s security.
We also welcome the agreement between NATO and
Afghanistan to establish a post-2014 Resolute Support
Mission in order to train, advise and assist the Afghan
national defence and security forces.

S/PV.7347

Moreover, we share the concerns expressed by other
members of the Council regarding the surge in opium
production and hope that that trend will be reversed.
We therefore support the proposals put forward by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
I conclude by expressing Chile’s support for the
efforts of the Afghan people to build a democratic State
with full respect for the rule of law and the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. We also
reiterate our call for the international community to
continue to support the Afghan people by strengthening
their capacities to address the security challenges their
country faces. We believe that is equally essential for
the development of Afghanistan and that of the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Haysom for presenting the
Secretary-General’s quarterly report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/876), as well as Mr. Fedotov for
his substantive briefing on the issues with which he is
tasked concerning the problem of drug trafficking. We
listened attentively and with interest to the statement of
Permanent Representative Tanin.
Not very long ago, Afghanistan completed a
protracted presidential electoral marathon. For the first
time, the Afghan people witnessed the peaceful transfer
of power from one elected governmental authority
to another. We wish the National Unity Government
success and courage in addressing the remaining
challenges. Now that the agreement between Mr. Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah has been signed
and sealed, there are new possibilities to correct the
situation and to lay the foundations for the country’s
gradual development, which for so many years has been
held back by devastating war.
In that context, we would like to note the important
role that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is continuing to play in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan. The Mission’s
clear contribution to the electoral process and to the
agreement reached between the two leading presidential
candidates is beyond dispute. For our part, we are
prepared to offer continued support to the activities
of UNAMA, in coordination with the international
community, for the benefit of the Afghan people.
The particular importance of that mechn\anism was
highlighted in last week’s resolution 2189 (2014).

14-7024719/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

One of Afghanistan’s gravest problems remains
the production and illicit trafficking of drugs. The
most recent data from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are shocking. There was a 7 per
cent increase in the area under cultivation with opium
poppies compared to 2013, with a 9 percent increase in
average yield, while in the southern regions the average
yield increased 27 per cent, for an overall 17 per cent
rise in drug production. It is therefore vital to pay
close attention to the links between the production of
Afghan opiates and international terrorism, including
its financing through drug revenues. There is abundant
information on that matter in the recent report of the
Monitoring Group of the Security Council Committee
on sanctions concerning Al-Qaida and and the Taliban,
as well as in the conclusions of the Financial Action
Task Force.
The dimensions of this problem are such that
it represents a threat to the peace and stability of
Afghanistan and the whole region well beyond its borders.
In that regard, we consider the presidential statement
concerning Afghan narcotics (S/PRST/2014/12), which
the Council adopted in June at Russia’s initiative, both
timely and pertinent. It is now essential to develop
practical measures aimed at eliminating the problems.
We hope that a comprehensive review of the issues
related to Afghan opiates will be part of the agenda of
the 2016 special session of the General Assembly on the
global drug problem.
A useful contribution to measures to combat
drug trafficking would be to broaden Afghanistan’s
cooperation in bilateral, regional, subregional and
multilateral formats, first of all with its neigbbours in
the region, in order to take necessary steps towards
developing alternative sources of income for its
agricultural population.
For its part, Russia is reinforcing its efforts to
combat illicit drug production and drug trafficking
through regional structures, in particular through
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), as
well as through bilateral cooperation with Afghanistan.
Moreover, we are continuing our practice of providing
advanced training to Afghan narcotics police at the
training institute of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Russia at Domodedovo, the Siberian Legal Institute and
the Russian Federation’s North-Western Drug Control
Training Centre for Russian federal drug-control
agents.

20/36

18/12/2014

A significant contribution to solving the Afghan
drug problem is also being made by the ongoing
presence of the CSTO antinarcotic mechanism “Canal”.
Just this year, as a result of the special Canal operation
known as “Southern Trap”, more than 10 tons of Afghan
opiates were seized.
In that regard, another question arises with regard
to the complacency of the anti narcotic work of the
soon-to-be-dissolved International Security Assistance
Force. It would appear that the new NATO Resolute
Support Mission is also in no hurry to act. Why is
there no such problem in the context of the bilateral
American-Afghan security agreement? We are very
disappointed that the NATO countries for many years
ignored the pragmatic suggestions of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization for joint action in this
area — yet that alliance is constantly trying to prove its
usefulness. We have to admit that NATO lost one such
opportunity that was very much needed.
The extremely tense security situation is the subject
of our common concern. The country is experiencing
perhaps the most difficult period of recent years.
Since the beginning of the year there has been a rise
of 20 per cent over the previous year in the number of
civilians, Afghan army personnel and police killed at
the hands of militants. The militants are behaving ever
more boldly, sometimes capturing entire districts. The
expected winter lull in their activity did not come. On
the contrary, the number of terrorist attacks recently
saw an almost twofold increase, and there has been a
series of high-profile terrorist attacks in Kabul and
in the country that showed that the Taliban retain a
fearsome capacity. As before, Al-Qaida is still alive,
and I will mention that, strange as it may seem, once
again this fact was not reflected in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/876). The progressive
concentration of extremists in the northern districts is
worrisome, especially as that area was relatively calm
until recently.
It is not surprising that we also did not wait for the
comprehensive report on the outcomes of the activity
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
which we had the right to expect and which was
required from the alliance under the Security Council
resolution. What we did receive was a very compact
document entirely lacking in analysis of the security
situation, yet ISAF had received a mandate specifically
to improve the situation in this area under Council
resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003). Pre-empting

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

this factual knowledge could lead an unsuspecting
public to get the impression that the mandate has been
fully implemented and the major problems solved.
But that in no way reflects what is really going on in
this country. By the way, NATO’s report also contains
nothing concrete about what ISAF actually did in
terms of assisting Afghan law enforcement officers
in the counter-narcotics area. One can conclude that
nothing was done. An thoughtful conclusion in that
sphere asserting that more should be done is more than
a decade overdue.
Against the background of all that is happening, we
note with satisfaction President Ghani’s declartation
on national reconciliation. The well-known triad of
principles still retains its relevance: laying down
arms, recognizing the Constitution of Afghanistan
and severing ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations. We must also not forget that there is
a need for strict compliance with the Taliban and
Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
Many times we have announced that our country will
work constructively with any leadership of Afghanistan
that is supported by the Afghan people themselves. Once
again, we would like to pay tribute to the perseverance
and courage of the new President, Mr. Ghani, and the
Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Abdullah. We are sure
that with the responsible assistance of the international
community, led by the United Nations, they will be
able to put the friendly Afghan people on the right path
towards the peaceful building of an independent, selfsufficient and economically prosperous Afghanistan
that is free from terrorism and narcotics-related crime.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank you,
Foreign Minister Mahamat, for chairing this important
meeting. Your presence here adds weight to an already
weighty discussion. I welcome Special Representative
Haysom to the Security Council and thank him for his
briefing and his work on the ground in Afghanistan.
We congratulate him on his appointment as the head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
As he serves, he and his team can count on our full
support. I also thank Mr. Fedotov for his informative
briefing on illicit narcotics production in Afghanistan,
an issue of substantial concern to the Council.
Afghanistan is in a very different place today than
it where it was when the Council last met to discuss the
country, on 18 September 2014 (see S/PV.7267). At that
time, the election process was still being worked out,

S/PV.7347

and the Council urged candidates to work towards a
durable compromise in the interest of the Afghan people.
The candidates forged that compromise and formed a
National Unity Government. Since taking office that
Government has taken crucial steps to end the year on
a positive note. The National Unity Government has set
out a compelling reform agenda committing to improve
governance, limit corruption, reintegrate refugees,
promote sustainable development and defend and
promote the human rights of all Afghans, with a special
focus on women’s rights. The Government is backing up
its words with important actions, including reopening
the Kabul Bank investigation, passing internationally
compliant financial regulations, removing unqualified
and corrupt Government personnel and tackling illicit
trade, among other key efforts.
We look forward to President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah naming a cabinet soon,
made up of people chosen on merit. We applaud
their commitment to ensuring that the cabinet is
representative of the Afghan people, including Afghan
women.
The Afghan Government has shored up critical
regional support for its agenda. At the Heart of Asia/
Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference in Beijing
in October, neighbouring countries committed to
doing their part to strengthen Afghanistan’s security
and prosperity, which is in the interest of the region’s
stability and development. President Ghani has
undertaken important visits to improve relationships
with neighbours, including Pakistan.
Support for Afghanistan’s continued progress
also comes from beyond the immediate region. At the
London Conference at the beginning of December,
more than 70 donor States affirmed their commitment
of over $16 billion in assistance to Afghanistan through
2016. That support is critical to building upon the hardearned gains made in Afghanistan since 2001. In that
time, school enrolment has increased tenfold, with
nearly 10 million children now signed up. Forty per cent
of students are girls — something that would have been
unthinkable under Taliban rule. Life expectancy has
improved dramatically. Maternal mortality has fallen
from 16 per cent to 3 per cent, while under-five mortality
has dropped from 25 per cent to less than 10 per cent.
Women can now not only walk in public without a male
relative by their side, but also can become doctors who
treat male and female patients. Women hold 28 per cent
of the seats in the parliament of Afghanistan.

14-7024721/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

The United States is committed to supporting that
ongoing progress. Among other contributions, our
Government is providing more than $107 million this
year to help refugees returning to Afghanistan, because
we have seen the inspiring contributions they can make
to their country. For just one example, look at Fereshta
Abbasi. Her parents fled Afghanistan for Iran before she
was born, and her family did not return until Fereshta
was 12. But she was determined to excel in school
and pursue a career. With her family’s support, she
attended Herat University’s law school, where she was
the only woman on the school’s moot court team. After
graduating she went to work in her country’s Ministry
of Women’s Affairs, which never would have been
conceivable under Taliban rule. Now she is ensuring
that other girls and women have the same opportunity
she had and face fewer obstacles in their paths.
Of course, much work remains, including on
women’s rights. Last month the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on violence against women
visited Afghanistan. While she was encouraged by the
Government’s commitment to seeking to end violence
against women, Special Rapporteur Manjoo also found
that “insecurity, pervasive levels of gender-based
violence and an ever present climate of fear has had a
disproportionate impact on the promotion, protection
and fulfilment of human rights of women and girls”
in Afghanistan. Women and girls, she said, continue
to endure domestic abuse by husbands and relatives,
exchange marriages, incest, honour crimes, targeted
killings and discrimination at home and at work, as
well a daunting obstacles to seeking redress for those
and other problems.
Let me turn to the very large challenge of security.
At the end of this month, the United States and our
NATO allies and partners from around the world will
conclude the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) mission. Over 13 years, troops and civilian
personnel from more than 50 countries have worked
alongside Afghan partners to root out terrorism and try
to build a more stable and a more secure Afghanistan.
More than 2,200 Americans and more than 1,200
citizens of other ISAF coalition countries have given
their lives working to defend and empower the Afghan
people.
Afghanistan continues to face serious threats to
security, as evinced by horrific terrorist attacks like the
one carried out on 23 November when a suicide bomber
detonated an improvised explosive device at a volleyball

22/36

18/12/2014

tournament in Paktika province. More than 50 people
were killed, many of then children. It was part of the
increase in targeting of innocents by anti-Government
armed groups, which has resulted, as we have heard, in
the largest number of civilian casualties this year since
2008. Those horrific, depraved attacks show more than
just the ongoing risks; they show why it is so important
that the Afghan Government succeed and why those
responsible for such for attacks must be neutralized and
brought to justice. NATO and its partners will continue
to train, advise and assist Afghan security forces
through the Resolute Support Mission, allowing brave
Afghan soldiers and police to continue to stand up to
extremists and work to protect their fellow citizens.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened this important debate. I would like
to welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and thank him for his inaugural briefing. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
very informative briefing. I recognize the presence
of Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, thank him for his statement.
The peaceful resolution of the post-election
political crisis in Afghanistan marks a very significant
development in the political process of the country. We
commend the United Nations, the United States and
former President Hamid Karzai for their mediation
efforts, which led to the agreement between President
Ghani and Mr. Abdullah to form a National Unity
Government. We welcome that agreement and note
that it has led to a considerable reduction of tensions
in Afghanistan. It has also fostered an atmosphere of
optimism about the country’s future. We urge both
leaders to build a scaffold around this remarkable
achievement by expediting the formation of the Cabinet
to execute President Ghani’s reform agenda.
With regard to the reform agenda, we welcome
its focus on governance, the rule of law, regional
engagement, national reconciliation and the fight
against corruption. We believe that placing appropriate
priority on national reconciliation is indeed a valid step
in the right direction. We take positive note of the efforts
of President Ghani to facilitate peace talks, especially
with religious leaders. His invitation to the Taliban and
other militant groups to join the inter-Afghan dialogue
is a strident effort towards reconciliation. We urge all

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghans to embrace dialogue as the path to lasting
peace and stability in the country.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
volatile. The recent wave of attacks against civilians
carried out by the Taliban and other terrorist groups
serves to underscore the challenges that the country
continues to face in terms of security. We condemn
in the strongest terms all acts of violence against
civilian populations. We pay special tribute to the
Afghan Security Forces for their demonstrated ability
to clear and recover contested areas from insurgents.
International assistance to Afghanistan will remain
crucial in sustaining the ability of the Afghan security
forces to fight the terrorists, insurgents and other
criminal elements destabilizing the country.
We note the pledge by Afghanistan’s NATO allies
and partners to support the country’s security forces
with approximately $5.1 billion per annum until the
end of 2017. It is our hope that this assistance will
provide the much-needed support to help Afghanistan
prepare to assume full financial responsibility for its
security forces by 2024, as envisaged under the NATOAfghanistan Enduring Partnership.
Turning to regional cooperation, we believe that
this is critical to resolving the crisis in Afghanistan and
surmounting the challenges confronting neighbouring
States in the region. President Ghani has demonstrated
the critical importance he attaches to cooperation with
his neighbours through various engagements at the
bilateral and multilateral levels. We take note of the
outcome of the fourth Ministerial Conference of the
Istanbul Process on Afghanistan, held in October in
Beijing. The meeting provided a platform for addressing
issues, including terrorism, drug-trafficking, poverty
and violent extremism, that threaten the peace and
security of the region.
The meeting between President Ghani and Prime
Minister Sharif of Pakistan was also significant. It
presented an opportunity for both leaders to deliberate
on the security challenges confronting both countries.
We urge them to strengthen their engagement to enable
them to find lasting solutions to the cross-border threats
to their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In terms of counter-narcotics, we welcome the
engagement of Mr. Fedotov with the Afghan authorities.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/876) indicates
that, while progress has been made by local authorities
in fighting drug-trafficking, considerable challenges

S/PV.7347

still remain. One of those challenges is the increase
in the area under opium cultivation, as a consequence
of which opium production in 2014 may increase by
17 per cent. Nigeria believes that an integrated counternarcotics approach is necessary to check the production
of opium. With the crop generating as much is
$850 million in revenues, it is clear that it poses a grave
threat as a source of terrorist financing in Afghanistan,
and indeed beyond. Concerted national, regional and
international action to address this challenge is vital
and must be stayed and sustained in that direction.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2014/876). I take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his appointment and to wish him the greatest
of success as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for their briefings.
When the Council last considered the situation
in Afghanistan, on 18 September (see S/PV.7267), we
were awaiting the results of the second round of the
presidential elections. Since then, an agreement was
reached between the two presidential candidates,
confirming Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai as
the new President of Afghanistan and of Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah as Chief Executive Officer. Through
Ambassador Tanin, we congratulate the Government
and the people of Afghanistan on this important
demonstration of civil democracy. This, the first such
peaceful and democratic transfer of power between two
elected leaders in the history of Afghanistan, is a major
turning point in the political transition in the country.
The challenges facing the new authorities are both
well known and overwhelming, including the widespread
desire for peace on the part of the Afghan people and
cordial relations with neighbouring countries in the
region. In that regard, we welcome the announcement
by the new Government of its commitment to the
launching of a national peace process in Afghanistan.
It is crucial that the political opposition, especially the
Taliban, join the inter-Afghan dialogue so the country
may begin overcoming its violent past, which has
claimed more than 32,000 Afghan and foreign lives,
including those of some 15,000 civilians, in addition to

14-7024723/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

18/12/2014

the thousands of Taliban victims since only 2007, when
United Nations records began.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.

We note that during the reporting period there
was a reduction in the number of security incidents as
compared to the same period in the year 2013, thereby
reversing the trend that we had been observing. We hope
that this new trend solidifies. While it is a welcome fact
that the Afghan security forces have demonstrated the
capability to control insurgent activities, Argentina
does not believe that there can be a purely military
solution to the conflict without addressing the deeprooted causes of the conflict. Acts as abhorrent as
those we saw last Tuesday — when the Taliban killed
127 people, the majority of them children, in a school
in Peshawar — serve to underscore the importance
of regional cooperation when it comes to ushering in
prosperity and stability, not just for Afghanistan but
also for its neighbours in the region.

Mr. Bishnoi (India): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, as President of the
Security Council, for organizing today’s debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for the quarterly report (S/2014/876) on the
situation in Afghanistan and welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom.

Argentina is just as worried about the increase in
the number of civilian victims resulting from aerial
operations carried out by international military forces,
including 148 children during the reporting period. In
that vein, we reiterate the obligation of such operations
being made in full compliance with the obligations
arising from international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Argentina supports efforts aimed at preventing the
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we know that regional cooperation is
essential, both in law enforcement and criminal justice
as well as in the promotion of a reduction in demand. It
is worrisome that in 2014 there has been an increase in
the opium harvest, and we underscore the important role
that the United Nations plays in monitoring the situation
surrounding drugs in Afghanistan and in supporting
national efforts. It is also important to coordinate the
efforts of the various agencies of the United Nations
system in order to implement a comprehensive approach
on this matter.
The United Nations role continues to be crucial
when it comes to helping the future National Unity
Government meet its obligations in the areas of security
and development as well as in its cooperation in the
coordination of humanitarian assistance and in the
fight against the production and trafficking of drugs.
We fully support the work of the UNAMA and of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNAMA.

24/36

Afghanistan has just gone through a historic
political transition. We welcome the establishment
of the National Unity Government, led by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah.
The people of Afghanistan have shown tremendous
patience and forbearance, which made the National
Ynity Government agreement possible. I have no
doubt that the Afghan political leadership will keep
the expectations of the Afghan people in mind as they
undertake the difficult tasks that lie ahead, including
the early formation of the Government, consistent with
the National Unity Government agreement and the task
of electoral reforms and organizing the constitutional
loya jirga. I wish to place on record my Government’s
appreciation for the special role played by the Special
Representative in Afghanistan during this process.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community’s
efforts to assist Afghanistan’s political and economic
reconstruction process.
The scourge of terrorism and extremism continues
to threaten Afghanistan’s peace and stability. That
terrorists and extremist groups have continued to
survive despite the immense military pressure that
is being brought on them by the Afghan National
Security Forces only underscores the fact that these
groups continue to benefit from support from beyond
Afghanistan’s borders and continue to access resources
from transnational terrorists and criminal networks. The
latest Secretary-General’s report mentions that, of late,
the Afghan Government has been facing a sustained and
determined challenge in securing key districts across
many provinces that remain under insurgent pressure.
It is alarming to see statistics like the overall number
of security incidents this year increase by 10.3 per cent,
as compared to a similar period in 2013. The Special
Representative must therefore continue to focus his
attention on this serious issue. We cannot afford to

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

lose sight of the fact that the main threat to peace and
stability in Afghanistan is terrorism. The attacks in
Kabul, Sydney and Peshawar only serve to underline
the fact that terrorists do not respect borders and make
no differentiation between States. They pose a common
threat to humankind.
In the recently concluded London Conference
on Afghanistan, we all agreed that Afghanistan is
entering a new phase in its economic transition. In
today’s global economic situation, when Government
budgets are strained and when the sentiment of aid
fatigue exists in most traditional donor countries,
Afghanistan’s economic transition will have to be
primarily private-sector led. As a lead country of the
trade, commerce and investment confidence-building
measure under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
India has gained some experience on the issue. One
of the consistent messages we are receiving from
the private-sector businesses that are serious about
entering the Afghan market is that while security is an
issue that can at times be managed, Afghanistan’s lack
of connectivity to seaports and to the faster growing
economic regions of Asia is an insurmountable
constraint. India feels that ecuring Afghanistan’s access
to all existing regional maritime ports and developing
more effective transit agreements between Afghanistan
and its immediate neighbours, and faithfully
implementing the existing ones, are vital priorities.
India is at present in discussion with the Governments of
Afghanistan and Iran to examine how the existing Port
of Chabahar in Iran can be developed to support such a
strategy. We feel that when this project takes off, there
will be significant immediate gains for reconstruction
activities in the western regions of Afghanistan.
UNAMA has an important role to play in
supporting the activities of new political institutions of
the Afghan State. No other organization can represent
in full measure the international community’s concern
for Afghanistan and its vision for a peaceful, sovereign,
independent and prosperous Afghanistan. But
UNAMA must also focus on the important role it plays
in ensuring the delivery of valuable humanitarian and
development assistance to Afghanistan. The Mission is
uniquely placed to deploy the required professional and
physical resources to reach much-needed humanitarian
and development assistance to the remotest corners of
Afghanistan.
This is a critical decade of transformation
for Afghanistan. A united, stable, prosperous and

S/PV.7347

independent Afghanistan is in the interests of the region
and the international community. India is committed to
helping Afghanistan achieve that objective.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, allow
me to thank everyone for all the words of support
and sympathy that we have received and heard on the
horrendous terror attack in Pakistan.
We welcome to the Council Mr. Haysom as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We thank him for his briefing. We look forward to
working with him in support of Afghanistan’s decade
of transformation, and I would like to assure him of
Pakistan’s fullest cooperation. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing today and, in the same
breath, pay tribute to former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his excellent
stewardship of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. Pakistan would like to express its
appreciation for the statement made by Ambassador
Zahir Tanin this morning.
The security transition in Afghanistan is now under
way. We believe that the Bilateral Security Agreement
with the United States and the status-of-forces
agreement with NATO will provide the legal framework
for continued international military assistance post2014. The support expressed in resolution 2189 (2014)
is another positive signal. The International Security
Assistance Force will end its mission in Afghanistan
in approximately 13 days. Afghan forces will resume
full responsibility for security. The Resolute Support
Mission will be there to advise, train and assist. These
are historic moments, and we welcome the seamless
transition.
The recent visit by President Ashraf Ghani to
Pakistan, preceded by the visit of our adviser on
national security and foreign policy and high-level
contacts in both the civil and military fields, has
contributed to an auspicious beginning — a resetting
of the relationship, as the Secretary-General stated. We
have initiated actions to deepen security cooperation,
promote bilateral trade, streamline transit trade issues,
build a strong economic relationship and enhance
regional economic cooperation. We welcome the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference, held
in Beijing, and have offered to host its fifth Ministerial
Conference in Pakistan.

14-7024725/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

Let me reiterate that we fully support the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We appreciate its good offices, capacitybuilding and coordination of assistance roles. We hope
that it will continue to contribute to the peace and
stability of Afghanistan, which is our common goal.
I would also like to reiterate what Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif proposed for the consideration of the
international partners at the London Conference on
Afghanistan. First, we must send a clear message
of deeper engagement with Afghanistan. Secondly,
we must help address the urgent fiscal crisis and
provide sustained financial assistance throughout the
transformation decade for building a secure and selfreliant Afghanistan. Thirdly, we must strengthen efforts
in the fight against narcotics production and trafficking.
Fourthly, we must support the new Government’s
desire to bring back the 5 million Afghan refugees
living abroad by helping to create conditions conducive
to their sustainable reintegration. Finally, we must
implement the vision of Afghanistan as a land bridge
by supporting communications and energy corridors.
I would like to end by underlining that terrorism
is a common enemy. It must be fought with common
endeavours, without any distinction.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
While voicing, once again, our appreciation for the
tireless efforts and dedication of his predecessor, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, I would like to wish Mr. Haysom a successful
term in office. The effective role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
his able leadership will continue to be a key element in
supporting the people and Government of Afghanistan
in the period ahead. I would also like to thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
their statements.
Afghanistan is going through a crucial phase in terms
of its political, security and economic transformation.
The year 2014 marked several milestone events in the
process of consolidating Afghanistan’s sovereignty
and national unity. In this context, the outcome of
the presidential elections signified a success for all

26/36

18/12/2014

of the Afghan people, as it demonstrated their strong
will and courage to determine their own destiny. The
decision to establish a National Unity Government has
clearly displayed the Afghan people’s determination
as a whole to carry their country forward. We believe
that Afghanistan has emerged stronger from those
experiences. We welcome and support the robust agenda
the new Government of Afghanistan has embarked
upon, including in the fields of governance, the rule of
law and the fight against corruption, and its efforts for
an Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process.
It is commendable that, by the end of this year,
Afghan National Security Forces will assume full
security responsibility for their people and country.
The year 2015 will be pivotal in the consolidation of the
achievements reached thus far. Therefore, continued
support for the development of the Afghan National
Security Forces and wider international cooperation
with Afghanistan will still be of the utmost importance.
Turkey remains committed to standing by Afghanistan
in this process. The official visit of President Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan to Afghanistan in October 2014,
whereby a strategic partnership and friendship
agreement was signed between the two countries,
renewing the previous agreement of 1928, is a recent
testament of that commitment.
The changing nature and scope of NATO’s
engagement with Afghanistan in the period ahead was
outlined during the NATO Summit held in Wales in
September 2014. We welcome the recent adoption of
resolution 2189 (2014) on the NATO Resolute Support
Mission, which will be launched to provide training,
advice and assistance to the Afghan National Security
Forces. In addition to Turkey’s financial pledges for
the funding of the Afghan National Security Forces,
Turkey will assume the framework nation role for
Kabul in the Resolute Support Mission. Turkey will
also undertake responsibility for Kabul International
Airport. As would be recalled, Mr. Ismail Aramaz,
Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey to Afghanistan,
has recently been appointed as the next NATO Senior
Civilian Representative in Afghanistan.
We deeply regret and condemn the terrorist
attacks that have been perpetrated in Afghanistan in
the reporting period, which have claimed many lives,
including those of civilians. We are confident that those
attacks will not succeed in derailing Afghanistan’s
efforts to achieve a peaceful transformation.

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

The gains of the past 13 years in the country,
including in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, capacity- and institution-building,
economic development and human rights, have prepared
a good foundation for the country’s move to the next
step. Nevertheless, the international community’s
continuing support is vital for a peaceful, secure and
stable Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs
of its people. The London Conference on Afghanistan,
held on 4 December, provided a timely opportunity
for the Government of Afghanistan to set out its
vision for reform and for the international community
to demonstrate enduring solidarity and support for
Afghanistan.
At a critical juncture of political, security and
economic transformation in Afghanistan, the importance
of regional cooperation and commitment has further
increased. We welcome all bilateral and multilateral
dialogue and cooperation efforts aimed at promoting
an environment conducive to the enhancement of
regional collaboration. With that understanding, the
fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, held in Beijing, yielded a
good opportunity for furthering efforts for enhanced
regional cooperation. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/876) highlights, the continued forward
momentum of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is
indeed encouraging.
The international community’s solidarity and
continued commitment will strengthen the hopes of the
Afghan people for a bright future. Turkey will continue
to contribute to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the observer
of the European Union, but would like to take this
opportunity to also make a few additional remarks.
I would like to start by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/876). Let me also welcome
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and thank him for his comprehensive and
substantive briefing. Our thanks also go to Mr. Fedotov
and Ambassador Tanin for their statements.

S/PV.7347

Much has been achieved in Afghanistan during
the past 13 years. The country has come a long way
and the Afghan men and women can take great pride
in this. Earlier this year the Afghan people revealed
their strong desire for democracy by turning up in great
numbers to vote in what became the first democratic
transfer of power in the history of Afghanistan. More
children, especially young girls, are enrolled in schools
and access to health care has increased significantly
since 2001. This year Afghanistan has also taken full
responsibility for its own security.
Despite the progress, reality continues to remind
us that there is certainly work left to do. The election
process illustrated that additional improvements
are needed to better consolidate democracy and
governance. The human rights situation still has a long
way to go, largely due to an ineffective justice system.
Afghanistan is still one of the worst places in the world
to be born a woman. It is time that Afghan women
receive the opportunity to become full and equal
members of society.
The production and smuggling of narcotics
are among the primary drivers of the conflict in
Afghanistan. Corruption is another great obstacle
present at all levels of society. The rule of law must be
strengthened and the culture of impunity must end.
President Ghani Ahmadzai and the Afghan
leadership have demonstrated a strong commitment to
change by outlining a rigorous and bold reform agenda.
This was clearly displayed during the successful
London Conference on Afghanistan on 4 December. The
international community now calls for an expeditious
implementation of these reforms.
The end to violence and conflict and the establishment
of a safe and secure environment are prerequisites for
achieving real and sustainable development results in
Afghanistan. This should be accomplished through
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process. It will
require serious efforts to ensure that such a process can
take root. It needs to be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led,
but the international community should stand ready to
offer its assistance.
Sweden believes that regional cooperation
and constructive engagement from Afghanistan’s
neighbours are paramount for creating an environment
conducive to peace and development. We welcome the
intentions and actions taken by the Afghan leadership
to strengthen the ties with neighbouring countries.

14-7024727/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

Drawing upon the recent Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference in Beijing, there now seems to
be an opportunity to solidify a foundation for genuine
regional cooperation.
In one form or another, Sweden has provided
assistance to Afghanistan for more than three decades.
Today, Afghanistan is one of the largest recipients
of Swedish development aid. As we approach the
transformation decade, our focus on civilian matters
is becoming increasingly dominant. At the London
Conference on Afghanistan, we reaffirmed our
long-term support, as stated in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Sweden stands ready to
contribute with an indicative volume of $1 billion to
$1.2 billion in development assistance over the next
decade.
Earlier this year, Sweden also established a new
development strategy for the period up to 2019. Our
focus will primarily be on strengthening Afghanistan’s
own ability to improve the economy, enhance
democratic governance, promote equality and improve
the human rights situation, in particular the situation
for women and children.
Sweden has over the years made a considerable
contribution to the International Security Assistance
Force. Building on these efforts, we aim to also
participate in the Resolute Support Mission, which will
be launched on 1 January 2015.
Sweden would like to express its full support for
the important role played by United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and by all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people and
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
Beyond 2014, the presence of the United Nations in
Afghanistan will become even more important.
While our expectations are high for the Afghan
Government to deliver on its reform commitments,
these expectations can hardly compare with the appeals
for improvement coming from Afghan men and women.
The time is ripe now to achieve concrete results, and
Sweden is ready to play its part. We look forward to
continuing our cooperation with the new Afghan
Government as we enter the transformation decade.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

28/36

18/12/2014

Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/876), Special
Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings, and Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.
I would also like to express my heartfelt condolences
to our Pakistani colleagues, to the Government of
Pakistan and to the families of the victims for the
heinous attack on the military school in Peshawar, which
left us all in shock. The European Union stands fully
committed to tackling the threat posed by terrorism and
ready to assist the Pakistani Government.
We saw recently at the London Conference on
Afghanistan that the international community remains
committed to assisting the Government and the people
of Afghanistan. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations agencies remain
critical to the effective coordination and delivery of
international assistance to Afghanistan. The role of
the United Nations will be even more important in the
coming years in building Afghan capacity, and thereby
supporting effective and accountable administration
across the country as the international presence
decreases.
The European Union believes that it is the right
time for the relationship between the international
community and Afghanistan to take a different shape.
Afghans have increasingly taken the lead responsibility
in all areas across the country and have shown increasing
willingness to engage in regional cooperation. The
European Union and its member States have already
signalled their intention to change the way they operate
in Afghanistan. Our new strategy puts the emphasis
on supporting the development of Afghanistan’s own
institutions — institutions critical for ensuring that
the legacy of the international engagement will be an
Afghanistan that is able to stand on its own two feet, an
Afghanistan that enables its people to live in the peace
and prosperity to which they legitimately aspire.

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

The London Conference provided a good
opportunity to hear and see the plans that the National
Unity Government has for further progress and
increased self-reliance. The European Union believes
that the vision put forward in the “Realizing SelfReliance” reform paper can be the basis for renewed
progress in Afghanistan. At the same time, it is also
critical that efforts be made to ensure progress on peace
and reconciliation. It is imperative now that President
Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
appoint a new Cabinet as soon as possible. One of the
first tasks of the new ministers will be to substantiate
the plans set out in the Government’s vision to allow
for consultation with Afghans and the international
community in advance of the senior officials meeting
foreseen to take place in Kabul in 2015.
In developing the details for the meeting, the EU
would like to highlight three areas that would benefit
from particular attention.
First, with regard to justice and the rule of law,
while we realize the challenges they pose, we find it
is vital that Afghans see the development of a system
where every Afghan stands equal before the law. The
key to guaranteeing greater equality for women in
Afghanistan is not just to have more laws saying they
are equal, but the consistent implementation of the laws
that are already in place. Some important appointments
have already been made, but now Afghanistan needs a
concerted effort to drive reform across the whole of the
justice system.
Secondly, Afghans must be empowered to keep their
Government accountable at all levels. That requires a
programme to improve subnational governance that
transfers decision-making authority and resources from
the national level to the provinces, from the provinces to
the districts and from the districts to the communities.
Thirdly, Afghans must be assured that security
will be maintained. Further strengthening the capacity
to address the remaining security challenges will be a
prerequisite for additional progress. The sustainable
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan largely
depends upon a safe and stable Afghanistan, as well as
a stable and conducive regional environment. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance of
the Resolute Support Mission, which will train, advise
and assist the Afghan national defence and security
forces at the invitation of Afghanistan.

S/PV.7347

In conclusion, these changes, together with those
set out in more detail in the paper provided by the
Government of Afghanistan, can contribute to the real
change we all want to see. Afghans themselves are
really the ones taking the decisions and shaping their
destiny.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): To save time, I will give
an abbreviated version of my statement, the full text of
which will be circulated by the Secretariat.
First, however, I would like to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, whom
Japan warmly congratulates on his appointment as the
new Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), together with his deputies,
Mr. Mark Bowen and Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto. We
look forward to seeing UNAMA continue to play an
important role in providing international assistance to
Afghanistan on its path towards self-reliance. I would
also like to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
statement.
Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture. Under
the leadership of President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah, the new
Government must now begin to tackle numerous
challenges. In the area of security, the drawdown at the
end of this year of the International Security Assistance
Force will mark a watershed in Afghanistan’s road to
self-reliance. The Afghan people have to realize that
they must demonstrate ownership and take the lead
in ensuring their own security, for which the Afghan
national defence and security forces should now assume
full responsibility.
Afghanistan’s future is in the hands of the
Afghan people themselves. Japan therefore considers
their ownership and efforts to help themselves very
important. The transformation decade of 2015 through
2024 presents Afghanistan with a historical opportunity
for determining its own self-reliant future. Japan stands
ready to support the Afghan people as long as they
work in earnest for a better future. We also emphasize
the perspective of human security in focusing on each
individual’s fulfilment and empowerment. We believe

14-7024729/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

that ordinary Afghan citizens aspire to a peaceful and
prosperous life close to their families and friends.
That aspiration is what provides the driving force for
peace and stability, and it is from those perspectives
that Japan has been actively engaged in the country’s
reconstruction process. I would like to touch on two
points that are priorities for Japanese assistance.
The first concerns public order and security. From
my own experiences in post-conflict countries, I know
how crucial law and order are to reconstructing local
communities, where local people must assume the
primary responsibility for their own communities. It
is therefore essential that the Afghan people become
empowered and capable of ensuring public order and
security. That is why Japan has been supporting the
strengthening of Afghan law-enforcement capabilities.
Through our contribution to the Law and Order
Trust Fund for Afghanistan of the United Nations
Development Programme, amounting to a total of
$1 billion, we helped to double the number of Afghan
police officers between 2008 and 2012. We have also
implemented numerous capacity-building programmes,
providing, for instance, financial and technical
assistance to a four-month training programme for
about 200 female Afghan police officers that has been
under way in Turkey since last month.
My second point concerns sustainable development.
We believe that poverty reduction and sustainable
growth are essential to people’s empowerment. A sound
and prosperous economy helps address the root causes of
terrorism and extremism. In that context, we would like
to underscore the strategic importance of agriculture
from the perspective of human security. Approximately
80 per cent of Afghanistan’s total population is engaged
in agricultural work, a sector that has the biggest
potential for job creation in the country. The presence
of empowered Afghan farmers will provide a solid
foundation for strong and resilient local communities,
which is what Japan is aiming for. Since rice production
has great potential for the Afghan economy, our
assistance projects include research and development
on rice cultivation and improving irrigation facilities.
Japan has recently also made contributions in the
area of veterinary medicine by providing $19 million
through the Food and Agriculture Organization to help
control foot-and-mouth disease.
Furthermore, I would like to point out that
developing basic infrastructure is also an essential
component in sustainable development. Infrastructure

30/36

18/12/2014

connects people and enables trade and investment to
expand. We have been helping to construct or improve
roads, such as that between Kabul and Kandahar, as
well as airports, including Kabul International Airport
and the airport in Bamyan. The new Government’s
emphasis on improving connectivity between
Afghanistan and its surroundings is further testimony
to the relevance of our approach. We hope Japan’s
support will significantly contribute to reinvigorating
local communities and reintegrating Afghanistan into
the regional and global economies.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
the importance of a strong partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community. The
London Conference on Afghanistan offered a valuable
opportunity to reaffirm the solid bond that unites us.
Japan welcomes the fact that most of the participants,
Afghan and international partners alike, reaffirmed
their commitments to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Since 2012, Japan, as the second-largest
contributor of aid to Afghanistan, has already disbursed
more than $2 billion of the $3 billion it committed to.
In the understanding that the new Afghan Government
will deliver on the commitments it made under the
Framework, we will make good on ours. As Afghanistan
makes the crucial transition to peace and prosperity,
Japan remains committed to offering its support, in
cooperation with the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Like the Ambassador of Japan, I will deliver a shortened
statement, for which the full text will be posted on the
Mission’s web page.
I would like to thank Mr. Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and my good
friend Ambassador Tanin for their statements.
I also fully associate myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
My statement will focus on four areas. I will first
discuss Afghanistan from the Spanish perspective,
and Spain’s commitments regarding Afghanistan.
Secondly, I have some comments on the internal
situation in the country. Thirdly, I will look at things
from an international perspective, concluding with a
firm condemnation of terrorism.

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Concerning Spain and Afghanistan, there have
been two very important developments in recent days
in my country. First, the Vice-President of Spain,
Ms. Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría, visited Afghanistan
to meet with the Spanish troops in the country and the
Afghan authorities. It was a significant and relevant
gesture.
Secondly, this past Friday the Council of Ministers
approved a decision to again participate in Afghanistan,
via the NATO Resolute Support Mission, in accordance
with resolution 2189 (2014). We trust that the Congress
of Deputies will adopt the decision in the days ahead.
Thirdly, concerning Afghanistan’s domestic
situation, we have repeatedly spoken in this Chamber
about the recent elections, the important progress in
women’s participation and the election results. Now we
are facing a new and important challenge, namely, that
the Government fully establish its Cabinet. That step is
critical and absolutely urgent.
Fourthly, from the international perspective, the
London Conference just took place. There we were able
to warmly welcome the reform agenda presented by the
Government of Afghanistan. The priorities established
by the Government of President Ghani comprise the
toolkit of the Afghan Government and the international
community. Among the priorities, the Spanish
delegation has underlined two of particular importance.
The first is support for rule-of-law initiatives; the
second concerns strengthening progress in ensuring the
rights of women and girls.
I also take this opportunity to emphasize the
importance we attach to the Beijing Ministerial
Conference and the determined support of Spain in the
Istanbul Process where, as Council members know, we
participate in the support group.
Lastly, my most vigorous and emphatic words
go to condemn and reject the recent terrorist attacks
committed in Afghanistan and in Pakistan, which
represent the most bitter and sad face of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Over the past year,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has been instrumental in supporting
Afghanistan’s election process. It and the wider United
Nations system will continue to play a key role as
Afghanistan proceeds on its journey of transformation.

S/PV.7347

The formation of the Afghan National Unity
Government through Afghanistan’s first peaceful
democratic transfer of power was a historic
milestone — momentous for the Afghan people and
for the international community alike. Canada is
encouraged by the new Government’s first few months.
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
have embraced cooperation and secured important
progress towards Afghanistan’s future stability.
Continuing cooperation that delivers practical
outcomes will be the key to managing the challenges
ahead. Central to this, President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah must together ensure
effective implementation of vital reforms to reduce
poverty, strengthen the economy, improve governance,
eradicate corruption, protect human rights — especially
women’s rights — and improve participation in politics
and society, particularly for women and minority
groups. The sooner the National Unity Government
delivers a Cabinet, the better positioned it will be to act
on these challenges.
I can assure the Council that Afghanistan will not
stand alone in its undertakings. Since 2001, Canada has
stood with Afghanistan. Our troops have fought and
died for security and freedom for the Afghan people;
we have supported the development of Afghanistan’s
constitutional and democratic processes; and we have
funded programmes that have improved the lives of
ordinary Afghan people, particularly women and
children.
We remain committed to these goals. Canada will
be contributing $330 million over three years, starting in
2015, to help sustain the Afghan National Security Forces
in order to further the aims of stability and security.
Afghanistan remains a country of focus for Canada’s
international development efforts, and between 2014
and 2017 we will invest $227 million in the future of
Afghanistan’s children and youth. We will solidify and
expand the gains made in maternal, newborn and child
health. We will assist in providing education to children
and young people, and in emboldening women’s civil
and political participation, human rights and economic
empowerment. We expressed confidence in President
Ghani’s reform agenda by investing $20 million towards
the Government’s fiscal gap, of which $10 million were
new funds, and the other $10 million reprofiled from
the World Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund.

14-7024731/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

We recognize that the international footprint in
Afghanistan will change in 2015. Canada welcomes the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2189 (2014),
recognizing the importance of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission, which will provide ongoing training,
advice, and assistance to the Afghan Government
beginning in 2015. We further welcome the Afghan
Government’s reaffirmation of its commitment to the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, set out at
the Tokyo Conference in 2012, and the consensus it
reached with the international community on a process
to refresh the Framework at next year’s senior officials
meeting, based on the reform programme and priorities
of the Afghan Government.
(spoke in French)
In the meantime, Afghanistan’s regional partners
must continue to work together to manage security
and development challenges through the established
frameworks and in accordance with international law.
When States flout international law by annexing or
illegally intervening in other States’ territory, we all
suffer the ensuing effects of the conflict and instability.
An international rules-based order benefits us all;
chaos erupts without it. Each and every Member State
has the responsibility to abide by international law,
including to act against terrorists and militant groups,
and to ensure that their territories do not become bases
for such operations.
Let me dwell further on this point. There is no
distinction to be made between a good terrorist and a
bad terrorist, for all terrorism is inherently evil. There
is consequently no role for terrorism in the conduct of
international relations. Terrorist forces may have tainted
Afghanistan’s recent history, but we are determined that
they will not decide its future. The Afghan population
has made plain its desire for a peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan. Canada continues to support them in this
aspiration, and will work with the Afghan Government
and international community to address the numerous
challenges that remain.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing today, and for
his excellent work. We commend him on his very
successful start at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also

32/36

18/12/2014

thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for his briefing today.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by observer of the European Union earlier in this debate.
This meeting takes place at a pivotal moment for
Afghanistan and its international friends and supporters.
Since our debate in September, Afghanistan has
experienced the first democratic change of Government
in its long and often painful history. President Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah have formed
a National Unity Government that aims at building a
stable, prosperous, democratic and inclusive country.
We strongly believe that these goals serve the interests
of all Afghans and therefore they have our full support.
In a few days, NATO’s International Security
Assistance Force mission will come to an end.
Afghanistan will then be fully responsible for the
internal and national security of their country. Of
course, sceptics remain; they ask whether Afghanistan
will be up to that task. While we are concerned about
the recent rise in terrorist acts in Kabul, we still believe
that, on the whole, Afghanistan’s security forces have
already answered that question themselves — over
the past months, they were in the front lines and in
the summer they successfully secured two rounds of
presidential elections.
Despite those remarkable achievements, we agree
with Special Representative Haysom that the gains
made are still fragile. As of January 2015, based on
an invitation by the Afghan Government, NATO and
its partners will therefore continue to train and assist
Afghan security forces under the non-combat Resolute
Support Mission. Today, in fact just 10 minutes ago,
the German Parliament approved our own substantial
contribution to that Mission. We will provide up to
850 troops, to be based in Mazar-e-Sharif and Kabul,
making Germany the second-largest troop contributor
to Resolute Support. In this regard, let me commend
Security Council members, and particularly Australia
as the pen holder, on the recent adoption of resolution
2189 (2014), welcoming the establishment of the
Mission. The resolution sends out the clear political
message that the international community continues
to stand by Afghanistan and feels committed to its
stability and security even beyond 2014.
Securing a stable future for Afghanistan requires
that international civilian assistance does not come
to an abrupt end. At the London Conference on

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan on 4 December, therefore, Germany
renewed its commitment to maintaining its high level
of civilian assistance, €430 million per year up to
2016. This pledge builds on a quid pro quo approach
as well as on the sound and ambitious reform agenda
that President Ghani and Government Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah presented in London and in meetings
with Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister
Steinmeier on 5 December in Berlin. We commend the
two leaders’ clear commitment to tackling corruption,
safeguarding human rights, strengthening the role of
women, mobilizing the private sector and stabilizing
Afghanistan’s worrying fiscal situation. The swift
merit-based formation of a new cabinet of ministers
will play a key role. In this regard, we also continue
to strongly support UNAMA and all the United
Nations agencies in assisting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
We deem it important that UNAMA remain present,
not only in Kabul, but also throughout the country.
While looking at the challenges that certainly lie
ahead for Afghanistan, we should not forget what we
have achieved since the fall of the Taliban regime. Life
expectancy has increased from 45 to 60 years. Maternal
and child mortality rates have dropped tremendously.
More and more girls are attending schools. Some
200,000 students are enrolled at Afghan universities.
Roads have been built, and there is electricity and water
in all major cities. That is real progress.
Most importantly, however, Afghanistan has
developed a strong civil society that will not allow a
rollback of their hard-earned freedoms and rights.
Supporting these brave Afghan men and women
certainly deserves our continued attention and
commitment. Germany will continue to stand by the
Afghan Government and people as they write a new
chapter in their history.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2014/876). I would like
to welcome and thank Special Representative Haysom
for his briefing and wish him every success in his
endeavours, as the task remains huge. Slovakia will
continue to offer full support to the United Nations

S/PV.7347

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Of
course, I cannot proceed without thanking Ambassador
Tanin for his effort and his statement. I would also like
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
UNAMA’s performance has been remarkable in
recent years. Its role in coming years will be no less
important in assisting the Afghan Government in the
reform process and in achieving good governance.
Commitments made in London in early December
encourage us in our efforts, guided as we are by the
spirit of inclusion and political unity. In this regard,
we invite the Afghan Government to continue its
outreach towards all legitimate political stakeholders in
Afghanistan.
While President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah are going to embody their vision in the
formation a new cabinet, UNAMA and the wider
international community stand ready to offer support
and experience with transition. We would like to
highlight the need for reform, especially in areas of
justice, institution-building and legislation. Expansion
of principles of rule of law at all horizontal levels
of governance will be crucial. The aforementioned
principles should be well anchored in the expected
revision of electoral law.
The fundamental prerequisites for development in
any country of the world are safety, security and stability.
Slovakia therefore appreciates the unanimous Security
Council decision to adopt resolution 2189 (2014), which,
inter alia, welcomes the NATO-Afghan Government
Agreement to establish a post-2014 non-combat mission.
In that regard, I am honoured to inform the Council that
on 10 December the Government of Slovakia approved
military troops to serve in the new Resolute Support
Mission in Afghanistan as of 1 January 2015. Slovakia
will also provide financial support for the Afghan
National Security Forces. This contribution is fully
in line with our long-term commitments and the spirit
of cooperation with the Government of Afghanistan.
Slovakia also remains active in development assistance
to the country, which continues to be among our official
development aid priorities. I think that we all can work
together and wish the Afghan people all the best in their
future endeavours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.

14-7024733/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement made earlier by representative of the
European Union.
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing, as well as Secretary-General
for his report containing a comprehensive and realistic
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan (S/2014/876).
I would also like to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing, as well as my
colleague, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.
Our common goal is a self-reliant Afghanistan able
to shape its own future based on a successful transition.
That requires renewed efforts, cooperation and hard
work. Regional cooperation in promoting security and
development is of key importance in building a peaceful
and prosperous future. I would therefore like to recall
the importance and responsibilities of neighbours and
regional partners in that regard.
The United Nations will remain a key partner in
Afghanistan after the transition. The biggest United
Nations special political mission, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, plays a critical
role in advancing human rights and coordinating
international assistance in Afghanistan. To continue
to effectively deliver on its mandate in the future,
adequate resources need to be ensured.
Since 2001, Afghanistan has made real progress in
nation-building, fostering economic growth, improving
health and education, and rebuilding infrastructure.
However, formidable challenges remain in security,
poverty reduction, job creation and service delivery.
As we all know, these challenges are interconnected.
Post-transition development will depend on reforms
in key sectors. The ownership of Afghanistan remains
the foundation for Finland’s support. We therefore
welcome the National Unity Government’s “Realizing
self-reliance: Commitment to reforms and renewed
partnership” paper, which spells out a clear vision of
the way forward.
Sustainable progress in Afghanistan is not only
about convincing the international community. It is first
and foremost about convincing the Afghan people — all
people, women and men. It is about restoring their faith
in their own Government and about offering them
a future. The full and equal participation of women
at all levels of society is not only a prerequisite for

34/36

18/12/2014

democracy and human rights, but it is also the key to
economic success and social stability. Afghan women
must have a prominent role in the society. We welcome
the leadership role fulfilled by President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah in this regard and
encourage them to continue in these efforts.
We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Afghanistan for demonstrating a
remarkable sense of ownership in drafting a national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) through
countrywide consultations and by Afghans themselves.
The national action plan soon to be launched is clearly
an Afghan product. For several years, Finland has
supported this process in Afghanistan, and we will
maintain our support and continue to respect the
Afghan-led implementation.
During the past 13 years, Finland has been
contributing to the reconstruction and stabilization
of Afghanistan through our participation in the
International Security Assistance Force and various
forms of civilian crisis management. Our development
and humanitarian aid amounts to over €220 million.
Our annual support now stands at €30 million. We are
ready to continue this long-term assistance and retain
its current level. We are also preparing to take part with
some 80 troops in the Resolute Support Mission, which
was welcomed by the Security Council on 12 December.
The Finnish Parliament recently approved the
Government’s white paper on Afghanistan, outlining
our future contribution.
As the transition process draws to the end, it is
important that the international community maintain
its support to Afghanistan and its people. I assure the
Council that Finland is ready to do its part.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
position expressed by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
First of all, I should like to thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
debate, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan for his briefing, and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
Only three months ago, the uncertainty over the
outcome of the elections in Afghanistan, with the

14-70247

18/12/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

transition process nearing its end, was a source of great
concern in the country and throughout the international
community. Today, we are pleased to see that this
sensitive moment has come to a positive conclusion
with the installation of a new President of the Republic
and the establishment of a National Unity Government.
Allow me to underline the great commitment and
efforts of the new Afghan leadership — in particular
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah — in meeting the expectations and hopes of
the overwhelming majority of the Afghan population
for a future of peace, stability and development. Let
me also express deep appreciation for the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United States in recent months
to facilitate an agreement between the two former
candidates.
The new Afghan Government has already taken
encouraging steps at the domestic, regional and
international levels. We hope that this positive approach
will continue and the interests of national unity will
prevail. We are all aware of the serious challenges faced
today by Afghanistan and its new authorities, starting
with the security situation, which is threatened by a new
wave of terrorist attacks that have claimed numerous
victims, including unarmed civilians. We condemn these
attacks in the firmest possible terms. This is why we
welcomed the new Afghan Administration’s immediate
signature of the Bilateral Security Agreement and the
NATO status-of-forces agreement, later ratified by the
Afghan Parliament. These instruments represent the
legal bases for the upcoming Resolute Support Mission,
which will begin after the completion of the transition
process.
The launch of the Resolute Support Mission
confirms the will of contributing countries, including
Italy as a framework nation, to maintain their support of
Afghanistan in the consolidation of peace and security.
They will work together with the Afghan Government
and in coordination with the United Nations to help the
Afghan National Security Forces and support them in
the performance of their duties.
Italy’s support in the security field is one element
of our long-term commitment to Afghanistan, which
we have reiterated on many occasions, including here
and most recently at the London Conference. London
was an important event at which the international
community and its members reaffirmed their
solidarity with Afghanistan and their support for the

S/PV.7347

new Government on the basis of the principles of the
Mutual Accountability Framework established at the
Tokyo Conference, namely, mutual commitment,
conditionality and the accountability of Afghanistan,
inspired by collaboration with the donor countries.
This is why we welcome and support the reform
programme presented in London by the Afghan
Government in the areas of the fight against corruption,
the promotion of human rights — where we believe
special attention should be reserved for women — the
strengthening of the rule of law, the reform of the
election and judiciary systems, and the enhancing of the
business climate to attract investors. The programme
aims to achieve concrete progress in these areas and
enable Afghanistan to build its capacity for development
and become self-sustaining.
Italy will remain by Afghanistan’s side and to
provide assistance, in line with our multi-decade
civilian cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing
this meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Nicholas Haysom as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and wish him
success in his new assignment. I also thank him for his
briefing.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, with its deep cultural
and historical ties to Afghanistan, is indeed very eager
to see a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan as its
neighbour. Our policy has been and will continue to
be one of supporting peace, stability, security and
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan, as we see
security in Afghanistan as tantamount to security along
our borders and in our region. It is our firm intention to
maintain and expand our relationship with Afghanistan,
which is rooted in friendship, good-neighbourliness
and mutual interest and understanding.
Iran has already welcomed the formation of the
National Unity Government, led by His Excellency
Mr. Ashraf Ghani as its President and His Excellency
Mr. Abdullah as its Chief Executive Officer, and
has pledged its support for and cooperation with
that Government. We earnestly hope that the new

14-7024735/36

S/PV.7347

The situation in Afghanistan

Government will succeed in its efforts to strengthen
peace, security, stability and development in
Afghanistan, and can carry its difficult job to fruition.
My Government is deeply concerned over
the continuation and exacerbation of violence in
Afghanistan, and strongly condemns all violent attacks
committed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent
and extremist groups against innocent people and
Afghan infrastructure. Unfortunately, over the past
several years the presence of foreign troops and the
activities of terrorists and violent extremist groups
have developed into a vicious circle, with terrible
consequences for the Afghan people. Those groups
have used the presence of foreign troops as an excuse
to justify and expand their operations and to attract
human and financial resources. We hope that, as the
number of foreign troops in Afghanistan dwindles, the
situation in that country can and will rapidly return to
normal. In the meantime, we condemn any cooperation
with and encouragement provided to these groups, as it
emboldens them in their odious behaviour, extends the
plight of the Afghan people and is counterproductive
to establishing peace in Afghanistan and in the region.
On the important question of security arrangements
beyond 2014, we believe that any activity aiming
at security sector capacity-building or supporting
the Afghan National Security Forces, including the
Resolute Support Mission, should be undertaken with
the full consent of and in constant consultation with the
Afghan Government. This is an important prerequisite
to demonstrate the strong commitment of the
international community to respecting the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. At the same time, we wish to underline
that regional cooperation constitutes an effective means
to promote security and development in Afghanistan.
Sustainable progress on security and development
is mutually reinforcing. The establishment of peace
and security remains essential to reconstruction,
humanitarian
relief
efforts
and
sustainable
development. It is in that light that Iran has played an
important role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan and
is ready to pursue that role in future and in cooperation
with the new Government. We are ready to expand our
bilateral cooperation, particularly on security matters,
counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects and
economic cooperation in the fields of infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as durable solution for Afghan
refugees.

36/36

18/12/2014

There is great potential for improving relations
especially in the fields of trade and transit As an
example, completing the railroad project between Herat
and Khaf City in Iran would be an important step. We
have also offered to make available our facilities in the
port of Chah Bahar, which could be very useful for
Afghanistan as a landlocked country. We are waiting
for the tripartite agreement between India, Afghanistan
and Iran to be finalized in this regard. We support
any regional initiatives aimed at exploring regional
potential for the welfare, stability and development of
Afghanistan and the rest of the region.
With respect to counter-narcotics efforts, we are
particularly concerned about reports indicating that
opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan has almost
doubled since 2012. That poses a real threat to the
region and beyond, and should be addressed by the
international conununity and the Afghan Government.
In this regard, the international community should, inter
alia, support the Triangular Initiative on cooperation
on countering narcotics among Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, which is essential not only to strengthening
the security and stability of Afghanistan, but also to
alleviating the serious concerns of neighboring States
and transit and destination countries.
We support UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development
assistance and reconstruction support to Afghanistan
through a robust regional engagement on issues such
as border security, immigration, the return of refugees
and drug-control measures. The role of UNAMA
should be further strengthened in the light of the new
developments in Afghanistan. The future role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan is going to grow due to
the multifaceted and more complicated challenges.
In conclusion, the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran once again reiterates its sustained
support for the promotion of security, stability and
comprehensive and sustainable development in
Afghanistan, and extends our warmest support to the
new Government in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

14-70247
