S/2017/563

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 29 December 2016 (S/2016/1129), the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) until 31 December 2019 and requested me to submit a report every six
months on the implementation of its mandate. The present report covers the period
from 1 January to 30 June 2017 and provides an overview of developments and
trends in West Africa and the Sahel. It also outlines the a ctivities of UNOWAS and
progress made in the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel.

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
The reporting period was characterized by the peaceful resolution of the postelection crisis in the Gambia; government initiatives to promote development in
Cabo Verde and Ghana; and political reforms and electoral preparations in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Senegal. While some headway was made in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, the security situation in West Africa and the Sahel
remained fragile. Terrorist activities and cross-border criminality, notably piracy
and trafficking in drugs, arms and persons, continued to pose serious threats to the
stability of the region. Despite regional efforts to counter Boko Haram, continuing
violence has deepened a serious humanitarian crisis and development deficit in the
Lake Chad basin. During a visit from 2 to 7 March 2017, a delegation from the
Security Council took stock of the situation and raised awareness of the crisis. The
visit led to the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) on 31 March. Meanwhile, at the
fifty-first ordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held in Monrovia on 4 June, the
President of Togo, Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, was elected Chair.

A.

Political and governance trends
3.
On 19 January 2017, the President of the Gambia, Adama Barrow, was sworn
in at the embassy of the Gambia in Dakar, where he had temporarily relocated for
security reasons following the refusal by the former President, Yahya A. J. J.
Jammeh, to accept defeat in the presidential election held on 1 December 2016 .

17-10344 (E)

030717

*1710344*

S/2017/563

Diplomatic efforts made by the Heads of State of the member countries of
ECOWAS, with the support of my Special Representative for West Africa and the
Sahel, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2337 (2017), resulted in the departure
of the former President from the country on 21 January 2017. President Barrow
returned to the Gambia on 26 January and began focusing efforts on establishing a
new cabinet, supporting the preparation and conduct of legisl ative elections and
developing a joint vision for the country, in consultation with members of the ruling
coalition. In the legislative elections, held on 6 April, the United Democratic Party,
a party in the ruling coalition led by the current Minister for Foreign Affairs,
A. N. M. Ousainou Darboe, secured an absolute majority in the National Assembly.
4.
In Cabo Verde, the Government, led by the Prime Minister, José Ulisses
Correia e Silva, advanced its reform agenda focused on privatization,
decentralization and investment in the tourism sector.
5.
In Ghana, the President, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo -Addo, appointed
54 ministers and deputy ministers to serve in his cabinet, increasing the total
number of ministers to 110, up from 78 under the previous Administration. The
Government immediately began implementing its key priorities of job creation;
economic stabilization; the creation of a business-friendly environment; the revival
of the country’s agricultural sector; and investment in the health sector.
6.
In Côte d’Ivoire, a new Government, under the leadership of the Prime
Minister, Amadou Gon Coulibaly, was appointed on 11 January. In line with the
provisions approved through a constitutional referendum in October 2016, Daniel
Kablan Duncan, who had served as Prime Minister during the first term in office of
the President, Alassane Ouattara, assumed the newly created post of Vice-President.
Since January, the country has experienced a series of revolts and mutinies by
soldiers demanding monetary compensation from the Government. These incidents
underscore the challenges that remain to be addressed in the area of securi ty sector
reform.
7.
In Guinea, the opposition deplored the fact that local elections were not held in
February, as stipulated in the political agreement of 12 October 2016 between the
Government and the opposition. A number of steps still need to be take n before
local elections can be organized, including the approval by the Constitutional Court
of a bill reforming the Electoral Code.
8.
In Senegal, preparations are under way for parliamentary elections on 30 July.
The amendment to the electoral law adopted on 3 January by the National Assembly
included the addition of 15 parliamentary seats to represent the diaspora.
Meanwhile, the arrest and indictment on 7 March of the Mayor of Dakar, Khalifa
Sall, a possible presidential contender for the elections in 2019, on charges of fraud,
triggered heated debate over the independence of the judiciary.
9.
In Sierra Leone, the President, Ernest Bai Koroma, announced on 14 February
that presidential and legislative elections would be held on 7 March 2018 and that a
constitutional referendum would be held by September 2017.
10. In Liberia, preparations continued for the presidential election scheduled for
10 October.
11. In Togo, the Government took a number of measures in connection with the
holding of the long overdue local elections and the reforms that remained pending
under the comprehensive political agreement of 2006. Notably, a national committee
for reflection on constitutional reform was established on 3 January to propose
reforms in concert with the High Commission for Reconciliation and Strengthening
of National Unity. The payment of reparations to the victims of the political
violence that prevailed between 1958 and 2005, in line with the recommendations of
2/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, began in March. Moreover, on
19 January, a National Council for Monitoring Decentralization was established and
the High Authority for Combating Corruption and Related Offences commenced
operations. However, opposition leaders denounced the measures as insufficient and
reiterated their demands for the holding of local elections.
12. In Benin, the National Assembly failed to secure the majority required to
consider the constitutional reforms proposed by the President, Patrice Athanase
Guillaume Talon, including the imposition of a single six-year presidential term;
public funding of political parties; and the prohibition of pretrial detention and
police custody for incumbent presidents and cabinet members.
13. In Burkina Faso, against the backdrop of a worsening security situation,
including protests by police personnel, on 20 February, the President, Roch Marc
Christian Kaboré, appointed Jean-Claude Bouda as Minister of Defence. One week
later, the President also replaced the heads of the police and the armed forces. In
addition, a new Ministry of Security was created in February and steps were taken
to implement a strategic plan on the reform of the defence sector for the period
2017-2021. Following the finalization of the constitutional reform proposal s by the
Constitutional Committee on 10 January, regional consultations were held between
18 March and 20 April and a referendum on their adoption is expected to be held
later in 2017.
14. In the Niger, the political situation continued to be marked by te nsions
between the ruling majority and the opposition. Local elections previously
scheduled to be held in January were postponed indefinitely. The opposition
candidate in the second round of the 2016 presidential election, Hama Amadou, was
sentenced in absentia on 13 March to one year in prison on child smuggling charges.
On 21 April, in response to a series of student strikes, some of which involved
violent clashes with security forces, the Government signed an agreement with
student representatives, in which it committed to reducing the backlog on
scholarship grants and investing in building additional university infrastructure. In
addition, in a cabinet reshuffle on 18 April, the President decided that the Minister
of Employment, Labour and Social Protection would take the role of the Minister of
Higher Education, and vice versa.
15. In Mauritania, on 17 March, the Senate rejected a draft law for constitutional
reform, which included the abolishment of the Senate and significant changes to the
Constitutional Council and the High Court of Justice, as well as a modification to
the national flag. The draft law had been passed by a majority of the National
Assembly one week earlier. On 20 April, the Council of Ministers adopted a decree
for a referendum on the draft law, which is planned for 15 July.
16. In Nigeria, on 5 April, following a series of protests against socioeconomic
hardship held in several cities, the President, Muhammadu Buhari, launched the
Economic Recovery and Growth Plan, 2017-2020. The Government also continued
to pursue its efforts to combat corruption. In that regard, on 19 April, the head of the
National Intelligence Agency and the Secretary to the Government of the Federation
were suspended in connection with the alleged misappropriati on of public funds.
Notwithstanding these positive developments, national debate centred on the
President’s long absences from the country on medical grounds.

B.

Security trends
17. Instability in Mali continued to spread into north -eastern Burkina Faso and the
western area of the Niger. On 2 March, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Al Mourabitoun, Ansar Eddine and Front de libération du Macina merged to form a

17-10344

3/16

S/2017/563

new alliance, the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims, which is composed
of leaders of different ethnic backgrounds. The Group has already claimed
responsibility for several deadly attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Malian forces and is
expected to continue carrying out such attacks. In Burkina Faso, the number of
terrorist attacks against military and civilian targets increased during the first
quarter of the year. In the Niger, terrorist and violent extremist activity spread from
the north of the country and contributed to Boko Haram militant activities in the
south. On 26 April, representatives of the Liptako -Gourma Integrated Development
Authority, a regional organization seeking to develop the contiguous areas of Mali,
Burkina Faso and the Niger, at the request of the three Heads of State, visited the
Lake Chad Basin Commission in N’Djamena to discuss the establishment of a joint
security force to more effectively control the borders shared by the three countries
and to enhance their capacity to combat terrorism. Meanwhile, Operation Barkhane,
conducted by French forces, remained under way in the region, one element of
which was to provide support for forces of Mali and Burkina Faso in their efforts to
search for terrorists in the Soum province of Burkina Faso. On 13 April, at its
679th meeting, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union endorsed the
strategic concept of operations for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and authorized the deployment of the Joint Force, comprising some
5,000 military, police and civilian personnel, for an initial period of 12 months. It
also requested the United Nations Security Council to authorize the deployment of
the force.
18. In Nigeria, a surge in patrols and a scaling-up of the Niger Delta amnesty
programme, as well as more vigorous outreach by the Government, under the
leadership of the Vice-President, Yemi Osinbajo, led to a significant reduction in the
number of violent incidents in the Niger Delta region. However, the continued
detention without trial of the leader of the Islamic Movement in Nigeria, Sheikh
Ibraheem Zakzaky, despite a court ordering his release in December 2016, triggered
further clashes between security forces and members of the Movement. In addition,
violent clashes between farmers and pastoralists in the Middle Belt and other
regions continued to strain intercommunal relations. From January to April, clashes
between farmers and pastoralists resulted in over 700 deaths. Violent confrontations
between pastoralists and farmers were also observed in other West African
countries, including Ghana and Benin.
19. The production and trafficking of drugs remained a source of instability.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Joint
Airport Interdiction Task Force of the Airport Communication Project (AIRCOP), a
multi-agency anti-trafficking initiative, seized over 7 kilograms of cocaine between
January and March in Mali alone. In addition, there were reports of an increase in
cannabis production and consumption, as well as in methamphetamine trafficking in
the region. Moreover, on 10 April, the Chair of ECOWAS, the President of Liberia,
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, called on ECOWAS member States to strengthen regulatory
regimes and enforce legislation against the counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals in the
region.
20. Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea remained a significant challenge. A
shift in piracy tactics was noted, from theft of cargo to hijackings for ransom. Of the
27 maritime crew members kidnapped for ransom worldwide between January and
March, 17 were abducted off the coast of Nigeria.

4/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

C.

Violence perpetrated by Boko Haram
21. Since my previous report (S/2016/1072), a slight decrease in the number of
attacks carried out by Boko Haram and a larger decrease in the number of fatalities
were reported in the Niger and Nigeria. In the period from 1 January to 15 April,
161 security incidents related to Boko Haram in the two countries resulted i n
143 reported deaths. Despite efforts by the Multinational Joint Task Force and the
countries, Boko Haram continued to perform raids on urban and rural settlements
and staged heavily armed attacks against military positions in Borno State, Nigeria.
On 9 February, Boko Haram insurgents ambushed newly trained army recruits along
the Ajiri-Dikwa road in the Dikwa area of Borno State. The incident reportedly
resulted in the deaths of seven Nigerian soldiers and more than 30 Boko Haram
militants. On 15 March, approximately 300 Boko Haram fighters attacked a police
station and a military base in the Magumeri area of Borno State. They were repelled
by the military forces, but a number of soldiers were injured and the military base
was destroyed. Attacks on military convoys also continued. Two assaults on the
Maiduguri-Biu highway on 28 and 31 January, which had earlier been declared safe,
underlined the tenuous nature of the gains made. The continuing use of women and
children as suicide agents, including pregnant women and mothers with babies, was
particularly alarming. On 20 January, three female suicide bombers, one of them
carrying a baby on her back, blew themselves up, killing at least 11 people and
injuring 14 others at a checkpoint in the town of Madagali, Adamawa State, Nigeria.
Several abductions of women and young people were also recorded during the
reporting period in Borno State. In a video released on 22 March, the leader of Boko
Haram, Abubakar Shekau, reiterated calls to create an Islamic caliphate a cross West
Africa, while the group’s faction under Abu Musab al-Barnawi reportedly
intensified attempts to win over local populations.
22. Although confronted with continuing logistical and financial challenges, the
Multinational Joint Task Force continued to play a key role in the response to Boko
Haram. In collaboration with the Force, the Cameroonian and Nigerian military
reportedly rescued over 7,000 captives who were being held by Boko Haram
between March and April. The ongoing offensive also led to t he surrender of
hundreds of Boko Haram fighters. In an unfortunate turn of events, however, on
17 January, the Nigerian military accidentally bombed an internally displaced
persons camp in the town of Rann in Borno State, underscoring the need to further
improve intelligence-gathering and civilian-military relations in the fight against
Boko Haram. In Senegal, a suspected Boko Haram recruiter was arrested on
12 April and progress was made in setting up a rehabilitation centre for ex -militants
in the Diffa region of the Niger.
23. On 6 May, following negotiations facilitated by the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Government of Switzerland, Boko Haram released a further
82 of the girls who had been abducted from Chibok in April 2014, bringing the total
number of girls freed to 105, of the 276 initially abducted. The Government is
making efforts, with United Nations support, to help them to reintegrate into
society. On 12 April, the Nigerian Department of State Services revealed that it had
averted planned attacks on the embassies of the United States of America and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Abuja.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
24. West African economies are rebounding from a slump in export commodity
prices and the concomitant economic slowdown. An economic growth rate of
4.3 per cent is forecast for West Africa in 2017 by the International Monetary Fund,

17-10344

5/16

S/2017/563

while the Central Bank of West African States projects an expansion of up to 7 per
cent for members of the West African Economic and Monetary Union. According to
an analysis by the World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal are ranked among the
seven best-performing countries in Africa. However, owing to a decrease in world
prices and a glut of stock offerings, the Government of Côte d’Ivoire announced in
April a 10 per cent reduction in the purchase price for cocoa. After officially
entering into recession in 2016, Nigeria is expected to resume modest growth at a
rate of 0.8 per cent in 2017, reflecting an increase in oil production, strong
performance in the agricultural sector and the stabilization of the national currency.
An increase in oil production is also expected to drive the growth rate in Ghana to
6 per cent, which should help to counter the country’s rising level of debt.

E.

Humanitarian trends
25. The overall humanitarian situation in the region remains dire, marked by high
levels of food insecurity, widespread displacement and susceptibility to epidemics.
Extreme poverty, climate change, armed conflict and insecurity are behind the high
levels of structural, chronic and acute vulnerability present in the region, which
continue to require significant humanitarian and development action. Despite larger than-average harvests in 2016 in much of the Sahel, approximately 30 million
people are facing food insecurity, 12 million of whom are in need of emergency
food assistance, and around 4.7 million children under the age of 5 years are
severely malnourished.
26. Across the region, almost 5 million people are suffering from the
consequences of forced displacement. While the number of internally displaced
persons in the Lake Chad Basin has decreased slightly from 2.6 million to
2.4 million since the previous reporting period, 6.7 million people in the are a are
considered to be facing severe food insecurity. In the worst affected areas of Borno
and Yobe States in Nigeria, more than 44,000 people are reported to face famine like conditions. In Mali, 3.8 million people are food insecure, and the number of
internally displaced persons rose by about 30 per cent between January and March,
to 46,000. In addition, 143,500 Malian refugees are being hosted by Burkina Faso,
Mauritania and the Niger. Around 243,000 of the estimated 700,000 people living in
the Diffa region of the Niger are internally displaced persons, refugees or nationals
of the Niger who have returned from Nigeria.
27. Approximately 260,000 returnees were registered by the Nigeria Immigration
Service as of April, and a significant number of internally displaced persons have
also returned, including in some newly liberated areas. Owing to increased access,
the number of beneficiaries of food assistance increased from 1.2 million to
2.1 million between January and March. However, in May, the Governor o f Borno
State indicated that it was no longer feasible to provide support for people returning
to their areas of habitual residence because of ongoing military operations, and the
authorities continued to intensify preparations to close some camps for inte rnally
displaced persons in Nigeria. Over 2,600 refugees were reportedly forcibly
repatriated between January and March to border villages in Nigeria by the
Cameroonian authorities. On 2 March, the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria
signed a tripartite agreement with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for voluntary repatriation. The Government
of Mali disclosed that about 57,000 refugees had returned, mostly from Mauritania,
as of April.
28. Funding shortfalls continued to limit the scope of the humanitarian response.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, $2.6 billion is
required in 2017 to provide assistance to 15 million people in eight countries in

6/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

West Africa and the Sahel. As of 18 May, only 20 per cent of that amount had been
funded. Of the $1.5 billion required for the Lake Chad Basin alone, only 17 per cent
had been received by the end of April. Following the appeal launched in December
2016, donors had pledged $672 million for the humanitarian response at a
conference in Oslo in February.

F.

Trends on human rights
29. Positive developments in relation to human rights were noted in a number of
countries. In the Gambia, media outlets that had been closed by the previous regime
were reopened. Political prisoners and persons arrested or detained illegally, without
charges being brought, were released. In addition, the Government announced a
series of measures to ensure compliance with human rights standards and made a
commitment to establish a national human rights commission. The Government
gave priority to setting up a truth and reconciliation commission, announcing that
the commission would begin receiving victim testimonies by September. Moreover,
the Government expressed its commitment to revise the Constitution in order to
ensure the independence of the judiciary and the media, and to enhance civilian
oversight of the security services. Notwithstanding the progress made, some cases
were reported in January and February of supporters of the former President being
arrested and detained for periods exceeding the constitutionally established maximum.
30. In Guinea, the Minister of Justice announced on 24 March that the trial of
those charged in connection with the stadium massacre of September 2009 would
start by the end of 2017. On 12 March, Abubakar “Toumba” Diakite, aide -de-camp
of the former Head of State, Moussa Dadis Camara, was extradited from Senegal to
Guinea, where he was subsequently indicted for a number of crimes, including
murder, rape and torture, in connection with the incident. However, a number of
high-ranking indicted officials remain in public office, fuelling scepticism about the
Government’s commitment to addressing widespread concerns over impunity.
31. In Burkina Faso, progress by the High Council for Reconciliation and National
Unity in the implementation of its mandate remained slow. The trial of the former
President, Blaise Compaoré, in his capacity as Minister of Defence, and
34 co-accused over their role in the violent repression of the popular uprising in
October 2014, began on 27 April, but the case has yet to be heard on its merits. In
Mauritania, difficulties with respect to the issuance of birth certificates, particularly
among certain ethnic and community groups, remained a source of concern. More
than 40 per cent of children under 5 years of age are improperly registered, which
has resulted in a large stateless population, exacerbating the risk of marginalization,
exploitation, trafficking and enslavement. Meanwhile, on 27 April, the Appeals
Chamber of the Extraordinary African Chambers in Senegal upheld the life sentence
of the former President of Chad, Hissène Habré, for war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
32. In Guinea, the security forces were accused of excessive use of force in
clashes with protesters in February, which led to the deaths of seven people. In a
number of countries, including Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau, the Niger,
Nigeria, Senegal and Sierra Leone, the authorities banned demonstrations by
political opponents, while media outlets were closed in Togo. In response to attacks
or threats by terrorist groups, some national authorities continued to subject people
suspected of being extremist militants to arbitrary arrest, detention and ill-treatment
and to carry out extrajudicial executions. In addition, recourse to judicial measures
by victims remained limited, highlighting weaknesses in accountability under
national and international legal instruments for human rights violations committed
either by armed groups or by security forces.

17-10344

7/16

S/2017/563

G.

Trends on gender issues
33. On 10 February, the Council of Ministers of ECOWAS adopted four key
documents to advance gender mainstreaming and the inclusion of wome n in
political, peace and security processes, notably a strategic framework and action
plan on gender equality and elections, 2017-2022; an action plan on women, peace
and security within the ECOWAS conflict prevention framework, 2017 -2022; a
regional action plan for combating obstetric fistula, 2016-2019; and a road map on
the implementation of the supplementary Act for sustainable development in
relation to the Agenda 2063 of the African Union. In addition, the adoption of a
national action plan by Benin brings to 14 the number of West African countries that
have put in place action plans on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments by my Special Representative
34. Through his good offices missions and in collaboration with regional and
international partners, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel
continued to support efforts to sustain peace in a number of countries in the region,
including by promoting and supporting inclusive national political dialogues,
constitutional and democratic reforms, and transparent and peaceful electoral
processes.
35. In response to the post-election crisis in the Gambia, my Special Representative
engaged with all relevant national, regional and international stakeholders to help to
bring about a peaceful resolution to the crisis. He spearheaded the issuance of joint
statements by the African Union, ECOWAS and the United Nations, accompanied
Heads of State of the member countries of ECOWAS on their mediation and good
offices visits to Banjul and advocated the full support of the international
community for action by ECOWAS that aimed to ensure that the outcome of the
election in the Gambia was respected. Guided by Security Council resolution 2337
(2017), my Special Representative played a critical role during the final
negotiations led by the President of Guinea, Alpha Condé, and the President of
Mauritania, Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, who were appointed by ECOWAS and
supported by the African Union and the United Nations, which resulted in the
decision by the former President, Yahya Jammeh, to step down.
36. Following the departure of the former President on 21 January, my Special
Representative visited the Gambia five times to support the Government in its
efforts to advance democratic governance, promote respect for the rule of law and
human rights, reform the security sector and facilitate socioeconomic recovery. He
held regular consultations with all relevant stakeholders and supported the efforts of
the United Nations country team, including by helping to ensure the timely
implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations inter -agency mission
to the Gambia in February. With the support of UNOWAS, a joint transition team,
comprising members of the former and the incumbent Governments, was
established in February. The team completed the handover process in April. From
5 to 7 May, the Economic Commission for Africa, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and UNOWAS organized a retreat for cabinet members, which
was chaired by the President. The retreat focused on enhancing collaborative
leadership skills and improving communication among cabinet members by
stimulating discussion on key government priorities. In mid -May, UNOWAS deployed

8/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

a strategic communications expert to Banjul to further assist the Government in its
efforts to inform the population about its priorities and achievements.
37. On 17 May, following the military mutiny in Côte d’Ivoire, which started on
8 May, my Special Representative travelled to Abidjan with the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, Marcel de Souza, and the Secretary-General of the
Presidency of Guinea, Naby Youssouf Kiridi Bangoura, on behalf of the African
Union. During a meeting with the President, Alassane Ouattara, the delegation
reiterated that the United Nations supported his efforts t o promote stability. The
delegation subsequently issued a joint press statement calling on national actors to
address disagreements through dialogue and in conformity with the rule of law.
38. In Guinea, my Special Representative, in coordination with all relevant United
Nations entities, continued to work with international partners to encourage national
stakeholders to take the measures necessary to implement the political agreement of
12 October 2016. In Sierra Leone, the first post-conflict presidential election
without the presence of a United Nations peace mission will be held in March 2018.
In anticipation of that election, my Special Representative conducted a mission to
Freetown in February, during which he consulted national stakeholders on a numb er
of issues, including the constitutional review process and electoral preparations. He
continues to support the Government’s fundraising efforts for the electoral process.
On 9 and 10 February, he conducted a visit to Togo for consultations with the
President and the country’s international partners. He reiterated the readiness of the
United Nations to provide support to the country in preparation for the local
elections.
39. During a meeting, held in Ouagadougou on 3 May, with the President of
Burkina Faso, my Special Representative stressed the importance of pursuing the
country’s agenda on constitutional, judicial and security sector reform. From 9 to
11 March, my Special Representative met with key national and international
stakeholders in Mauritania, including representatives of political parties and civil
society, and encouraged further political dialogue. In addition, he discussed regional
security challenges with the President of Mauritania, the Prime Minister and the
Permanent Secretary of G-5 Sahel.
40. My Special Representative, in his capacity as the High -level Representative
for Nigeria, remained actively engaged with all national stakeholders in a number of
areas, including with respect to the implementation of the Government’s key
priorities. During his most recent visit to the country at the end of April, he held
discussions with relevant national and international stakeholders on efforts to
enhance conflict prevention mechanisms, including through the strengthening of the
national peace architecture. In the light of transhumance-related tensions across the
region, my Deputy Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and the
ECOWAS Commissioner for Trade, Customs, Free Movement and Tourism met in
Praia on 25 January to analyse the situation and propose solutions. In follow-up to
that meeting, UNOWAS organized a meeting in Dakar on 4 May in order to present
to ECOWAS experts and representatives of the diplomatic community the
preliminary findings of a UNOWAS study on pastoralism, sec urity and sustainable
livelihoods in West Africa.

B.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
41. Insecurity in the northern Cameroon-Nigeria border area continued to affect
the work of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission. On 31 January, an unknown
armed group attacked and killed four members of a United Nations technical
monitoring team, which was conducting a field mission as part of efforts to

17-10344

9/16

S/2017/563

implement the mandate of the Commission. The technical monitoring team was
deployed in November 2016 to supervise the construction of 163 pillars, as part of
the Commission’s border demarcation activities, by the end of the first week of
March. Operations were suspended immediately following the attack and an
investigation into the incident was launched. My Special Representative for West
Africa and the Sahel, who is also the Chair of the Commission, met repre sentatives
of Cameroon and Nigeria who agreed upon reinforced security measures in order to
facilitate a resumption of the Commission’s activities. Representatives of Cameroon
and Nigeria met with representatives of the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security and the Commission in Geneva in April to develop a new field security
protocol and agreed to resume construction work in October. Despite this setback,
the technical monitoring team placed more than half of the pillars foreseen under
the current contract during the reporting period. In addition, my Special
Representative continued his efforts to raise funds for the replenishment of the
extrabudgetary trust fund.

C.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
Security sector reform
42. UNOWAS continued to advise ECOWAS on the operationalization of its
framework on security sector reform and governance. A joint mission of ECOWAS,
the European Union and UNOWAS to the Gambia was conducted from 15 to
19 May to ensure that all stakeholders shared a common understanding of the
country’s security sector reform needs and to assist in developing a joint support
plan. In Burkina Faso, where a United Nations sustaining peace initiativ e had been
launched in 2016, a United Nations senior adviser on security sector reform was
deployed to Ouagadougou in February. His contributions were instrumental in
preparing a draft presidential decree outlining the security sector reform process.
The decree is expected to be signed into law shortly. The process includes the
establishment of an interministerial committee, which will conduct a comprehensive
assessment of the security sector, taking into account all existing initiatives. A
project supported by the Peacebuilding Fund was approved on 10 March to extend
the deployment of the senior adviser for one year and to provide additional
resources for the process. In Guinea, the United Nations advisory team on security
sector reform continued to support the national process with a view to ensuring
sustainability and national ownership of security sector reform management
structures and their permanent integration into an organizational framework through
the High Council of National Defence. On 29 March, 304 police staff graduated
from the country’s police academy, which had reopened in 2016.
Boko Haram
43. My Special Representative continued to encourage appropriate diplomatic,
security and humanitarian responses to the violence perpetrated by Boko Haram.
Following the identification of Nigeria as one of the four countries in the world
facing a credible risk of famine, my Special Representative continued to advocate
the full disbursement of the pledges made at the Oslo Humanitarian Conference for
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region in February. In follow-up to previous visits
conducted in 2016, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel,
together with my Special Representative for Central Africa and the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, visited
countries affected by Boko Haram, namely, Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria,
from 13 to 17 February. During the visit, the delegation consulted national and

10/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

international stakeholders on ways of enhancing counter-terrorism measures,
strengthening coordination and supporting the rehabilitation and reintegration of
former militants. In addition, during his visit to Nigeria from 26 to 28 April, my
Special Representative discussed security and humanitarian conc erns relating to
Boko Haram with relevant stakeholders. During the visit, he was informed of recent
gains in the fight against Boko Haram in the Sambisa Forest. His interlocutors
expressed concern about the risk of famine in the north -east of the country, as well
as the continuous plight endured by the internally displaced persons in Borno State.
While expressing their appreciation for the support provided by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations, the country’s federal and state
authorities called for the further scaling-up of distributions by the World Food
Programme. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative maintained
contacts with international actors regarding the release of the girls who had been
abducted in Chibok and continued to encourage the Member States, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and ECOWAS to convene the longplanned joint summit on Boko Haram with the aim of developing a regional strategy.
44. With the support of the European Union, UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate continued to work with the Nigerian authorities to
strengthen criminal justice responses to terrorism, including by facilitating effective
inter-agency coordination and cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of
cases. From 20 to 22 June, UNODC and the Committee brought together officials in
Nigeria from a variety of government institutions to review the prosecution strategy
for terrorism cases and to recommend measures to strengthen inter-agency
coordination.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
45. Together with the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, UNOWAS
participated in a workshop organized by the Peacebuilding Support Office and
UNDP on 20 and 21 April in Abidjan, aimed at developing a project to enhance
cooperation between the border communities of the two countries and to strengthen
the capacities of the joint border security and confidence -building units. The project
will be funded by the Peacebuilding Fund, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). A total of
12 joint border security units have been established within the framework of the
cross-border security architecture of the Mano River Union. In addition, from 15 to
17 February, the International Organization for Migration, UNDP, UNMIL, UNOCI,
UNODC and UNOWAS met in Dakar to discuss ways of enhancing cooperation
among United Nations system entities in the context of the drawdown of UNOCI
and UNMIL. During the meeting, the need for stronger national ownership in efforts
to revitalize the Union was highlighted.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
46. During the reporting period, ECCAS and ECOWAS made progress in
operationalizing the Interregional Coordination Centre in Yaoundé. In March, the
ECOWAS Commission and Côte d’Ivoire signed an agreement on the Regional
Centre for Maritime Security in West Africa, which is to be based in Abidjan. My
Special Representative continued to work with the ECOWAS Commission to
encourage Ghana to sign an agreement to host the headquarters for Zone F, which
comprises Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone. He was
also instrumental in securing an agreement with Cabo Verde to host the headquarters
for Zone G, covering the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau, Mali and Senegal. In
addition, to inform the efforts of China and the United States to promote peace in
Africa, my Special Representative attended a consultation meeting organi zed by the
17-10344

11/16

S/2017/563

Carter Center and the United States Institute of Peace in Washington, D.C., on
11 and 12 April, during which tripartite cooperation in the maritime domain was
discussed.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
47. From 20 April to 15 May, UNOWAS worked together with partner entities of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, including the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and
UNODC, to conduct assessments in three of the four pilot countries of the Initiative,
namely, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The partner entities noted that the
Initiative, which had been designed in 2009, remained “fit for purpose” to counter
transnational organized crime, trafficking in drugs and other illicit trafficking. They
observed, however, that the transnational organized crime units were not yet fully
operational. Despite strong political commitment, the units continue to rely on
donor funding for operational activities. While funding from each country’s budget
is critical for the long-term sustainability of the units, economic challenges and
competing national priorities have prevented some Governments from disbursing
the funds allocated. The units are currently financed through contr ibuting officers of
law enforcement agencies, the West Africa Coast Initiative and peace operations that
are drawing down. Continued funding and support from the international
community will be essential for maintaining the daily operations of the units.

D.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel
48. On 6 March, my Special Representative briefed the Peacebuilding
Commission on the situation in the Sahel. He also attended the fourth meeting of
Sahel Special Envoys, hosted by Luxembourg and the European Union on 14 and
15 March. Following preparatory meetings held in April by the three working
groups of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the Regional
Director’s Team of the United Nations Development Group, my Special
Representative held a meeting of the Steering Committee of the integrated strategy
on 5 May to discuss ways of fast-tracking the recommendations of the independent
review of the integrated strategy, which had been submitted to the Cou ncil in
January 2017. The Steering Committee agreed that the strategy would guide the
United Nations in its engagement in the Sahel, while acknowledging the existing
frameworks used by some United Nations entities in the region. In that regard, the
role of the working groups of the Regional Director’s Team and the integrated
strategy was acknowledged as key to ensuring programmatic coherence. On
14 June, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support attended the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel, which was held in N’Djamena and chaired by Chad. A series
of decisions were adopted at the meeting with a view to revitalizing the Platform
and its support mechanisms, including through linkages between the working groups
of the integrated strategy and the Platform.
49. The three working groups of the integrated strategy continued to advance
programme delivery and joint activities with regional and subregional organizations.
Several flagship projects were completed in March, including a UNDP project on
border management and border communities in the Sahel and a project of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa on action in support
of physical security and stockpile management activities to reduce the risk of illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and their ammunitions in the Sahel region.
The UNODC programme entitled “Strengthening the Sahel against crime and

12/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

terrorism” is ongoing and played a major role in the establishment in Burkina Faso
in January of specialized judicial units to improve the legal response to
transnational organized crime and terrorism. My Deputy Special Representative for
West Africa and the Sahel attended a meeting of the Steering Committee of the
UNODC programme for the Sahel on 5 and 6 April, which demonstrated the
increased coordination between the United Nations and national Governments, as
well as the stronger linkages between countries in West Africa and the Maghreb.
Under the resilience pillar of the integrated strategy, the initiative of the United
Nations Population Fund on harnessing the demographic dividend for the future of
the Sahel, in cooperation with ECOWAS and the Permanent Inter -State Committee
on Drought Control in the Sahel, served to strengthen links with G-5 Sahel.
However, lack of funds has hampered the implementation of three important
flagship projects under the pillar, namely, on support for resilient pastoralism,
strengthening the resilience of mobile populations and vulnerable communities and
accelerating progress towards the economic empowerment of rural women to
increase resilience in the Sahel.
50. The reporting period was characterized by a stronger partnership between the
United Nations and G-5 Sahel. On 6 February, my Deputy Special Representative
attended the third ordinary Summit of the Heads of State of G -5 Sahel, held in
Bamako. In follow-up to her participation, UNOWAS and MINUSMA provided
technical support for the preparation of the strategic concept of operations of the
Joint Force proposed at the Summit. My Deputy Special Representative and the
Permanent Secretary of G-5 Sahel led the review, in Nouakchott on 6 and 7 March,
of the road map for cooperation between the United Nations and G -5 Sahel, which
endorsed a new methodology for developing joint projects and fundraising.
51. Through its liaison cell in Nouakchott, UNOWAS engaged in a series of
meetings with bilateral and multilateral partners, including the African Union and
the European Union, in order to enhance synergies in support of G -5 Sahel. In
response to Security Council resolution 2295 (2016), UNOWAS also stepped up
collaboration with MINUSMA and facilitated the Mission’s contribution to the
review of the road map. The cell also collaborated with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to enhance the integration
of human rights considerations into the work of G -5 Sahel, and with the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
to facilitate the deployment of a gender adviser within the permanent secretariat of
G-5 Sahel.
52. UNOWAS supported G-5 Sahel initiatives on countering violent extremism,
while ensuring a concerted approach by regional United Nations actors in the
operationalization of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism of 2016. On 8 and 9 March, UNOWAS and the Permanent Secretariat of
G-5 Sahel organized a meeting of national experts of the Group’s cell for the
prevention of radicalization. The meeting examined standard operating procedures
and developed work plans for 2017-2018, including community and media
sensitization activities and outreach to religious bodies. UNOWAS provided
assistance for the establishment of the Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning
Centre, which commenced operations in Nouakchott in June. From 17 to 19 May,
UNOWAS also contributed to the third African Union regional workshop for the
prevention of violent extremism and radicalization, held in Nouakchott, in
cooperation with G-5 Sahel and the African Union. On 31 May and 1 June, my
Special Representative participated in the Second Regional Conversation for the
Prevention of Violent Extremism on the theme “Investing in peace and the
prevention of violence in the Sahel-Sahara”, organized by the International Peace
Institute and the Government of Switzerland.
17-10344

13/16

S/2017/563

E.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
53. From 8 to 12 May, UNOWAS participated in the sixtieth ordinary session of
the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights. It was preceded by a forum
of non-governmental organizations, during which UNOWAS co-chaired a panel on
impunity, justice and human rights in the context of violent extremism in West
Africa and the Sahel. On the margins of the session, UNOWAS also organized two
dialogue sessions on issues relating to human rights, governance and the rule of law,
during which participants called for greater transparency with respect to civilian
casualties of counter-terrorism operations, particularly in the Lake Chad Basin. In
support of the implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Question of Impunity, the International Organization of La
Francophonie, OHCHR, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and UNOWAS organized, from 28 to 30 March, a training workshop
for 26 trainers from the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection of Mali, as well as
media professionals, which resulted in the adoption of a plan of action on
maintaining order and respect for freedom of expression.
54. During the reporting period, UNOWAS efforts to promote the role of wom en
and youth in conflict prevention focused on creating synergies among regional
organizations and raising awareness on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on women, youth, peace and security. Representatives of
UNOWAS participated in a meeting of ministers of gender and women’s affairs
from member countries of ECOWAS in early February, attended a joint planning
session with ECOWAS and United Nations entities on 4 May and addressed the
ECOWAS West African Network of Young Female Leaders in a regional forum,
which was held from 10 to 14 June. In cooperation with G -5 Sahel, UNOWAS
discussed issues relating to gender, radicalization and extremism in a workshop held
in Nouakchott on 18 and 19 January and contributed to a high-level dialogue held in
Bamako on 21 and 22 February aimed at promoting women’s leadership in the
prevention of violent extremism. Shortly before the dialogue, UNOWAS took part in
a meeting establishing the G-5 Sahel Women’s Platform, which adopted an
implementation road map. As part of its role as the secretariat of the Working Group
on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel, UNOWAS
hosted the Group’s annual planning meeting in Dakar on 26 January and facilitated
three thematic exchange sessions in March and April.
55. From 28 to 31 March, UNOWAS facilitated a mission of the Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel to the Gambia. The
Working Group met local women and youth organizations, as well as national
authorities, including the President of the Gambia, to explore ways of enhancing the
contribution of women and youth to the Government’s agenda for peace and
development. On 30 March, my Special Representative met the new Director of the
ECOWAS Gender Development Centre to discuss the support provided by
UNOWAS for the implementation of gender-related United Nations resolutions in
West Africa.
56. On 9 May, my Special Representative attended a ministerial meeting in Banjul,
organized by ECOWAS and UNHCR, on the eradication of statelessness in West
Africa. In his keynote remarks, he stressed the need for a regional response on the
issue. During the meeting, representatives of the member States of ECOWAS
validated an action plan for the eradication of statelessness by 2024, which includes
specific measures to identify, prevent, reduce and raise awareness on statelessness.
The plan of action will be submitted to the ECOWAS Council of Ministers and the

14/16

17-10344

S/2017/563

ECOWAS Summit of Heads of State and Government for adoption as a legally
binding instrument.

IV. Observations and recommendations
57. During the reporting period, there were several positive developments in the
overall situation in West Africa and the Sahel. I was particularly encouraged by the
peaceful transition of power in the Gambia, which demonstrated the democratic
maturity of its people and showcased the effective collaboration between the United
Nations, regional organizations and other international stakeholders. I encourage the
political leaders of the Gambia to continue to promote national reconciliation and to
lay the foundation for accountable governance and sustainable growth. I also call on
international partners to support the Gambia at this critical juncture.
58. I commend the authorities of Burkina Faso on the progress achieved, with
United Nations support, in reforming and reorganizing the security sector and in
promoting national reconciliation. I call on institutional partners and donors t o
ensure close coordination with the country and support for its efforts to sustain
peace and consolidate stability and democratic gains.
59. I welcome the return to calm in Côte d’Ivoire following the instability created
by military elements in May and commend the Government on the measures taken
to restore order. I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to supporting the
Government’s efforts to sustain the hard-won gains of peace and stability. Following
the closure of UNOCI on 30 June, UNOWAS will continue to follow developments
in the country within the context of its regional mandate. As the United Nations
peacekeeping footprint in West Africa becomes lighter, with the end of the UNMIL
mandate foreseen in March 2018, the role of UNOWAS in helping to preserve the
achievements made in peace consolidation in post-conflict countries will become
increasingly important.
60. I am encouraged by the progress being made by some countries of the region
in the fight against corruption, which continues to compromise good governance,
delegitimize State authority and undermine the fight against violent extremism. I
commend the Government of Nigeria, in particular, on the gains made in this area. I
also congratulate the outreach efforts made by the Nigerian au thorities in the Niger
Delta, which have resulted in reduced violence in the area.
61. I welcome the efforts that are being made to carry out political and
constitutional reforms in several countries in the region, as well as the steps being
taken to strengthen human rights protection, and I urge national stakeholders to
continue to engage in dialogue in a spirit of tolerance and inclusivity. In this regard,
I call upon national stakeholders to work together to facilitate the holding of local
elections, where they are due. I also urge them to work towards increasing the
number of women appointed to senior government positions in accordance with
national and regional commitments.
62. I remain worried by the prevalence of terrorist and violent extremist threats in
the region and the linkages with transnational organized crime. In this regard, I
welcome the leadership demonstrated by countries in West Africa and the Sahel to
tackle security challenges in the region. I support the establishment of the Joint
Force of G-5 Sahel and the imminent deployment of its 5,000 personnel. I also
commend the efforts of the countries participating in the Multinational Joint Task
Force, which have reduced the operational capacities and geographical reach of
Boko Haram. I note with concern the continuing attacks on military and civilian
targets, which are hampering resettlement and rehabilitation efforts and providing a

17-10344

15/16

S/2017/563

breeding ground for extremism. I encourage stronger partnership among the affected
countries, as well as with regional organizations, including the African Union, and
reiterate my call for all counter-insurgency efforts to be carried out in full
compliance with international humanitarian, hu man rights and refugee law. I
wholeheartedly welcome the release of the 82 Chibok girls and encourage
continuous efforts towards the release of more Boko Haram abductees.
63. While I welcome the humanitarian assistance already provided by regional and
international partners to the countries affected by Boko Haram, I remain very
concerned about food insecurity in the region. I urge donors to support the
humanitarian response in the Lake Chad Basin, which remains critically
underfunded, and to quickly disburse the funds pledged at the Oslo Humanitarian
Conference for Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region in February. I also urge the
international community to support efforts to address the root causes of the Boko
Haram crisis. I welcome the visit by a delegation from the Security Council to the
Lake Chad region, which drew attention to this neglected crisis.
64. I commend the close cooperation between the United Nations, the African
Union, ECOWAS, G-5 Sahel, the European Union and other partners in support of
stability in the Sahel region and reiterate the dedication of the United Nations to
ensuring the effective implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. I commend the donor community for its generous support for the region
and encourage Governments in the region and development partners to explore
innovative ways to use these resources to achieve a greater development impact. I
also call on all stakeholders to take the steps required to create the security and
political conditions necessary for the implementation of development assistance in
the Sahel region.
65. I condemn the tragic attack on the technical monitoring team of the Cameroon Nigeria Mixed Commission on 31 January, which resulted in the deaths of four
personnel, and look forward to the completion of the investigation into the incident
by the relevant authorities. I welcome the expeditious measures undertaken to
enhance security and resume the border demarcation activities in order to give effect
to the judgment of the International Court of Justice of 10 October 2002.
66. I wish to express my deep appreciation to the Governments of West Africa and
the Sahel region, the African Union, ECOWAS, G -5 Sahel, the Mano River
Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for
their continued cooperation with UNOWAS. I also extend my appreciation to the
United Nations system in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society organizations and
other institutions for their close partnership with UNOWAS in the implem entation
of its mandate. I would like to express particular appreciation to my Special
Representative, as well as the staff of UNOWAS and the Cameroon -Nigeria Mixed
Commission for their continuing efforts to advance peace and security in West
Africa and the Sahel.

16/16

17-10344
