S/PV.8553

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8553rd meeting

Tuesday, 18 June 2019, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Velásquez
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Goolab
Ms. Pierce/Mr. Power
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18222 (E)
*1918222*

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3:30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
and Political Affairs, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Since I last briefed the Security
Council a month ago (see S/PV.8527), violence in
north-west Syria has continued unabated as parties on
the ground try to advance militarily. Our unflagging
efforts to mediate a political solution that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people cannot move
forward in an environment of open conflict. Our efforts
will stall if Russia and Turkey cannot uphold their
ceasefire agreement. Our efforts will suffer if members
of the Security Council, as well as the Astana group and
the small group on Syria — many of whom sit around
this table today — cannot find a way to work together
in common support of the Special Envoy’s efforts to
implement resolution 2254 (2015).

18/06/2019

civilians are paying a horrific price. Air strikes continue.
Barrel bomb use and cluster munitions and exchanges
of mortar and artillery fire are ongoing, resulting in
civilian casualties and massive displacement. Population
centres and civilian infrastructure, including schools
and medical facilities, have been attacked, mostly
inside the de-escalation zone. It is imperative that we
address Hayat Tahrir al-Sham without triggering the
humanitarian catastrophe that we see unfolding before
our eyes, with hundreds of thousands on the move,
being pushed closer to Turkey’s border.
Despite all this violence, the front lines have hardly
shifted, suggesting a stalemate. But if that is the case, it
is plainly turning out to be a bloody and quite pointless
stalemate with devastating humanitarian consequences
that far outstrip any damage done to Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham. Undoubtedly, the situation in Idlib is complex.
But, as we have repeatedly said, counter-terrorism
cannot overtake obligations under international law to
protect civilians and the obligation to strictly observe
the principles of distinction and proportionality. The
problem posed by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham will need to
be dealt with in a more effective and suitable way, one
where civilians do not pay the price. That can begin
only with the restoration of calm.
The Secretary-General, the Special Envoy and I
have been pressing for the need for a solution in Idlib in
all of our engagements at all levels. We welcome Russia
and Turkey’s continued efforts to contain the violence,
most recently in their working group meeting on 16 and
17 June. However, if a solution is not found, then the
consequences will be unimaginable — and not just in
humanitarian terms. Let us remember the international
players involved and the potential for escalation.

The United Nations understands very well the
positions of the guarantors of the Idlib memorandum, an
agreement which until a few months ago had delivered
relative calm to the people of Idlib. For Russia, the
presence of Security Council-designated terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham in the de-escalation zone is
not tolerable. For Turkey, time is required to effectively
isolate and address Hayat Tahrir al-Sham’s most hardline fighters.

Over the weekend, Turkey announced that one of
its observation posts had been shelled by Government
forces intentionally and that it had retaliated with
heavy weapons. That was the second such incident in
less than a week that impacted a Turkish observation
post — defensive positions meant to maintain the lines
agreed in the September memorandum. Today Syrian
Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moualem assured that Syria
did not want to see an armed confrontation between
its forces and Turkey. These close military exchanges
underscore how Idlib is not just a humanitarian issue; it
also poses a grave risk to regional security.

As the Secretary-General said a few hours ago, the
situation in Idlib is especially dangerous and, yet again,

As we look to the upcoming Group of 20 meeting,
where world leaders who can contain this conflict will

2/21

19-18222

The situation in the Middle East

18/06/2019

be present, we stress the need for diplomacy to produce
an outcome in Idlib that can create the necessary
conditions for the political process to advance. We
call on international stakeholders — in particular the
Russian Federation and Turkey, as guarantors of the
September 2018 memorandum of understanding on
Idlib — to exert the efforts needed to end the violence
and restore calm. All that is required is political will.
As the Secretary-General also stated today, there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. It was clear at the
start and it remains clear more than eight years later:
the solution is political.
The Syrian people have paid a high price for the
failures of the international community to end this war.
More than half the population is displaced and in need.
More than 5 million refugees are uncertain of when
it will be safe to return. Hundreds of thousands have
paid with their lives. Tens of thousands are detained,
missing, tortured. Are we really asking them to pay
more? We must collectively work together to ensure the
answer to that question is no.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Security Council members will all
have heard what the Secretary-General said earlier
today, which Rosemary DiCarlo also just referred to.
Like Ms. DiCarlo, I briefed the Council one month
ago on the worsening humanitarian situation in Idlib
(see S/PV.8527). Ten days later, my deputy alerted
the Council to further violence and destruction (see
S/PV.8535). Violence, involving Syrian Government
forces and their allies, armed opposition forces and
the Security Council-listed terrorist organization
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, continued throughout the holy
Eid al-Fitr period. It has still not stopped, despite the
announcement of a truce on 12 June. The conduct
of hostilities has resulted in more than 230 civilian
deaths over the past six weeks, including 69 women
and 81 children. Hundreds more have been injured. An
estimated 330,000 people have been forced to flee their
homes since 1 May and have moved northward towards
the border with Turkey. That is almost double the
number of newly displaced people since my previous
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8527). A recently
conducted rapid assessment found that many of them
have moved multiple times since the start of the conflict,
some as many as 10 times. That is a particular feature

S/PV. 8553

of the Idlib area. People fled there initially from other
parts of Syria, then moved again and again, constantly
searching for safety.
Camps for the displaced are overcrowded, with
many people forced to stay in the open. Those who
remain in towns and villages close to the fighting live
in constant fear of the next attack. Many are crowding
into basements, seeking refuge from air strikes, volleys
of shells and mortar rounds, and fighting that continues
to threaten what is left of their homes. Hospitals,
schools and markets have been hit. Power stations have
been affected. Crops have been burned. Children have
been forced out of their schools. We had reports this
morning of another 19 people killed yesterday by air
strikes and artillery shelling. And this past weekend
civilians were killed by mortar and rocket attacks in
the Al-Wadihi area, south of Aleppo. In short, we are
facing a humanitarian disaster unfolding before our
eyes. There is no denying the facts.
The United Nations and its partners have been
responding with emergency food assistance through
ready-to-eat rations, reaching more than 190,000 people
in May. In addition, the United Nations and its partners
have reached nearly 800,000 people with general food
assistance. Water, health and sanitation supplies have
been distributed to some 180,000 displaced people, and
water trucking has been made available to people in
some 342 camps and informal settlements. Incidentally,
none of that would have been possible if the Council
had not renewed resolution 2165 (2014). Cross-border
assistance remains the only means of reaching people
in and around Idlib. The United Nations and the brave
humanitarian workers on the ground are doing all they
can. They are risking their lives to help others. But the
response is stretched, and a further increase in need
brought on by additional fighting would risk seeing
it overwhelmed.
To this day, we continue to receive reports of attacks
impacting civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. Since April, according to reports, 37 schools
have been affected. More than 250,000 children are out
of school, some 400,000 students have had their exams
cancelled, and 94 schools are currently being used as
shelters. As a UNICEF representative said last week, no
parent should fear sending their child to a school that
may be bombed later that day.
I need to remind the Council again of the incidents
affecting health facilities. Twenty-six incidents

19-182223/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

affecting health-care facilities in north-western Syria
have been confirmed by the World Health Organization
since late April — eight more than when I last briefed
the Council. Two of those facilities were located in
an area controlled by the Government of Syria. Many
other hospitals have closed out of fear of being attacked.
Those attacks do not just claim innocent lives. They also
deprive thousands of civilians of basic health services,
even as fighting intensifies around them.
As the Council is aware, some of those hospitals
had been deconflicted through the Organization’s
deconfliction mechanism. All parties have specific
obligations under international humanitarian law
to refrain from attacking protected sites, regardless
of whether they have been deconflicted or not. It is
appalling that those sites were hit in the first place,
but hitting a facility whose coordinates were shared
as part of the Organization’s deconfliction system is
simply intolerable.
A number of partners now feel that supplying
geographical coordinates to be given to the warring
parties effectively paints a target on their backs. Some
have drawn the conclusion that hospital bombings are a
deliberate tactic aimed at terrorizing people. This whole
episode raises deep questions about the deconfliction
system. We are discussing this internally, and I will
tell the Council what our conclusions are at the regular
monthly humanitarian briefing next week.
Security Council-listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham has a significant presence in Idlib, and
it is responsible for its own share of the suffering there.
Countering Hayat Tahrir al-Sham is plainly a major
challenge. But counter-terrorism efforts cannot, in
any way, absolve States of their obligations to uphold
international humanitarian law. That is the bottom line.
Just as the Secretary-General said earlier, international
humanitarian law must be upheld and attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure need to stop — and
they need to stop immediately.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this
statement on behalf of the three humanitarian
co-penholders — Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.
We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under4/21

18/06/2019

Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for their briefings
and updates.
The situation in north-western Syria remains deeply
unsettling. We reiterate our deep concern about the
continuing violence in recent weeks in north-western
Syria, including indiscriminate aerial bombardments
and heavy shelling. As a result, we have witnessed more
civilian casualties and displaced people. The number of
internally displaced persons since April has surpassed
300,000. We see people, including many children,
living without any shelter. We also condemn the loss of
innocent lives as a result of this escalation.
We are highly alarmed by the persistent attacks
on civilian infrastructure, including 26 health-care
facilities and 37 schools. This is appalling. It seems as
if we are losing the very essence of humanity.
The indiscriminate use of weapons, especially in
densely populated areas, is unacceptable. Such attacks
show complete disregard for human life and follow a
strategy of collective punishment.
In addition, the reported intentional use of
incendiary weapons to destroy farmland and
agricultural equipment adds a new horrific dimension
to the conflict and runs counter to resolution 2417
(2018). Farmers are already struggling to access their
land and harvest their crops.
We, the co-penholders, remind all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
based on the Geneva Conventions and its Protocols,
including the humanitarian principles to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We once again
recall the obligations under resolutions 2286 (2016)
and 2427 (2018). Those who have committed violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law must be held accountable. We stand firm in our
commitment to fight impunity.
We welcome all sustained efforts and ongoing
dialogue to reinstate the ceasefire arrangements of
the Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
signed in September 2018. We call on all parties to
fully implement it in order to de-escalate the situation
and protect the lives of 3 million people, including
1 million children.
We echo the clear and repeated assessment of the
United Nations that any wide-scale military offensive
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe for Syria
and the region. The co-penholders are unified in their
condemnation of any attack by members of United
Nations-designated terrorist groups, such as Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham. However, the fight against terrorism
can never justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Counter-terrorism operations
do not override the responsibility and obligations of
parties to protect civilians. Nor should they impede
impartial humanitarian action.
On the contrary, all parties to conflict must allow and
facilitate principled humanitarian action. Humanitarian
access must be provided in an unconditional, safe,
timely, unhindered and sustained manner. The United
Nations and its partners must be in a position to assess
needs properly and to deliver humanitarian assistance
without obstacles, including through the cross-border
mechanism in accordance with resolution 2449
(2018), which remains the crucial lifeline to millions
in north-western Syria. We sincerely thank the whole
humanitarian community for its efforts to continue to
bring life-saving assistance to people in need.
Last but not least, we reiterate our full support
to Special Envoy Pederson in his efforts to reach an
inclusive and credible political solution in Syria on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué of 2012 (S/2021/522, annex).
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their briefings today.
The United States position on the humanitarian
situation in Idlib is simple: we need to see a full and
immediate de-escalation of violence by all sides, and in
particular the Al-Assad regime forces and the Russian
Federation in and around Idlib province. The regime’s
military escalation is unacceptable and poses a reckless
and irresponsible threat to the security and stability of
the region.
We were hopeful that the Russian Federation’s
announcement on 13 June of a ceasefire between Turkey
and the Russian Federation would bring a reprieve to
the civilians of Idlib. However, as we just heard from
the United Nations, this latest ceasefire appears already
to have broken down, and the Syrian regime is showing
no signs of stopping its offensive push into Idlib, in
clear violation of the 2018 Sochi agreement reached
between Turkey and Russia.

S/PV. 8553

Reports of Al-Assad regime forces shelling Turkish
positions in the Idlib demilitarized zone resulting in the
injuries of Turkish soldiers are alarming. The United
States is gravely concerned about the threat that this
offensive poses to Turkey and Turkish military forces.
Such acts are increasing tensions and the threat of a
wider escalation of the conflict, which would ultimately
put millions of Syrian civilians at risk inside Syria.
The United States stands with our NATO ally
Turkey in calling for the preservation of the 2018 Sochi
agreement ceasefire as agreed by Russia and Turkey
last September and confirmed at the Istanbul Summit
in October. Furthermore, the United States strongly
supports Turkey’s efforts to de-escalate the violence. It
is essential that the parties restore the September Sochi
ceasefire line.
Over the past four years, the Russian Federation
has announced at least 10 ceasefire agreements that
it has gone on to violate or disregard despite the
risk to civilian lives and humanitarian conditions
on the ground. The Al-Assad regime and its allies
have used those ceasefires to seek a tactical military
advantage — to acquire ammunition, reposition forces
and send in reinforcements — while it has ultimately,
every time, resumed its brutal offensives against
civilian populations and moderate opposition groups,
which have resulted in mass displacement, civilian
casualties and restricted humanitarian access.
The United States is gravely concerned that, absent
an immediate and full return by all parties to the 2018
Sochi agreement ceasefire line and the immediate
restoration of the de-escalation agreements, the
humanitarian conditions in Idlib and north-west Syria
could soon surpass the international community’s
ability to conduct a robust humanitarian response.
Reconstituting the 2018 Sochi agreement ceasefire
is also essential for the safety of medical workers and
humanitarians, and the continuation of the United
Nations ability to freely implement cross-border aid
deliveries throughout all agreed border crossings, and
in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018).
The United States and our partners are steadfast
in our position that there is no military solution to the
Syrian conflict: not to the conflict in Idlib any more
than to the conflict in Syria more broadly. The United
States is determined to see a lasting and immediate
return to the Sochi agreement ceasefire in order to
protect civilian lives and preserve the current ceasefire

19-182225/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

lines while the United Nations pushes ahead to
implement the political transition outlined in resolution
2254 (2015).
The United States therefore reiterates its calls on
all parties, including Russia and the Syrian regime, to
abide by their commitments outlined in the September
2018 Sochi memorandum of understanding to end the
violence, avoid a large-scale military offensive, return
to a de-escalation of violence in the area and allow
for unhindered humanitarian access to address this
humanitarian disaster. The Security Council and the
Syrian people cannot accept anything less.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I wish to thank Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany for having called for the
convening of this very timely and important meeting.
I should like also to thank our briefers, UnderSecretaries-General DiCarlo and Lowcock.
It goes without saying that we are very much
concerned about the dangerous developments in Syria,
particularly the deadly escalation of violence in northwestern Syria over recent weeks. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock rightly pointed out, a humanitarian
catastrophe is unfolding there right now.
The conflict in Syria has already brought about
enormous suffering for the Syrian people, with more
than 10 million Syrians in need of humanitarian
assistance. Yet again, we have observed with great
concern an increase in air strikes over Idlib governorate
and in northern Hama over the past weeks and days.
Everyone has underlined that it is essential to avoid
a full-scale battle in Idlib. Otherwise, we might face
the worst humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first
century. Despite all those warnings, our worst fears are
now coming true. It is no longer a risk of a dangerous
escalation in Idlib; that escalation is happening as we
speak. Sadly, it is the civilian population who will pay
the highest price for this.
Attacks on densely populated areas, homes, medical
facilities and settlements for internally displaced
persons are unacceptable and must stop. All parties
must, as their top priority, protect civilians in Idlib. I
should like to reiterate once again that all parties are
obliged to comply with international humanitarian law:
it is not a matter of choice; it is simply a legal obligation.
In that context, all counter-terrorism activities must be
conducted fully within international humanitarian and
human rights law.
6/21

18/06/2019

I should like once again to underline the significance
of the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the
Idlib de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards
avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to
the conflict should ensure the full implementation of
that agreement. We call on all parties to return to the
ceasefire line as set out in Sochi agreement.
Ongoing fighting is resulting in the further
displacement of over 300,000 persons. Our utmost
concern is, first of all, that those people should be safe,
and, secondly, that the United Nations should have full
access to them. Unconditional access must be provided
as a matter of principle. In that connection, let me also
salute the heroic work of humanitarian workers in
these particularly difficult circumstances. The United
Nations and its partners continue to deliver life-saving
humanitarian assistance based on humanitarian
principles, including through cross-border assistance,
in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018), which is a
lifeline to millions of people in north-western Syria.
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) remains the
only way towards achieving peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Germany, Belgium and
Kuwait, co-penholders on the humanitarian track of
the Security Council’s work on the situation in Syria.
I also thank Rosemary DiCarlo and Mark Lowcock for
their very informative presentations, the conclusions of
which are indisputable, namely, that we are witnessing
another humanitarian catastrophe in the north-western
part of the country, adding further to the long list of
tragic events that Syria has experienced for more than
eight years. This dark chapter in Syria’s history has yet
to conclude.
The number one priority today is to prevent Idlib
from becoming another Aleppo. We must spare no
effort to shield the lives of more than 3 million civilians,
including 1 million children. In order to help those who
are most vulnerable, in the coming days France will
release €5 million for the Syria Humanitarian Fund
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), based in Gaziantep.
Humanitarian aid is crucial for the millions of
people in the north-west, but remains an inadequate
means for sustainably alleviating the suffering of the
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

people. We therefore must also focus our efforts on
three priorities: the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, unconditional respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances, including in
the fight against terrorism, and the need for a lasting
political solution.
First, the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure must be an absolute priority for all.
Despite the positive words uttered by both sides, the
offensive against Idlib is leading to renewed civilian
casualties every day, in flagrant violation of every
underlying principle of international humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure, is
an obligation that all must uphold. It is not negotiable.
It is unacceptable that health-care infrastructure,
including that which has been deconflicted, and
schools continue to be the targeted. A letter signed
by 60 doctors and prepared by the non-governmental
organization Syria Campaign, which France recently
asked to be circulated as a Security Council document,
is an irrevocable appeal to that end. I recall once again
that attacks on hospitals and health-care workers,
which France condemns in the strongest possible terms,
constitute war crimes.
In that regard, we call on the signatories of the
ceasefire agreement to fulfil their commitments and
ensure an effective ceasefire in the north-western part
of the country with a view to freezing the fronts and
a nationwide ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). Russia in particular must exert all the
necessary pressure on the regime. We urgently call on
that country to do so. Discussions between Turkey and
Russia must also be pursued in order to allow for an
immediate de-escalation of the situation. Iran must also
join that effort. Furthermore, I reiterate here and now
that France will stand extremely firm in the event of the
renewed use of chemical weapons and ready to respond.
Secondly, the fight against terrorism must be
carried out under international humanitarian law. The
influence that the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
has gained in most of the region covered by the ceasefire
agreement is of course a cause of great concern to all of
us, but we must be clear on three points.
First, the offensive under way is not part of the fight
against terrorism, as was demonstrated by the attacks
on densely populated areas and civilian infrastructure.
It is impossible to see such attacks as having any other

S/PV. 8553

purpose than to terrorize populations and depopulate the
localities concerned in order to retake control of those
areas. Furthermore, such an offensive in no way serves
our goal of beating back terrorism. On the contrary, it
contributes only to increasing and spreading the threat,
while running the risk of dispersing the terrorist fighters
present in the region. The offensive calls into question
Turkey’s efforts to reduce the influence of terrorist
groups — efforts we fully support. Finally, combating
terrorism, which is a priority for us all, cannot be
invoked in every instance as a justification for violating
international humanitarian law, as the SecretaryGeneral has recalled on more than one occasion.
Lastly, the current escalation risks undermining
all efforts under way to reach a political solution when
such efforts are more urgently needed than ever.
While a compromise on the constitutional
committee, which was accepted by most international
actors, seemed to be coming to fruition and would
have finally allowed for substantive discussions, the
Syrian regime chose to adopt a strategy of systematic
obstruction, thereby preventing the establishment of that
body so as to hold those discussions hostage. We have
every confidence that Special Envoy Geir Pedersen will
keep us up to date on the obstacles he encounters and
will hopefully inform us when a satisfactory balance
for all has been found. But we cannot stop there. Every
one of us understands that the political process would
be meaningless if it were limited to the issue of the
constitutional committee. It is therefore imperative that
the Council unequivocally support the Special Envoy
in order to move forward, as of now, with regard to all
aspects of resolution 2254 (2015).
In particular, I am alluding to the issue of elections.
The Syrians themselves must be able to freely choose
the future they want for their country, and we must
ensure that they have the means to do so. That is
the condition necessary for providing a satisfactory
and lasting response to the tragedy that Syria had
undergone. In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
we must therefore begin to consider the conditions
necessary for avoiding a scripted outcome, as was the
case in the past, so that the elections will be free and
fair, that all Syrians, including refugees, will have a
free voice in the process and that the United Nations
will be involved in overseeing the process. I also take
this opportunity to reiterate that, in the absence of
significant and irrevocable progress in the political
arena, the positions of France and the European Union

19-182227/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

on sanctions, reconstruction and normalization will
remain unchanged.
It would be a serious error of judgement as well
as a grave political misstep to consider that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. In view of the recent tragic events
in Idlib that are following a well-worn script, no one
will be able to say that they were taken by surprise. We
therefore call on every member of the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities to end this recent tragedy
and allow for the establishment of a credible political
process under the supervision of the United Nations
allow that country to move forward on the path towards
stability and peace
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank both UnderSecretaries-General for their respective briefings.
Through them, I should also like to pay tribute to and
thank all United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers on the ground in Syria and neighbouring
countries who are risking their lives to try and make
the situation better for the ordinary people of Idlib
and Syria.
I agree very much with a lot of what my colleagues
said today. I therefore will not repeat it. I thank the
representatives of Germany and Belgium for insisting
on this meeting, which is much needed. I will not go
into the political process, as the French Ambassador
has said everything I would have said. On this occasion
he therefore speaks for the United Kingdom as well.
I want to start with the situation involving the attack
on the Turkish observation post personnel in Idlib.
They have been targeted by Syrian regime shelling. I
look forward to what our Turkish colleague can tell us
about that later. However, I want to recall that Turkey
has been one of the countries trying to help resolve the
situation in Idlib, and the reward that it gets for that is
to have its personnel fired upon.
That is not just a sad commentary on the state of
affairs in Syria, it is an absolute inversion of Member
States’ responsibility to contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security. As the UnderSecretary-General said, the damage that is being done
to Idlib and its civilians far outstrips any degradation
or necessity in respect of terrorist forces, like Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, and I think that she referred to a
pointless stalemate.
That is exactly what it is. People are being killed,
but no advantage is being gained at all militarily. Other
8/21

18/06/2019

speakers have drawn attention to the fact that there is
no military solution, and I agree very much with my
American colleague on that. Along with the Polish
representative, I want to call that out as a clear violation
of the Sochi agreement and call for all parties to respect
that agreement and go back to that ceasefire.
In fact, I have to say that I find it incredible that
President Putin agreed to the Sochi agreement with
President Erdoğan. Why the Russian Federation cannot
persuade the Syrian authorities to follow it is therefore a
mystery to all of us. But, again, it is an inversion of what
ought to be happening. I hope that when Special Envoy
Lavrentiev and Deputy Foreign Minister Vershinin go
to Syria this week that they will be able to press the
Syrian authorities on that and that they will be able to
have success.
Like other speakers, I would like to turn also to the
situation against international humanitarian law and
the situation of the bombing of the hospitals. That is
a situation that is accelerating, and it is exponential. I
look forward to what the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs can tell us next week, after
its briefing.
But in the meantime, I would like to hear some
answers from the Russian and the Syrian representatives
here today. I keep asking these questions, and I keep not
getting answers; but I am going to carry on asking them
because they are absolutely critical. If people believe,
as we will hear later today from both representatives,
that they want to resolve this conflict, then they need to
begin to address these questions.
My first question is, are the attacks on hospitals
deliberate? If they are deliberate, then I would be
grateful for an explanation as to how such attacks meet
the international humanitarian law core principles of
distinction, necessity and proportionality. I would also
be grateful to know why no warning was given to the
hospitals, because under article 19 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention the protection to which civilian hospitals are
entitled shall not cease unless they are used to commit
acts harmful to the enemy. But the critical clause is that
protection may, however, cease only after due warning
has been given, naming a reasonable time limit.
I would therefore like to know if those warnings
were given and if time limits were set. If not, then why
not? If, on the other hand, the attacks on the hospitals
are not deliberate, what steps are being taken by the
Syrian and Russian authorities to avoid such attacks in
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

future? What are the weaknesses in their deconfliction
systems that are allowing the attacks to happen? I have
one last question: which units from both the Syrian
military and the Russian military are involved in those
attacks? I think that would be a very helpful piece of
transparency for the Council to have.
For the United Kingdom’s part, we will continue
to provide significant humanitarian assistance to help
keep people alive. But there is no doubt that restoring
a ceasefire and ensuring that all parties respect it is
actually the critical thing that needs to happen. That is
the thing, not humanitarian assistance, that will make
the biggest difference to the people in Idlib.
I have two points on looking ahead. I very much share
what the French representative said about reconstruction
and elections. We provide humanitarian assistance. We
will not provide reconstruction assistance. We will not
be able to contribute to the eventual rehabilitation of
Syria into the world community of nations without a
viable, meaningful and sustainable political process.
Lastly, again like the representative of France,
I would like to reiterate that if chemical weapons are
used again against civilians in Syria, we will join our
colleagues in responding swiftly and appropriately.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of this briefing on the
latest developments in the humanitarian situation in
Syria, at the request of Belgium, Kuwait and Germany,
whom I thank.
I commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on their briefings, which orient
the Security Council on the magnitude of the current
humanitarian challenges and the need to act for a
peaceful resolution to the Syrian conflict.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the
resumption of fighting in the governorate of Idlib
since 29 April, which has further eroded an already
crumbling humanitarian situation. That new military
escalation reveals the unwillingness of the parties to
the conflict to silence their guns in order to resolutely
engage in a political process to end the crisis.
My delegation notes with regret the continuing
fighting, as well as the resulting loss of life and
the thousands of internally displaced persons.

S/PV. 8553

Approximately 300,000 people have been forced to
seek refuge outside Idlib governorate, causing a surge
in humanitarian needs in the region. Similarly, the
destruction of hospital and school infrastructure once
again constitutes an urgent need for action to improve
the protection of civilians. My country would like to
remind the defence and security forces and armed
groups that they have the primary responsibility of
refraining from all forms of violence against civilians.
The current state of fighting cannot exempt them from
their obligations under international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
In that regard, the parties to the conflict must be
fully aware of their responsibility before the competent
international courts for violations of conventions and
treaties relating to the protection of civilians and
international humanitarian law, if they are found guilty.
Moreover, my delegation believes that, in addition to
the protection of civilians, the actors in the Syrian
conflict have an obligation to create the conditions for
the safe and unhindered access to deliver humanitarian
assistance to the affected populations.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that, despite the exacerbation of the conflict and the
gravity of the humanitarian crisis it has caused, peace
is possible in Syria through an inclusive and credible
political process aimed at ending the crisis, which would
allow all parties to engage in fruitful compromises. In
that regard, we reaffirm our full support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
and encourage his efforts towards reaching a political
solution to the Syrian crisis.
My country urges the Syrian parties to prioritize
dialogue and comply with the provisions of the RussianTurkish agreement on the demilitarized zone for a
lasting ceasefire, with a view to giving the political
process a chance to succeed. Côte d’Ivoire also calls
on all stakeholders to work towards the establishment
of the constitutional committee, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the delegations of Germany,
Kuwait and Belgium for calling for the convening of
this meeting, as well as Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their enlightening briefings.
Having listened to both of our briefers and given
careful consideration of the daily reports we receive,
it is an undeniable fact that we are witnessing a

19-182229/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian tragedy in Idlib that is worsening by
the day. The inaction of the international community
in response to the escalation of violence has caused
not only the largest wave of displaced persons since
the outbreak of the conflict — we are talking about
more than 200,000 people — but also an increase in
indiscriminate attacks targeting the civilian population,
public infrastructures and health-care facilities.
Faced with this terrible situation, Equatorial Guinea
wishes to underscore the need for a genuine international
awakening in order to spur on joint efforts to stabilize
the situation in north-western Syria, including effective
measures to neutralize terrorist groups in the area.
Moreover, in the framework of the Sochi and Astana
agreements, we call upon the parties to reaffirm their
commitments to avoid spoiler activities, guarantee the
safety of civilians and restore the ceasefire. In order to
ensure that these endeavours are successful, the Astana
guarantors must remain united and coherent in their
approach. Any hint of mutual pressure, provocation or
hostilities between them will serve only to undermine
coordination efforts to achieve peace, stability and a
ceasefire in the region.
We wish to pay special tribute to Turkey and
Lebanon, countries that are bearing the greatest
financial burden caused by the influx of millions
of refugees into their territories. In that connection,
it continues to be necessary to bolster the work of
humanitarian organizations and ensure the steady
flow of financial aid earmarked for refugees, who are,
in many cases, living in appalling conditions. In that
context, it is essential that United Nations agencies
and donor countries intervene immediately to address
the humanitarian crisis caused by the current wave of
bombings. It is the obligation of the Security Council
to ensure the implementation of this vital work on an
uninterrupted basis.
The conflict in Syria led to the collapse of norms
of international humanitarian law. At the end of
the twentieth century, the international community
agreed on norms and principles of behaviour, such as
the protection of the civilian population, a refusal to
condone torture, the condemnation of the use of certain
weapons and the desire to avoid, at all costs, the risk of
humanitarian disasters. This compendium of prohibited
activities was like a set of 10 commandments for the
modern world and, although they were not implemented
by all States, they did enjoy a certain degree of
consensus. Another of our obligations as members of
10/21

18/06/2019

the Council is to ensure that those norms are upheld
in Syria.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for the parties to
act with restraint and ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We also reaffirm the need for Russian-Turkish
cooperation to facilitate efforts to find the necessary
means to reduce tensions in the de-escalation zone
within the framework of existing agreements.
I wish to conclude my statement by underlining
once again the importance of diplomacy in achieving
a credible and lasting political solution to the conflict.
My country’s Government will therefore continue
to support ongoing political negotiations aimed at
making significant headway in the establishment of the
constitutional committee, a country-wide ceasefire and
the implementation of confidence-building measures to
create a secure and neutral environment, as well as the
organization of free, transparent and inclusive elections.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the presidency for convening
this meeting, and Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our country’s
admiration for all humanitarian actors, who, in the
worst conditions of insecurity, continue to extend
assistance to save the lives of more than 11 million
vulnerable people in Syria.
With the majority of the population living in
extreme poverty, it greatly concerns us that the existing
humanitarian operation is on its knees, struggling
to meet the increasingly acute and urgent needs of
the Syrian people. In that sense, the suspension of
operations by several humanitarian partners due to
the woeful security situation constitutes an equally
alarming factor. To add insult to injury, the humanitarian
operation for the course of this year has reached only
20 per cent of its financing requirements.
Despite multiple reports by the Secretary-General
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, testimonies by people directly affected by the
conflict and ongoing words of concern expressed in this
Chamber, the Security Council has been unable to make
a unanimous demand for the cessation of hostilities
in the north-west of the country. That has produced
a disconcerting seeming indifference to the number
of deaths, injuries and attacks on civilians and civil
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

infrastructure and areas. The figures that Mr. Lowcock
has presented, on behalf of the United Nations and its
partners on the ground, speak for themselves. Let us not
deceive ourselves. Even now, air strikes endangering
the lives of civilians continue unabated. The number
of deaths currently stands at approximately 300, which
includes more than 80 children.
The forced displacement of civilians has reached
exorbitant levels. Many of those people flee on foot
and, as their journeys continue, they end up selling the
few belongings they possess in order to pay for some
means of transportation. Others have no choice but to
seek shelter under trees, without any form of protection
whatsoever. Women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities continue to be the most vulnerable.
In the light of this awful situation, we must ask
ourselves: what more needs to happen? What more
needs to happen for the parties involved — and those
with influence over them — to grant a respite to a
people that have endured nine years of conflict? What
more needs to happen for the Council, with a unified
voice, to demand an immediate ceasefire to avoid
military escalation and protect the civilian population?
We must not forget that the Council, as the guarantor
of the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), is
accountable for ensuring that the conditions conducive
to a revitalized and inclusive peace process — based
on the will of the entire population, including the
millions of refugees scattered beyond the borders of the
country — are viable.
All of us here in the Chamber have expressed our
support for the political process. Today more than ever
before, we are compelled to shoulder our responsibility
to match the efforts being undertaken by Ambassador
Pedersen to benefit strategically from the opportunity
that lies before us. Regrettably, the fragility of the
political process as it stands today is inextricably linked
to the situation developing in the north-west of Syria,
something that is reflected in the position adopted by
the Security Council in response.
That is why we continue to call upon the parties
to move decisively towards concrete outcomes, while
making an inclusive transition their guiding principle
towards a future of hope and justice for all Syrians. It
is our moral responsibility to help make that aspiration
a reality. We cannot continue to fail those who need us.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): While of course thanking
our briefers, here we are again in the Chamber listening

S/PV. 8553

to yet more grim and alarming briefings by UnderSecretaries-General Lowcock and DiCarlo on the
situation in north-west Syria. It is heartbreaking to
learn that hundreds of innocent civilians have been
the victims of the escalation, with more than 300,000
people displaced recently. Three million people in
Idlib, including 1 million children, are trapped in the
crossfire. And if the violence keeps escalating, what
will happen to those people? Would the Council agree
with me if I said that it would trigger additional waves
of displacement? Would it agree with me if I said it
would further complicate humanitarian operations?
And would Council members also agree with me that
a further escalation of violence would cause more
casualties? I am very sure that no one would disagree
with me, because I genuinely believe that we all want
to avoid those worrisome scenarios. This is really the
time for us to turn to each other, not on each other. The
people in north-west Syria need us more than ever. In
that context, my delegation wishes to highlight three
pertinent points.
First, we appeal to all the relevant parties to end
the violence and exercise maximum restraint. We
appreciate Russia and Turkey’s efforts to broker the
ceasefire agreements. All parties need to respect those
agreements, as well as uphold and fully implement
the 2018 Russian and Turkish ceasefire agreements. A
lasting ceasefire is of great importance.
Secondly, we must address urgently the immediate
life-saving needs of affected people in Idlib and the
surrounding areas, particularly internally displaced
persons. There are more than 300,000 newly displaced
individuals, and we need to ensure that their immediate
needs for food and water are being addressed. That also
applies to the health sector. With the services of many
health facilities suspended, it is crucial to provide basic
health support, especially for displaced people who are
living under trees and are prone to infectious illnesses.
In that context, Indonesia calls on all parties to ensure
safe, unhindered and unimpeded humanitarian access
and assistance to the people in need across north-west
Syria. We commend all humanitarian actors on the
ground who are working tirelessly to respond to the
growing needs of the population in the area.
Thirdly, my delegation wishes to once again urge
all parties to redouble their efforts and focus more
on dialogue in order to find a peaceful solution to
the Syrian conflict. Everybody seems to agree that a
comprehensive political solution in Syria is key, based

19-1822211/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

on the Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015).
However, we must not forget that continued engagement
and negotiation to enhance trust and confidence are
also crucial to advance the Syrian political process.
Many Council members have mentioned that this
humanitarian emergency cannot be resolved if there is
no political solution to the conflict, and we agree with
that position entirely. As the escalation of violence
continues in north-west Syria, the Council’s action is
increasingly needed. Now is the time for the Council to
give the right answer when asked: if the violence keeps
escalating, what will happen to the people in northwest Syria?
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would also like to
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their briefings on the situation in Syria.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the ongoing
violence in parts of Syria. The shelling and airstrikes
that have resulted in the death and injury of civilians
is unacceptable. We appeal to all parties to stop the
bombings of civilian infrastructure and ensure that the
civilians in the area are not used by non-State actors
as human shields. We call on all parties to observe
their commitments to cease hostilities and uphold their
obligations to international humanitarian law.
We call on all parties to refrain from any attacks on
education and health facilities. Those establishments
should be places of refuge and safety, and their special
status under international humanitarian law must be
protected. Tens of thousands of children, the most
vulnerable members of society, are unable to sit their
final exams due to the destruction of schools, the
escalation of violence and the resulting displacement.

18/06/2019

and those who most urgently require their support. It is
essential that the access to, and delivery of, aid to all
those who so desperately need it be guaranteed by all
parties. In that regard, we urge the full implementation
of all the relevant agreements, including the September
2018 ceasefire memorandum and the recent ceasefire
brokered between Russia and Turkey, which we hope
will lower tensions and de-escalate the violence. South
Africa calls on all parties to adhere to the provisions set
out in the ceasefire agreements.
South Africa urges all parties to fully engage in
the political processes currently under way, as the
situation in Syria cannot be solved through military
means. An inclusive, negotiated, political settlement is
the only way to achieve long-lasting peace and security
for all Syrians. My delegation supports the SecretaryGeneral in his statement that the solution for Syria must
be political.
In conclusion, it is important to note that the
presence of any foreign military forces operating in
the country without the permission of the Government
of Syria undermines and violates Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As mentioned previously, the
presence of unauthorized external forces serves only to
further destabilize the situation.
Mr. Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of this
meeting. We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
briefings, which paint a bleak scenario and urge the
Security Council to take action.

The increase in violence has severely impacted
the already fragile humanitarian situation. The large
number of people fleeing from one region to another
further strains limited humanitarian resources. As
we have heard before, Syria, the region and the
international community cannot afford a full-scale
military incursion, as it could result in a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe.

Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and its grave
humanitarian repercussions. We regret in particular
the recurrence and magnitude of violence in the northwestern part of the country, which is due to terroristorganization control of the area and military responses
that tend not to distinguish between combatants and
civilians. We are alarmed that this situation will further
exacerbate the extreme vulnerability of the population
in the area, while at the same time increasing tensions
in the region, particularly after the attacks on Turkish
observation posts in the vicinity of Idlib.

The suspension of some humanitarian operations
in the area also negatively impacts the humanitarian
response, particularly for those who need it most.
Humanitarian agencies are doing extraordinary work
in trying to assist all those who need it. We, too, must
do all we can to assist both the humanitarian agencies

Given that delicate panorama, we stress that the
duty of the international community is to prevent
north-western Syria from becoming the site of a new
humanitarian tragedy. We therefore urge the Syrian
Government and all the actors in the conflict to prevent
a further deterioration of the situation, which essentially

12/21

19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

means preserving the ceasefire agreed by Turkey and
Russia last September.
We reaffirm our strongest condemnation of all
terrorist acts and their perpetrators. But we underscore
that under no circumstances can the fight against
terrorism be used as an excuse to violate human rights
and international humanitarian law, especially when,
as in the case of Idlib, the lives of millions of children
are at stake. We also encourage the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors to continue to provide relief
and hope to the hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons — 270,000 in May alone — who are
in very precarious conditions in areas near the border
with Turkey.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Peru’s full
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of Syria. In that sense, any détente or other
arrangements, as well as the presence of foreign forces,
should always be of a temporary nature and should not
lead to a de facto partition of the country.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo
and Lowcock for their briefings this morning.
China follows the humanitarian situation in
Syria and supports the United Nations and the parties
concerned in their tireless efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Last September,
Russia and Turkey signed the Sochi memorandum on
de-escalation in Idlib, affirming their determination
to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and to maintain stability in north-western Syria. China
supports Russia and Turkey in continuing to implement
the memorandum. The international community should
keep in mind the overall need for combating terrorism in
Syria and for working to ensure its territorial integrity
and its future, with a view to finding a comprehensive
and long-term solution to the issue of terrorism and the
humanitarian situation in north-western Syria.
China supports the United Nations and the other
parties involved in providing humanitarian relief
to displaced civilians in north-western Syria and
improving their living conditions. In discussing the
humanitarian situation there, we cannot ignore the
problem of combating terrorism. Terrorist groups
have been trying to expand their areas of influence
in recent months by launching frequent attacks that
have resulted in civilian casualties and damage to
infrastructure and have jeopardized humanitarian relief

S/PV. 8553

efforts and undermined the security situation in the
region. China supports maintaining uniform criteria
and retaliating against terrorist groups’ atrocities, in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international law.
China is equally concerned about the humanitarian
issues that people in other regions of Syria and in camps
for internally displaced persons are dealing with. We
urge that efforts be made to tailor solutions to the
situation on the ground. The population in the Al-Hol
camp has exceeded its capacity, and it will be essential
to increase humanitarian relief for the camp and find
an appropriate solution to the problem of resettling its
residents. The international community should also
strengthen its dialogue and communication with regard
to the issue of the Rukban camp and reach a consensusbased solution that will enable more Syrians to return
home as soon as possible.
In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support the
Syrian Government in its efforts for reconstruction and
improving its people’s livelihoods. China is concerned
about the negative impact of economic sanctions on
the livelihoods of the Syrian people. The humanitarian
relief operations in Syria should show full respect for
its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and adhere strictly to the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the United Nations Guiding
Principles on the right to humanitarian assistance and
the relevant norms of international law. The coordination
of communications with the Syrian Government should
be strengthened.
If we are to genuinely alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must continue to advance the
political settlement process. In the quest for a settlement
that responds to the concerns of all sides, China supports
the United Nations in its role as the main channel for
mediation and Special Envoy Pedersen in encouraging
the parties in Syria to follow resolution 2254 (2015) and
the principle that the peace process should be Syrianled and Syrian-owned. We call on all parties in Syria
to work to overcome their differences through dialogue
and consultation in order to resolve specific issues in
the political process.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to the briefings by
Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mark Lowcock. However, we would like to thank

19-1822213/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

you, Mr. President, and the humanitarian troika for
convening today’s Council meeting on the situation
in north-western Syria. To be frank, we were also
planning to organize a meeting on the subject, since
a conversation about the developments in the situation
in Syria, including in the Idlib de-escalation zone, is
long overdue. Some of our partners continue to send
messages to the international community that either
have nothing to do with the real situation in Syria or
distort the situation on the ground.
We are frankly baffled that no one has even once
proposed that we discuss the situation in Baghouz
and Hajin when Western forces, operating illegally
on Syrian territory, wiped out these towns, with
considerable losses of civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, as well as civilian deaths. Is there
really any difference between civilians in Idlib and Deir
ez-Zor governorates? Why were the dead in Hajin not
considered worthy of discussion in the Council? When
Raqqa and the other towns beyond the Euphrates were
being razed to the ground, why did no one, including
our humanitarian activists, even bother to mention
the hospitals and schools or ask the kinds of searching
questions that we heard today?
We believe that what is at issue is not the
humanitarian disaster that would inevitably result
if a major military campaign began in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We have frequently heard the
same thing regarding the pacification of other parts of
Syria. The issue is the desire to keep territories out of
Damascus’s control for as long as possible, whoever
is ruling them. It could even be the terrorists of Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, who are actively trying to look as if
they could be a so-called political force. Regrettably,
despite public protestations, the anti-regime attitude
has not disappeared, and neither has the aim of creating
isolation and regime change in Damascus.
Today we once again heard talk about the need to
re-establish the ceasefire and reaffirm our commitment
to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. I
want to emphasize that the memorandum is being
fully implemented. Any military activity is dictated
exclusively by the need to respond to terrorist
provocations. I want to point out once again that the
Russian-Turkish memorandum does not prohibit the
fight against terrorism, it encourages it.
The Syrian Government has frequently announced
pauses in military action that the terrorists intentionally
14/21

18/06/2019

undermine. On 12 June, we and our Turkish colleagues
agreed on measures to extend the ceasefire regime
across the entire de-escalation zone. However, the
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham terrorists, who control 99 per cent
of Idlib, once again continued shelling Syrian territory.
Since the beginning of May they have continued to
attack Syrian Government forces’ positions, the Russian
airbase in Khmeimim, and towns and villages bordering
the de-escalation zone, using multiple launch rocket
systems, mortars and combat drones. In the past few
days alone they have attacked 12 villages in Latakia and
Hama. On 6 June, jihadists launched a rocket attack on a
hospital in Muhradah, seriously damaging its operating
and emergency rooms and in-patient centre. In the
same town on 16 June, several people were injured in a
rocket attack and serious damage was done to civilian
infrastructure. Yesterday fighters fired mortars on the
village of Al Wadihi in Aleppo governorate, leaving 11
people dead and 15 injured, with children among the
casualties. Mr. Lowcock mentioned that incident today
but forgot to mention at whose hands those people died.
The towns of Al-Suqaylabiyah and Muhradah,
whose populations are predominantly Christian, are
also being regularly attacked with mortars and rockets,
and civilians, including women and children, are
suffering as a result, while considerable damage is being
done to civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. We heard not a word about that today either
from our Western colleagues or the United Nations
representatives. Do they really not know that terrorists
are carrying out those attacks? There are many more
examples we could give. More detailed information
can be found in the information bulletins of Russia’s
Ministry of Defence on the de-escalation zones, which
we regularly distribute to Council members.
Despite the militias’ provocations and aggressive
incursions, Russia remains committed to its agreements
with Turkey on stabilizing Idlib. Our military is
in constant contact with the Turkish military and
coordinates their efforts to prevent the escalation of
violence and destabilization. However, neither Russia
nor Turkey will turn a blind eye to the dangerous
provocations of the terrorists who are threatening
Turkish territory, the Russian airbase in Khmeimim
and Syrian military personnel and civilians. And
there should be no attempts to pit the Astana process
participants against one another, as has been implicitly
suggested here. The Astana format remains one of
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the viable mechanisms — if not the only one — for
stabilizing the situation in Syria.
We want to emphasize once again that the Syrian
armed forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces
direct strikes only at facilities confirmed as terrorist
by intelligence. We are getting a feeling of déjà vu
today. There has been more breast-beating about
the destruction of hospitals, including those whose
coordinates were known. As I have said — and I mean
in our previous discussions and our discussions last
year in this Chamber, not just today — if we believed
the statistics we are presented with, the total number
of hospitals that have now been destroyed in Syria is
larger than the actual number that existed there before
the conflict started. But it is no secret to anyone
that militants use civilian infrastructure, hospitals
and schools for military purposes, and people as
human shields. We firmly reject any accusations of
indiscriminate strikes. We are not attacking civilians.
We ask that all of our colleagues, including the
Secretariat and the specialized United Nations agencies,
use only verified information in their assessments. We
have had major questions for a long time about some
information sources, including those used by various
United Nations entities, among them the World Health
Organization. I would like that request to be conveyed
to Mr. Lowcock and Ms. DiCarlo, who are no longer
present here, since they themselves have never visited
the areas where the alleged strikes on hospitals have
occurred. It appears that most of their information is
actually derived from telephone conversations with socalled reliable sources whom no one has verified and
whose identity they have refused to disclose.
Today there was also talk about chemical weapons.
I would like to point out that the White Helmets who
are working with the Al-Nusra Front, and whom some
members are so fond of, are preparing acts of provocation
using chemicals. We urge the international community
to take seriously the possibility that there will be
new fake stagings of the use of chemical weapons, of
which we have given repeated warnings. According to
information received, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham has even
formed a separate entity for those purposes, and yet the
warnings from the Syrian Government about terrorists’
preparations for chemical attacks have essentially been
ignored by the relevant international agencies.
Against the backdrop of the revival of alarmist
announcements about Idlib, the Security Council

S/PV. 8553

should not lose sight of the worrying and unstable
situation on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, which
is not controlled by the Syrian Government. Tension
is rising in that part of Syria. The local population is
resisting the demographic engineering that is being
imposed on it with the support of the Western coalition.
The potential for protests is growing and could boil over
into armed confrontation. We believe it will be possible
to avoid a major escalation and create a sustainable
national reconciliation process only when the illegal
international occupation led by the United States ends
and a dialogue between representatives of local ethnic
groups and the Syrian authorities is established.
There should be serious attention paid to the
situations in Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz and all the towns
in north-eastern Syria that are still in ruins and close
to uninhabitable for civilians. The Council should pay
special attention to the Al-Hol camp for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), which in an area in Hasaka
governorate that is not controlled by the Syrian
authorities and where the situation is verging on disaster.
The camp is overcrowded, with more than 74,000
inhabitants, of whom more than 47,000 are minors.
The adult population of the camp consists of radical
fighters, so radical that even humanitarian personnel
are not safe there. There is an acute shortage of food
and water, medical personnel, medicines and medical
equipment, and infectious diseases are spreading. For
our part, we are continuing our efforts in coordination
with the Syrian authorities to evacuate Syrians from the
Rukban camp in the illegal American occupation zone.
Its residents’ active departure from the camp to areas
controlled by the Syrian Government has resumed in
the past few days, despite the obstacles created by the
illegal armed groups who have taken refuge in that part
of the country. So far about 14,000 people have left
the camp. The situations in Rukban and Al-Hol lead
one to conclude that there is a certain pattern to the
Syrian conflict. The fact is that the problematic refugee
and IDP camps are only in areas illegally occupied by
foreign forces, and it is there that we are seeing flagrant
violations of human rights.
To go back to the situation in Idlib, we should
point out that like other territories of the Syrian Arab
Republic, it will ultimately have to return to Syrian
Government control, and the terrorist hotbeds there
will have to be eliminated. It will be crucial not to
let the terrorists in Idlib expand from Idlib into other
parts of Syria and further into the region. Militias who

19-1822215/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

fought in the Syrian Arab Republic have already begun
moving to Afghanistan and Libya and may very well
also return to their countries of origin in Europe or Asia.
It is much more important to fight the spread of that
threat than to artificially incite problems and escalation
in the Persian Gulf. Russia will continue its efforts to
combat terrorism in Syria and establish a sustainable
political process there in its national capacity, as an
Astana format participant and a permanent member
of the Security Council. We are ready to cooperate
with all constructively minded Member States that are
genuinely interested in restoring peace in Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): This is a timely meeting, as it has given us and a
number of other countries an opportunity to inform the
Security Council about the attacks that armed terrorist
groups from Idlib are carrying out on neighbouring
cities and towns in the suburbs of Aleppo, northern
Hama and northern Latakia. The most recent was two
days ago in the village of Al-Wadihi in the southern
suburbs of Aleppo, where those groups committed
a massacre in which 12 civilians died and more than
16 others were injured as they were celebrating a
wedding in the village. Those villagers are now living
in an indescribable state of terror after leading a safe
and normal life. Terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front,
supported by Erdoğan’s Turkish regime, fired rockets,
leaving the bodies of the martyrs and the wounded,
mostly women and children, scattered across the
village, and also significantly damaging houses and
other private and public property, including a health
centre and the village mosque.
That barbaric crime was part of a series committed
by terrorist groups led by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
is the Al-Nusra Front of Al-Qaida in Syria, a terrorist
group on the Security Council’s list of terrorist groups
and entities, and the Security Council should condemn
those crimes unequivocally.
I would like to provide the Council with a few
examples of the crimes that have resulted in the death of
dozens of martyrs and injuries to hundreds of innocent
civilians, including many women and children — and I
am citing only civilian victims, not military casualties.
On 25 May, the city of Al-Suqaylabiyah and the town
of Ein Al-Krum and village of Bilhsein were targeted
with dozens of missiles. On 26 May, the cities of Silhib
16/21

18/06/2019

and Al-Suqaylabiyah were targeted with more than
30 rockets. On 29 and 31 May the town of Qamhani
was targeted with a number of rockets, and scores of
missiles and rockets were aimed at the towns of Qalaat
Al-Madiq, Karakat and Shat-ha in the northern and
north-western suburbs of Hama, along with many areas
in Aleppo and its suburbs, while the city of Jablah was
targeted with several rockets. The city of Mhardeh has
also been repeatedly targeted by scores of rockets, most
recently earlier today. The positions of the Syrian Arab
Army and the locations of allied Russian forces, in
particular Hmeimim airport, are continuously targeted
with rockets and explosive drones.
As some Council members would like to ask
questions, I wish to ask a good one: Who provides those
terrorists with all their weapons? Where do they get
their weapons? By parachute? From another planet? Or
from Council members and other Member States? Who
provides those terrorists with rockets, tanks, missiles
and mines? Where do the terrorists and their arsenals
come from? Some 100,000 foreign terrorists have
entered Syria through our borders with Turkey. We
have repeated that fact inside and outside the Council,
and a Security Council sub-committee has confirmed
that 101 Member States have exported foreign terrorist
fighters to Syria.
The statements that we have heard in this Chamber
today indicate that there is a shared understanding of
the fact that we must address the problem in Idlib. That
is what we have understood from the statements of
Council members. I refer to the city of Idlib in Syria
and not an Idlib in Florida, Britain or Germany. I am
talking about the Syrian city of Idlib. On 17 May (see
S/PV.8527), I explained to the Council in detail that this
problem stems from the Turkish regime and its allies,
which continue to provide various forms of support to
terrorist groups.
The Turkish regime has disregarded its
commitments under the de-escalation agreement and
the Astana and Sochi agreements. That has allowed the
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist group, which includes
tens of thousands of foreign terrorists, including 15,000
Europeans, to take almost complete control of the city
of Idlib and some of the adjacent areas in north-western
Syria and to create a terrorist outpost for blackmailing
the Syrian State. It has allowed them to use hundreds of
thousands of civilians as human shields and commit the
most heinous crimes against them, spread terror, death
and destruction and destroy civilian infrastructure,
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

including hospitals and schools, turning them into
military barracks, detention and torture centres while
killing anyone who dares to reject their takfiri and
pre-Islamic ideologies.
Some members, as well as regrettably Mr. Lowcock
and Ms. DiCarlo, have stated that 27 hospitals have
been targeted in Idlib. I am unsure of the sources on
which they relied for that information. I wish to inform
the Council that Damascus, home to 8 million people,
has only eight public hospitals, with a further nine in its
suburbs, amount to 17 in total. I repeat that Damascus,
our capital and home to 8 million people, has only 17
public hospitals, with a further 10 private hospitals. The
total number of hospitals is therefore less than 30. That
is in Damascus, Syria’s capital. Aleppo has 11 public
hospitals and 10 private hospitals, which is 21 hospitals
in total. Aleppo, the second largest city in Syria, is
home to 5 million people. As for Idlib, there are only
four public hospitals and four private hospitals, which
are eight in total. How can members in this Chamber
therefore state that 27 hospitals have been targeted in
Idlib? I would like to know their sources. I wish to state
on the record that the misleading information that has
been provided is based on lies. Those sources are lying.
There are not 27 hospitals in Idlib.
With regard to what was said by our colleague the
British representative, if the White Helmets are using
some sort of basement from which to launch attacks,
then that cannot be called a hospital; rather, it is
a makeshift medical facility. That is a mere lie; it is
simply a basement that is used to launch attacks on and
shell civilians and the Syrian Arab Army.
I also wish to refer to another scandal. We have had
sanctions, or so-called non-Council unilateral coercive
measures, imposed on us for eight years. To this day,
the United States and the European Union still prohibit
the exportation of medical devices, such as MRI and
CT scanning equipment, to Syria, as well as medical
threads used in surgical procedures in the country. I do
not understand how Council members can talk of the
humanitarian situation in Syria and express concern,
while banning the export of medical equipment to the
country. Shame on them. I would go so far as to say
that that constitutes a crime, to which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms DiCarlo and
the humanitarian penholders are seemingly blind. The
Syrian Government and its allies do not target hospitals
or schools, as those are our hospitals and schools.

S/PV. 8553

The implementation of the principles of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Council’s resolutions on counter-terrorism also
require support for the efforts of the Syrian Government
and its allies in combating terrorism. Partnerships must
be built with the Syrian Government, as it is the only
party concerned about ending the presence of terrorists
in Syria and improving the humanitarian situation in
general. That should be done instead of convening
meetings to show off, spread misleading information
and falsely accuse my country and its allies in order
to support terrorist groups while blocking all legal
measures taken by the Syrian Government to protect its
citizens and liberate them from the terrorist groups that
use them as human shields.
There must be no further attempts to undermine
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic or to exploit the crisis to serve
the destructive agendas of certain countries and their
agents. We must put an end to selective policies and
systematic biased approaches. That is unequivocally
reflected in the fact that certain members overlook the
crimes committed by terrorist groups and the role of
certain Governments that are widely known to support
terrorism, as well as the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by the international coalition in
Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Hajin and Baghouz — thankfully
referred to by my Russian colleague — also overlook
the detention of tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
by American troops in Rukban camp. I would highlight
the fact that Rukban camp is on Syrian territory and is
occupied by United States troops, which are sponsoring
a terrorist group in the area known as Maghawir
Al-Thawra. That terrorist group demands 100,000
Syrian pounds for every Syrian civilian who wants to
leave the camp, with the knowledge of the Americans,
which means that a family of seven must pay 700,000
Syrian pounds in order to merely leave the camp.
Ending the suffering of Syrians in Idlib and other
parts of Syria will require the following actions.
First, the root causes of the suffering of Syrians
must be addressed, including the policies of terroristsponsoring Governments, the practices of their armed
terrorist groups and the continued crimes committed
by the so-called international coalition and its militias,
including the deliberate burning of crops, such as wheat
and barley.

19-1822217/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to the burning of agricultural crops, two
or three days ago an announcement was made in Turkey
in Arabic, addressing Syrian farmers. According to the
announcement, the Turkish Government is willing to
buy their crops with Turkish pounds. The crops that
are not burned will therefore be sold to Turkey for a
quarter of their price. Certain countries accuse us of
making false allegations about the Turkish regime.
The Turkish regime has absolutely no regard for goodneighbourliness. If it did, it would think about the
future in the context of international law and goodneighbourliness agreements between Syria and Turkey.
The Turkish Government must look to the future.
We and Turkey are in a region bound by geography
and history. The Erdoğan regime should not open its
borders with Syria to hundreds of thousands of foreign
terrorists and the smuggling into Syria of all kinds of
weapons, including chemical weapons that are brought
from Benghazi through Istanbul, then to Aleppo and
eventually to Khan Al-Assal with the help of a Syrian
terrorist by the name of Haitham Kassar, who worked
for Turkish intelligence. I have sent the Council 800
official letters detailing that information, but some do
not wish to read them.
Secondly, the illegal presence of United States and
Turkish forces on Syrian territories and the suffering of
millions of civilians in the areas controlled at the hands
of those forces must end.

18/06/2019

In conclusion, the Council has adopted more than
46 resolutions on counter-terrorism, and nine years
have passed since the beginning of the terrorist war
waged against my country, Syria. The dimensions of
that war and the role played by certain Governments
in fuelling and prolonging it have now become clear.
However, some Council members and other Member
States continue to invest in terrorism as a way to target
the Syrian State, instead of building a partnership with
it against terrorism. Council members may draw their
own conclusion from that.
I again reiterate that the Syrian Government will
not succumb to the terrorist war imposed on it and will
not allow its citizens to be endangered. The Syrian
Government will continue to exercise its sovereign and
constitutional rights and implement the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law to defend its land and citizens, combat
terrorism and end the illegitimate foreign presence on
all territories of the Syrian Arab Republic. My country’s
Government is also committed to a political solution
that will allow Syrians to determine their own future
and choices through a Syrian-Syrian dialogue led by
Syria, without foreign interference and in a manner that
will guarantee the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

Thirdly, the illegal unilateral coercive measures
imposed on the Syrian people, which constitute
economic terrorism and a collective punishment
of the Syrian people, must be immediately and
unconditionally lifted.

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely meeting. I would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings depicting the grave situation in Idlib.

Fourthly, the deliberate and systematic politicization
of the humanitarian issue and attempts by some States
to exploit it in a manner that is completely inconsistent
with the principles of humanitarian law must come to
an end.

Unfortunately, ceasefire violations are still on the
rise. The consequences of the attacks by the regime
against civilians are dire. So far, they have caused
hundreds of casualties, the displacement of over 300,000
people and severe damage to health facilities and schools.
We are particularly alarmed by attacks on medical
facilities, the locations of which have been notified
under the United Nations deconfliction mechanism.
That seriously undermines the very purpose of those
notifications, which is to allow for humanitarian access
while increasing the security of humanitarian actors in
the field. The continued targeting of health facilities
will only generate more displacement, instability and
suffering for the 3.5 million Syrians living in the Idlib
area. The deconfliction mechanism should be fully

Fifthly, the reconstruction efforts of the Syrian
State in areas destroyed by terrorism must be
supported. The United States, Britain, France and other
countries oppose the reconstruction of areas destroyed
by terrorism in Syria. It is up to Council members to
interpret the meaning of that. The Syrian State must
be supported in its efforts to facilitate the safe and
dignified return of Syrian refugees, and donor pledges
should be directed to that end.
18/21

19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

implemented and the ceasefire must be respected
without delay.
Turkey is fully committed to the Sochi memorandum
and has clearly demonstrated that with concrete action
on the ground, at the risk of putting our soldiers’ lives
in grave danger. The regime’s attacks undermine our
efforts to implement the memorandum. They must stop.
Over the past weeks, our observation posts in the Idlib
de-escalation area have been repeatedly targeted by the
regime. Most recently, observation post 10 was seriously
hit twice by mortar fire from regime-controlled areas
on 4 May and 13 June. Five Turkish soldiers were
wounded during those attacks. A recent aggression
over the weekend on observation post 9, with mortar
fire and shelling, also caused damage.
Those attacks are unacceptable and in clear
violation of, inter alia, the Sochi memorandum. We
must take precautions to protect the lives of our
military servicemen on the ground. We will not hesitate
to take decisive action to that end. We will keep our
observation posts operational, despite threats. We will
also continue to coordinate our efforts with Russia at all
levels in order to put an end to the regime’s violations
and preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area.
As a matter of fact, yesterday, the Defence Ministers
of Turkey and Russia discussed the situation in Idlib
and agreed to uphold their commitments under the
Sochi memorandum.
It is clear that combating terrorism does not absolve
any party from its obligations arising from international
law to prevent attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Fighting terrorism can in no way justify
those indiscriminate attacks. The use of barrel bombs
indicates a complete disregard for human life. As a
country with a long history of fighting terrorism, we
strongly condemn terrorism and extremism in all their
forms and manifestations. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is an
acute problem, aggravated by the presence of foreign
terrorist fighters. However, the problem of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham cannot be overcome by targeting civilians. We
need to address the problem of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
with a more sophisticated and comprehensive longterm strategy, targeting its ideology and structure.
Progress in the political process will be one of the key
elements to this end, and establishing the constitutional
committee will be the first step in that direction.
We are at a critical stage in the approach to finalizing
the formation of the constitutional committee. The

S/PV. 8553

convening of the committee will be the first essential
step in the international community’s efforts to achieve
a democratic Syria. All sides should assume their
responsibilities and support efforts to convene the first
meeting of the committee. We want to see a stable,
peaceful and democratic Syria that can maintain its
political unity and territorial integrity, a Syria that is
governed according to the legitimate aspirations of its
people. We can achieve that only through a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). There
can be no lasting humanitarian solution without a
credible political process. If the Idlib de-escalation area
cannot hold, the prospects for a viable political solution
will diminish considerably. The ongoing attacks by
the regime are clearly aimed at the collapse of the
political process.
We must be clear that the responsibility to prevent a
major catastrophe in Idlib lies not only with the parties
to the Sochi memorandum but with the Council as
well. What we are seeing in Idlib cannot be allowed
to continue. This latest chapter in the Syrian conflict
is an affront to all humankind. Enough blood has been
shed. All efforts should now prioritize the needs of the
millions of Syrians who have suffered tremendously
and are putting their faith in us.
Lastly, with regard to the hallucinatory statement
by the representative of the Syrian regime, I repeat that
I do not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart,
because that would be an affront to the millions of
Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the
hands of that regime. I will therefore not dignify his
delusional accusations with a response.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you for organizing this meeting, Mr. President.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is continuing
its consultations with the other guarantors of the
Astana format on a range of issues, including Idlib’s
de-escalation area, which we consider extremely
important. In line with international law, Iran supports
the inherent right of the Syrian Government to fight
terrorists designated as such by the Security Council.
While international humanitarian law must be fully
observed by all without exception, that cannot and
should not be used as a pretext to call for an end to the
fight against terrorism.

19-1822219/21

S/PV.8553

The situation in the Middle East

Fighting the most dangerous terrorist groups,
which have taken a large number of civilians hostage,
is a must. It is in fact the protection of civilians,
practically speaking, and should result in the release
of all civilians trapped in terrorist-held areas. It is also
obvious that those internationally designated terrorist
groups cannot and should not be allowed to maintain
their control over a large part of a sovereign State’s
territory. Otherwise, Idlib will certainly turn into a safe
haven from which the worst terrorists will continue
conducting their operations and killing more civilians
both inside and outside Idlib. We must not forget that
the Idlib de-escalation area was created to protect
civilians from terrorists, not to provide a safe zone for
terrorists. It was on the basis of that principle that the
importance of the continued fight against terrorists
was also stressed when the de-escalation area was
established. The Syrian Government has an inherent
right to restore its control over the whole of its territory
and a responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
all of its citizens from terrorists.
The current situation in Idlib, which is enabling
terrorists to conduct their operations and use more
than 2 million civilians as human shields, cannot and
must not continue indefinitely. Among other things,
it will prevent the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, delay the country’s reconstruction
and hamper the efforts to reach a political solution. I
must also stress how important it is that all concerned
fully respect international humanitarian law, as well as
Syria’s sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity.
In conclusion, I should underline that the Islamic
Republic of Iran is continuing its consultations with
the other guarantors of the Astana format to work with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Pedersen, in finding a political solution to the
current crisis in Syria. The right to determine the future
of Syria belongs exclusively to the Syrians themselves.
We must genuinely support a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Power (United Kingdom): My Ambassador has
apologized for the fact that she had to leave the meeting
and has asked me just to make a couple of final points
on the substance of the issue at hand today, as opposed
20/21

18/06/2019

to some of the extraneous points that have been brought
up by some speakers. My points refer back to the strikes
on the hospitals.
The Russian Ambassador asked a question about
the difference between hospitals that were attacked
in Syrian Government-controlled territory and those
attacked in rebel-held territory. The difference is that
in the rebel-held territory in Idlib, the Russians were
supplied with information about those medical facilities
through the de-confliction mechanism we have been
discussing today. So the question that my Ambassador
asked, as to how it came about that those hospitals
and medical facilities found themselves under attack,
remains a legitimate one.
We further find it slightly astonishing that the
Russian Ambassador was surprised that the number of
hospitals had increased during the civil war. We think
that this is a natural consequence of the attacks that
have been taking place on civilians and was the reason
why the mechanism was created in the first place. To
reiterate the point, we will answer the questions posed
to us, but will they answer questions posed to them?
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): So I now see that I have only just understood
the real point of the question and the answer. It turns
out that hospitals whose coordinates are known must
not be bombed, but carpet bombing that wipes hospitals
off the face of the earth is all right. That is how I
understood my British colleague’s statement.
In answer to his question, I have already said that
we have serious doubts about the statistics that have
been provided about the medical facilities that have
been destroyed. We have raised that question not just
in the Chamber but also in dialogue with our United
Nations colleagues, and we have not had a clear or
trustworthy answer. How reliable are the statistics
provided? We were told that the statistics confirming
the destruction of hospitals in various areas that had
been bombed are based on the testimony of certain
trustworthy individuals with links to the World Health
Organization (WHO), who provide the WHO with
data that has not been confirmed by anyone else but
which forms the basis for the statistics that have been
presented to us here. We are not convinced by that. That
is my answer to the question, and we will continue to
19-18222

18/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

try to obtain information concerning the basis for the
statistics that officials of the United Nations — and
they are high-ranking officials — are using as evidence
that we have heard about today and as the basis for the
accusations that some Member States have made.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked to
make a further statement.

S/PV. 8553

Mr. Power (United Kingdom): For the record,
then, the answer is that we should trust the information
from Russian intelligence about strikes on rebel-held
territory, but when the information is provided by
independent experts of the United Nations, we should
not trust it.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

19-1822221/21
