S/2012/538

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 July 2012
Original: English

France, Germany, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling its Resolutions 2043 (2012) and 2042 (2012), and its Presidential
Statements of 3 August 2011, 21 March 2012 and 5 April 2012,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, and to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming also its support to the Joint Special Envoy for the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, Kofi Annan, and his work, following General
Assembly resolution A/RES/66/253 of 16 February 2012 and relevant resolutions of
the League of Arab States, aimed at securing full implementation of his six-point
plan in its entirety, as annexed to resolution 2042 (2012),
Condemning the Syrian authorities’ increasing use of heavy weapons,
including indiscriminate shelling from tanks and helicopters, in population centres
and failure to withdraw its troops and heavy weapons to their barracks contrary to
paragraph 2 of resolution 2043 (2012),
Condemning the armed violence in all its forms, including by armed
opposition groups, and expressing grave concern at the continued escalation of
violence, and expressing its profound regret at the death of many thousands of
people in Syria,
Condemning the continued widespread violations of human rights by the
Syrian authorities, as well as any human rights abuses by armed opposition groups,
and recalling that those responsible shall be held accountable,
Condemning the series of bombings that have made the situation more
complex and deadly, some of which are indicative of the presence of well-organised
terrorist groups,
Deploring the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the failure to ensure
timely provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting
contrary to point 3 of the Envoy’s six-point plan, reiterating its call for the Syrian
parties to allow immediate, full and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to
all populations in need of assistance, in particular to civilian populations in need of
evacuation, and calling upon all parties in Syria, in particular the Syrian authorities,
to cooperate fully with the United Nations and relevant humanitarian organizations
to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance,
12-44757 (E) 310712

*1244757*

S/2012/538

Condemning the continued detention of thousands of Syrians in networks of
Government-run facilities and deploring that there is no freedom of assembly
contrary to points 4 and 6 of the six-point plan, and recalling the urgency of
intensifying the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons, and
reiterating the need for Syrians to enjoy the freedom to assemble, including to
demonstrate peacefully and freedom of movement for journalists throughout the
country, as part of the necessary conditions for a political transition,
Having considered the Secretary-General’s report on UNSMIS dated 6 July
2012, commending United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS)
personnel for their continued efforts in a dangerous and volatile environment, and
deploring that, due to the failure of the parties to implement the six-point plan and
to the level of violence, monitoring access restrictions and direct targeting, the
Mission’s operational activities were rendered unworkable, and supporting the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that a shift in Mission structure and focus
should be considered,
Stressing that rapid progress on a political solution represents the best
opportunity to resolve the situation in Syria peacefully, welcoming in this regard the
Final Communiqué of the Envoy’s 30 June Action Group meeting, and noting that
progress towards an atmosphere of safety and calm is key to enabling a credible
transition,
Welcoming the Syrian Opposition Conference held under the auspices of the
League of Arab States in Cairo on July 3, 2012, as part of the efforts of the League
of Arab States to engage the whole spectrum of the Syrian opposition, and
encouraging greater cohesion among the opposition,
Noting the Secretary-General’s 6 July 2012 call on the Security Council to
provide the necessary support and ensure sustained, united and effective pressure on
all concerned to ensure compliance with its decisions and create conditions for the
success of a political solution envisaged by the Action Group,
Determining that the situation in Syria constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1.
Expresses grave concern at the escalation of violence, and the failure of
the parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, to implement the Envoy’s six-point
plan as annexed to resolution 2042 (2012), thus not permitting the creation of a
political space that would allow for meaningful political dialogue, and calls upon all
parties to recommit immediately and without waiting for the actions of others to a
sustained cessation of violence in all its forms and implementation of the six-point
plan;
Endorses in full the 30 June Action Group Final Communiqué and its
2.
underlying guidelines and principles (Annex);
Enabling Transition: Immediate implementation of the Envoy’s six-point plan
3.
Demands the urgent, comprehensive, and immediate implementation of,
all elements of the Envoy’s six-point proposal as annexed to resolution 2042 (2012)
aimed at bringing an immediate end to all violence and human rights violations,
securing humanitarian access and facilitating a Syrian-led political transition as

2

12-44757

S/2012/538

outlined in the Annex, leading to a democratic, plural political system, in which
citizens are equal regardless of their affiliations, ethnicities or beliefs, including
through commencing a comprehensive political dialogue between the Syrian
authorities and the whole spectrum of the Syrian opposition;
Decides that the Syrian authorities shall implement visibly and verifiably
4.
their commitments in their entirety, as they agreed to do in the Preliminary
Understanding and as stipulated in resolution 2042 (2012) and 2043(2012), to
(a) cease troop movements towards population centres, (b) cease all use of heavy
weapons in such centres, (c) complete pullback of military concentrations in and
around population centres, and to withdraw its troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks or temporary deployment places to facilitate a
sustained cessation of violence;
Demands that all parties in Syria, including the opposition, immediately
5.
cease all armed violence in all its forms, thereby creating an atmosphere conducive
to a sustained cessation of violence and a Syrian-led political transition;
Expresses grave concern at the increasing numbers of refugees and
6.
internally displaced persons as a result of the ongoing violence, and reiterates its
appreciation of the significant efforts that have been made by the States bordering
Syria to assist those who have fled across Syria’s borders as a consequence of the
violence, and requesting UNHCR to provide assistance as requested by member
states receiving these displaced persons;
Transition
7.
Demands that all Syrian parties work with the Office of the Joint Special
Envoy to implement rapidly the transition plan set forth in the Final Communiqué in
a way that assures the safety of all in an atmosphere of stability and calm;
Accountability
8.
Recalls that all those responsible for human rights violations and abuses,
including acts of violence, must be held accountable;
9.
Decides that the Syrian Government shall provide the UN Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and individuals
working on its behalf immediate entry and access to all areas of Syria, decides that
the Syrian authorities shall cooperate fully with the Commission of Inquiry in the
performance of its mandate;
UNSMIS
10. Decides to renew the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in Syria (UNSMIS) for a period of 45 days, on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to reconfigure the Mission to increase support for dialogue with
and between the parties, and enhance attention to the political track and rights’
issues across the six-point plan;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to retain the minimum military observer
capacity and requisite civilian component necessary to promote forward steps on the
six-point plan through facilitation of political dialogue and to conduct verification
and fact-finding tasks;

12-44757

3

S/2012/538

12. Condemns all attacks against UNSMIS, reaffirms that perpetrators of
attacks against UN personnel must be held to account, demands that the parties
guarantee the safety of UNSMIS personnel without prejudice to its freedom of
movement and access, and stresses that the primary responsibility in this regard lies
with the Syrian authorities;
13. Demands that the Syrian authorities ensure the effective operation of
UNSMIS by: facilitating the expeditious and unhindered deployment of its
personnel and capabilities as required to fulfil its mandate; ensuring its full
unimpeded, and immediate freedom of movement and access as necessary to fulfil
its mandate, underlining in this regard the need for the Syrian authorities and the
United Nations to come rapidly to an agreement on appropriate air transportation
assets for UNSMIS; allowing its unobstructed communications; and allowing it to
freely and privately communicate with individuals throughout Syria without
retaliation against any person as a result of interaction with UNSMIS;
Compliance
14. Decides that, if the Syrian authorities have not fully complied with
paragraph 4 above within ten days, then it shall impose immediately measures under
Article 41 of the UN Charter;
Reporting and Follow-Up
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council on the
implementation by all parties in Syria of this resolution within 10 days of its
adoption and every 15 days thereafter;
16. Expresses its intention to assess the implementation of this resolution and
to consider further steps as appropriate;
17.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Annex
Final Communiqué of the Action Group for Syria
1.
On 30 June 2012, the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of China, France, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, Turkey, Iraq (Chair of the Summit of the League of Arab
States), Kuwait (Chair of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the League of Arab
States) and Qatar (Chair of the Arab Follow-up Committee on Syria of the League
of Arab States) and the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy met at the United Nations Office at Geneva as the
Action Group for Syria, chaired by the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to Syria.
2.
The members of the Action Group came together out of grave alarm at the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. They strongly condemn the continued and
escalating killing, destruction and human rights abuses. They are deeply concerned
at the failure to protect civilians, the intensification of the violence, the potential for
even deeper conflict in the country and the regional dimensions of the problem. The

4

12-44757

S/2012/538

unacceptable nature and magnitude of the crisis demands a common position and
joint international action.
3.
The members of the Action Group are committed to the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
They are determined to work urgently and intensively to bring about an end to the
violence and human rights abuses, and to facilitate the launch of a Syrian-led
political process leading to a transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people and enables them independently and democratically to determine their
own future.
4.
In order to secure these common objectives, the members of the Action Group
(a) identified steps and measures by the parties to secure the full implementation of
the six-point plan and Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
including an immediate cessation of violence in all its forms; (b) agreed on
principles and guidelines for a political transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people; and (c) agreed on actions that they would take to
implement the objectives in support of the Joint Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate
a Syrian-led political process. They are convinced that this can encourage and
support progress on the ground and will help to facilitate and support a Syrian-led
transition.
Identified steps and measures by the parties to secure the full implementation of
the six-point plan and Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
including an immediate cessation of violence in all its forms
5.
The parties must fully implement the six-point plan and Security Council
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). To that end:
(a) All parties must recommit to a sustained cessation of armed violence in
all its forms and to the implementation of the six-point plan immediately and
without waiting for the actions of others. The Government and armed opposition
groups must cooperate with the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic (UNSMIS), with a view to furthering the implementation of the plan
in accordance with the Mission’s mandate;
(b) A cessation of armed violence must be sustained, with immediate,
credible and visible actions by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
implement the other items of the six-point plan, including:
(i) Intensification of the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained
persons, including especially vulnerable categories of persons, and persons
involved in peaceful political activities; the provision, without delay and
through appropriate channels, of a list of all places in which such persons are
being detained; the immediate organization of access to such locations; and the
provision, through appropriate channels, of prompt responses to all written
requests for information, access or release regarding such persons;
(ii) Ensuring freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists
and a non-discriminatory visa policy for them;
(iii) Respecting freedom of association and the right to demonstrate
peacefully, as legally guaranteed;

12-44757

5

S/2012/538

(c) In all circumstances, all parties must show full respect for the safety and
security of UNSMIS and fully cooperate with and facilitate the Mission in all
respects;
(d) In all circumstances, the Government must allow immediate and full
humanitarian access by humanitarian organizations to all areas affected by the
fighting. The Government and all parties must enable the evacuation of the
wounded, and all civilians who wish to leave must be enabled to do so. All parties
must fully adhere to their obligations under international law, including in relation
to the protection of civilians.
Agreed principles and guidelines for a Syrian-led transition
6.
The members of the Action Group agreed on the principles and guidelines for
a Syrian-led transition set out below.
7.
Any political settlement must deliver to the people of the Syrian Arab
Republic a transition that:
(a) Offers a perspective for the future that can be shared by all in the Syrian
Arab Republic;
(b) Establishes clear steps according to a firm timetable towards the
realization of that perspective;
(c)

Can be implemented in a climate of safety for all and of stability and

(d)

Is reached rapidly without further bloodshed and violence and is credible.

calm;

8.
Perspective for the future. The aspirations of the people of the Syrian Arab
Republic have been clearly expressed by the wide range of Syrians consulted. There
is an overwhelming wish for a State that:
(a) Is genuinely democratic and pluralistic, giving space to established and
newly emerging political actors to compete fairly and equally in elections. This also
means that the commitment to multiparty democracy must be a lasting one, going
beyond an initial round of elections;
(b) Complies with international standards on human rights, the independence
of the judiciary, accountability of those in Government and the rule of law. It is not
enough just to enunciate such a commitment. There must be mechanisms available
to the people to ensure that these commitments are kept by those in authority;
(c) Offers equal opportunities and chances for all. There is no room for
sectarianism or discrimination on ethnic, religious, linguistic or any other grounds.
Numerically smaller communities must be assured that their rights will be respected.
Clear steps in the transition. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic will
9.
end only when all sides are assured that there is a peaceful way towards a common
future for all in the country. It is therefore essential that any settlement provide for
clear and irreversible steps in the transition according to a fixed time frame. The key
steps in any transition include:
(a) The establishment of a transitional governing body that can establish a
neutral environment in which the transition can take place, with the transitional
governing body exercising full executive powers. It could include members of the

6

12-44757

S/2012/538

present Government and the opposition and other groups and shall be formed on the
basis of mutual consent;
(b) It is for the Syrian people to determine the future of the country. All
groups and segments of society in the Syrian Arab Republic must be enabled to
participate in a national dialogue process. That process must be not only inclusive
but also meaningful. In other words, its key outcomes must be implemented;
(c) On that basis, there can be a review of the constitutional order and the
legal system. The result of constitutional drafting would be subject to popular
approval;
(d) Upon establishment of the new constitutional order, it will be necessary
to prepare for and conduct free and fair multiparty elections for the new institutions
and offices that have been established;
(e)

Women must be fully represented in all aspects of the transition.

10. Safety, stability and calm. Any transition involves change. However, it is
essential to ensure that the transition can be implemented in a way that ensures the
safety of all in an atmosphere of stability and calm. This requires:
(a) Consolidation of full calm and stability. All parties must cooperate with
the transitional governing body to ensure the permanent cessation of violence. This
includes completion of withdrawals and addressing the issue of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups;
(b) Effective steps to ensure that vulnerable groups are protected and that
immediate action is taken to address humanitarian issues in areas of need. It is also
necessary to ensure that the release of the detained is completed rapidly;
(c) Continuity of governmental institutions and qualified staff. Public
services must be preserved or restored. This includes the military forces and security
services. However, all governmental institutions, including the intelligence services,
have to perform according to human rights and professional standards and operate
under a leadership that inspires public confidence, under the control of the
transitional governing body;
(d) Commitment
to
accountability
and
national
reconciliation.
Accountability for acts committed during the present conflict must be addressed.
There also needs to be a comprehensive package for transitional justice, including
compensation or rehabilitation for victims of the present conflict, steps towards
national reconciliation and forgiveness.
11. Rapid steps to come to a credible political agreement. It is for the people of
the Syrian Arab Republic to come to a political agreement, but time is running out.
It is clear that:
(a) The sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic must be respected;
(b) The conflict must be resolved through peaceful dialogue and negotiation
alone. Conditions conducive to a political settlement must now be put in place;
(c) There must be an end to the bloodshed. All parties must recommit
themselves credibly to the six-point plan. This must include a cessation of armed

12-44757

7

S/2012/538

violence in all its forms and immediate, credible and visible actions to implement
points 2 to 6 of the six-point plan;
(d) All parties must now engage genuinely with the Joint Special Envoy. The
parties must be prepared to put forward effective interlocutors to work expeditiously
towards a Syrian-led settlement that meets the legitimate aspirations of the people.
The process must be fully inclusive in order to ensure that the views of all segments
of Syrian society are heard in shaping the political settlement for the transition;
(e) The organized international community, including the members of the
Action Group, stands ready to offer significant support for the implementation of an
agreement reached by the parties. This may include an international assistance
presence under a United Nations mandate if requested. Significant funds will be
available to support reconstruction and rehabilitation.
Agreed actions
12. Agreed actions that the members of the Group will take to implement the
above in support of the Joint Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate a Syrian-led
political process are as follows:
(a) Action Group members will engage as appropriate, and apply joint and
sustained pressure on, the parties in the Syrian Arab Republic to take the steps and
measures outlined in paragraph 5 above;
(b)
conflict;

Action Group members are opposed to any further militarization of the

(c) Action Group members emphasize to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic the importance of the appointment of an effective empowered interlocutor,
when requested by the Joint Special Envoy to do so, to work on the basis of the six
point plan and the present communiqué;
(d) Action Group members urge the opposition to increase cohesion and to
be in a position to ensure effective representative interlocutors to work on the basis
of the six-point plan and the present communiqué;
(e) Action Group members will give full support to the Joint Special Envoy
and his team as they immediately engage the Government and the opposition, and
will consult widely with Syrian society, as well as other international actors, to
further develop the way forward;
(f) Action Group members would welcome the further convening by the
Joint Special Envoy of a meeting of the Action Group, should he deem it necessary
to review the concrete progress taken on all points agreed in the present
communiqué and to determine what further and additional steps and actions are
needed from the Action Group to address the crisis. The Joint Special Envoy will
also keep the United Nations and the League of Arab States informed.

8

12-44757
