28

General Assembly -

necessitated the immediate launching of public information activities on as wide a scale as possible,
Having examined the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the present state of dissemination of information on the United Nations in these Territories, 10
Considering that the dissemination of information in
pursuance of its resolution 1465 (XIV) is still far from
satisfactory,
1. Takes note of the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the dissemination of information on the
United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing_ Territories;
2. Considers that measures adopted thus far by some
Administering Members for the dissemination of information on the United Nations among the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories do not include
steps to secure the active support and participation of
representative organizations of these inhabitants for
the purpose of spreading such information;
3. Invites the Administering Members to make
further efforts to secure the active support and participation of the aforementioned representative organizations;
4. Further invites the Administering Members to
broaden the scope and accelerate the process of dissemination of. information and to develop public awareness
of, and interest in, the United Nations by making full
use of facilities provided by the United Nations Office
of Public Information for the purpose of disseminating
information;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to review the
quantity, quality and content of the material distributed,
in order. to meet the growing demand for such material
and to assist the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories towards an easy and intelligent understanding of the aims and activities of the United
Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take action
towards the establishment of information centres in
Territories such as those in Eastern and Central Africa,
Papua and the Caribbean Territories;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on
the progress made in implementing the present resolution.
948th plenary meeting,
15 Dece111ber 1960.

1539 (XV). Participation
of
the Non-Self.
Governing Territories in the work of the
United Nations and of the specialized
agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 566 (VI) of 18 January
1952, 647 (VII) of 10 December 1952, 744 (VIII)
of 27 November 1953 and 1466 (XIV) of 12 December 1959,
Considering that the direct participation of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies is an
effective means of promoting the progress of those Territories and their people towards the attainment of the
objectives set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations,
10 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 37, 39, 40
and 41, documents A/4471 and Add.1.

Fifteenth Session

Recognizing that the part1C1pation of duly qualified
indigenous representatives of the dependent peoples in
the consideration of questions of fundamental concern
to their welfare is not only useful and desirable but also
essential at the present stage of development of the NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Noting that the participation of some Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of certain regional
economic commissions and specialized agencies has
proved a useful means of promoting the progress of the
peoples of those Territories towards complete selfgovernment or independence,
1. Considers that the direct participation of representatives of the indigenous peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the appropriate
organs of the U nite<l Nat ions is in the interest of the
peoples of those Territories and can do much to accelerate the process of their emancipation;
2. invites the Administering Members to arrange
for the participation of such representatives of the NonSelf-Governing Territories in the work of the appropriate
organs of the United Nations;
3. Further invites such Administering Members as
have not already done so to propose to the specialized
agencies and the regional economic commissions that the
_N,m-Self-Coverning Territories participate in the work
of those organs as members :or associate members,
according to the comtitution of each organ, through
such representatives:
4. Decides to include this question as a separate item
on the provisional agenda of its sixteenth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1540 (XV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral 11 on offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Noting 'With satisfaction the further response to its
resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
their offers of facilities for study and training to the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the increasing interest among the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, as
indicated by the fourfold increase over the previous year
in the number of applications for such facilities in
1959-1960,
Expressing regret that despite this increase a large
number of the scholarships so offered by Member States
remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
the students who have been granted scholarships have
not been accorded facilities to leave the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in order to take advantage of
such scholarships,
11 Ibid., documents A/447~ and Ad1j.1-3.

29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolutions 845 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1471 (XIV) of 12 December 1959;
3. Invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take. all necessary measures to ensure that
scholarships and training facilities offered by Member
States are utilized by the inhabitants of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, and to render every assistance
to those persons who have applied for, or have been
granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with
regard to facilitating their travel formali~ies ;
4. Requests all Administering Members ~~ich_ have
not already done so to give the fullest pubhc1ty 111 the
Territories under their administration to a!J offers of
study and training facilities made by Member States;
5. Urges Member States to increase the number of
scholarships offered ;
6. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information about the scholarships offered, and, whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to give such assistance as is possible and as
may be sought by the Member States concerned and
by the applicants ;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
for the sixteenth session of the General Assembly a
report on the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States to students from
the Non-Self-Governing Territories._
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1541 (XV). Principles which should guide Members in determining whether or not an
obligation exists to transmit the information
called for under Article 73 e of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering the objectives set forth in Chapter XI
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the list of factors annexed to General
Assembly resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
of Six on the Transmission of Information under Article
73 e of the Charter, 12 appointed under General
Assembly resolution 1467 (XIV) of 12 December 1959
to study the principles which should guide Members in
determining whether or not an obligation exists to
transmit the information called for in Article 73 e of
the Charter and to report on the results of its study to
the Assembly at its fifteenth session,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Special Committee of Six on the Transmission of Information under Article 73 e of the Charter;
2. Approves the principles set out in section V, part
B, of the report of the Committee, as amended and as
they appear in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Decides that these principles should be applied
in the light of the facts and the circumstances of each
12 Ibid., agenda item 38, document A/4526.

case to determine whether or not an obligation exists to
transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
ANNEX
l'RINC!PLES

WHICH

SHOliLIJ GUIDE MEMBERS

IN

DETERMINING

WHETHER OR NOT AN OBLIGATION EXISTS TO TRANSMIT THE
INFORMATION CALLED FOR IN ARTICLE

73 e OF TIIE CHARTER

OF THE UNITED NA'!IONS

Principle I
The authors of the Charter of the United Nations had in
mind that Chapter X [ should be applicable to territories which
were then known to be of the colonial type. An obligation
exists to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of such territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government.

Principle I I
Chapter XI of the Charter embodies the concept of Non-SelfGoverning Territories in a dynamic state of evolution and
progress towards a "full measure of self-government". As soon
as a territory and its peoples attain a full measure of selfgovernment, the obligation ceases. Until this comes about, the
obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e continues.

Principle II I
The obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e of
the Charter constitutes an international obligation and should
be carried out with due regard to the fulfilment of international
law.

Principle IV
Prima facie there is an obligation to transmit information
in respect of a territory which is geographically separate and
is distinct ethnically and/or culturally from the country administering it.
Principle V
Once it has been established that such a prima facie case
of geographical and ethnical or cultural distinctness of a
territory exists, other elements may then be brought into
consider;ition. These additional elements may be, inter alia,
of an administrative, political, juridical, economic or historical
nature. If they affect the relationship between the metropolitan
State and the territory concerned in a manner which arbitrarily
places the latter in a position or status of subordination, they
support the presumption that there is an obligation to transmit
information under Article 73 e of the Charter.

Principle VI
A Non-Self-Governing Territory can be said to have reached
a full measure of self-government by:
(a) Emergence as a sovereign independent State;
( b) Free association with an independent St?.te; or
(c) Integration with an independent State.

Principle VII
(a) Free assoc1at10n should be the result of a free and
voluntary choice by the peoples of the territory concerned
expressed through informed and democratic processes. It should
be one which respects the individuality and the cultural characteristics of tke territory and its peoples, and retains for the
peoples of the territory which is associated with an independent
State the freedom to modify the status of that territory through
the expression of their will by democratic means and through
constitutional processes.
(b) The associated territory should have the right to determine its internal constitution without outside interference, in
accordance with due constitutional processes and the freely
