UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

-,"
7

RECORDS

TWELFTH

YEAR

th MEETING: 21 FEBRUARY 1957

, .... ~'Jne SEANCE: 21 FEVRIER 1957

DOUZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agend"a/774). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

System of interpretation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January 1957 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/3767, S/3792 and Corr.1)
(continued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour prQvisoire (S/Agenda/774). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier 1957, adress~e
au President du Conseil de securite par le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres du Pakistan (S/3767, S/3792) [suite]. . . . . . . . . .

1

Syst~me dtinterpr~tation.

S/PV.774

Relevant docu.ments not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of ~ Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

*

* *
Les documents pertinents qUi ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des s~ances du Conseilde s~curit~ sont pubU~s dans des suppMments trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La Simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisatton.

SEVEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Thursday, 21 February 1957, at 3 p.m.
SEPoT CENT SOIXANTE-QUATORZIEME SEANCE
Tenue

a New-York, le jeudi 21 fevrier 1957, a 15 heures.
Pr~sident:

President: Mr. Gunnar JARRING (Sweden).

M. Gunnar JARRING (Suede).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France, Iraq,
philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Pr~sents: Les repr~sentants des pays suivants:
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak,
Philippin~s, Suede, Union des R~publiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'lrlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Am~rique.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/174)

Ordre du Jour provisoire (S/Agenda/774)

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Th~ India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

2. Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier

1957, adressee au President du Conseil de securit~ par le Ministre des affaires ~trangeres du
Pakistan.

System of interpretation

Systeme d'interpretation

1. The PRESIDENT: I want to inform the Council at
once that owing to the great amount of work going on in
the United Nations today we will have only simultaneous
interpretation. When we come to the vote we will have
to take a recess, as we did atthe previous meeting. It
is the only way of arranging the meeting.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je tiens a
informer imm~diatement les membres du Conseil
qu'en raison du grand nombre de r~unions qui se
tiennent aujourd'hui au Siege de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, nous ne pourrons disposer que du
systeme de l'interpretation simultanee. Avant de
passer au vote, nous suspendrons la seance, comme
!l0us l'avons fait a la s~ance precedente. C'est la la
seule maniere d'organiser notre reunion.

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/3767, S/3792 and Corr.1) (continued)

Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier
1957, adressee au President du Conseil de securite
par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan
(S/3767, S/3792) [suite]

At the invitation of the President, Mr. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representative of India, and Mr. Firoz Khan
Noon, representative of Pakistan, took places at the
Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representant de l'lnde, et M. Firoz Khan Noon,
representant du Pakistan, prennent place a la table du
Conseil.

2. Mr. NOON (Pakistan): The debate on this question
has roamed over a wide field and a large number of
seemingly controversial issues have been canvassed. I
am sure it would help the Security Council if I were to
state in concise terms the position as Pakistan views

2. M. NOON (Pakistan) [traduit del'anglais]: Ledebat
sur la question a porte sur un tres grand nombre de
points, et de nombreux problemes qui semblent faire
l'objet d'une controverse ont He souleves. 11 sera
certainement utile au Conseil que je presente brievement la situation telle que la voit la delegation du
Pakistan.

it.
3. I venture to submit that the points of controversy
between Pakistan and India over the question of accession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to Pakistan or
to India lie within a narrow compass, and the records
of the Council disclose a much larger degree of agreement between the two Governments both on principles

3. Je pense pouvoir declarer que les points controverses entre I'lnde et le Pakistan apropos du rattachement de l'Etat de Jammu etCachemire au Pakistan
ou a 1'Inde peuvent se situer dans des limites etroites;
les proces-verbaux du Conseil montrent qu'il existe
entre les deux gouvernements, aussi bien sur les
1

and on procedure than the debates before the Council
might lead the members to imagine.

questions de fond que sur laprocMure, un accord plus
grand que les d~bats ne pourraient le laisser penser
aux membres du Conseil.

4. I submit that India is fully committed to the principle formulated by the Government of India and communicated to the Government of Pakistan and reiterated on several occasions before the Council thatin
the case of a State where the ruler belonged to one
community and the majority of the people to the other,
the question of accession must be determined in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the
people of the State. Further, t.lJ.ere is agreement with
respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir that once
the tribesmen have withdrawn and law and order has
been restored, the Government of India would withdraw
its armed forces from such areas of the State into
which they had entered and that the wishes of the people
in the matter of accession would be ascertained through
the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite carried out under the auspices of the United
Nations. This would appear both from the telegrams
. exchanged between the two Governments before the
matter was brought to the Security Council and the
resolutions of the UnitedNationsCommissionforIndia
and Pakistan accepted by both Governments.

4. Je crois que l'Inde a accepte sans r~serve le
principe formul~ par le Gouvernementindien, communiqu~ a.u Gouvernement pakistanais et r~affirme a
plusieurs reprises devant le Conseil, a savoir que, dans
le cas d'un Etat dont le prince appartiendrait a une
communaut~ et lamajorit~delapopulat~onlluneautre,
la question du rattachement devrait etre determinee
conform~ment a la volonM librement exprim~e des
habitants du pays. De plus, en ce qui concerne 1'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire, il y a un accord aux termes
duquel, lorsque les tribus auront ~vacu~ le territoire,
lorsque l' ordre et la loi auront ~te r~tablis, le Gouvernement indien retirera ses troupes des parties de
I' Etaf dans lequel elles ont p~n~tr~ et la volont~ du
peuple, en ce qui concerne le rattachement, sera
determin~e par la methode democratique d'un plebiscite libre et impartial organis~ sous les ausp-ices de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Cela ressort a la
fois des t~l~grammes echanges par les deux gouvernements avant que le Conseil ne soit saiside l'affaire
et des resolutions de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Inde et le Pakistan que les deux gouvernements
ont acceptees.

5. A certain degree of progress towards the implementation of these resolutions was made in the first
months of 1949, but since then a deadlock has prevailed,
mainly in respect of the compliance with those portions
of the resolutions that relate to what has generally,
since, been described as the demilitarization of the
State.

5. En ce qui concerne la miSe en oouvre de ces
resolutions, certains progr~s avaient ~t~ accomplis au
cours des premiers mois de 1949, mais depuis, nous
nous sommes trouves dans une impasse apropos
surtout de l'application de lapartie des resolutions qui
traite de ce qui - dans les ann~es qui ont suivi - a
generalement ete appele la demilitarisation de l'Etat.

6. It has been contended on behalf of India that progress towards the holding of a free and impartial plebiscite under the auspices of the United Nations cannot
be made until Pakistan's armed forces are withdrawn
from the "Azad" Kashmir territory.

6. On a pretendu, au nom de l'Inde, que l'on ne pouvait faire aucun progres en vue d'unplebiscite libre et
impartial sous les auspices des Nations Unies tant que
les forces armees du Pakistan ne seront pas retirees
du Cachemire "azad".
7. Je tiens a declarer, de fa~on claire et definitive,
que le Gouvernement pakistanais a toujours et~ pret,
et meme, en verit~, tres desireux, de remplir toutes
ses obligations decoulant des r~solutions de la Commission, y compris l' obligation de retirer ses troupes,
conformement aux termes de ces r~solutions. En
aucune occasion, il n'y a eu discussion ou tergiversation de la part du Pakistan lorsqu'il s'est agi du
respect de ses obligations. Le Pakistan a ete si desireux de voir regler ce probleme conformement aux
resolutions de la Commission que, en certaines occasions, il a parfois ete dispose llfaireplus, et plus tot,
que les resolutions ne le demandaient, afin que des
progres rapides puissent etre realises. Je repete que
le Pakistan est pret a se conformer, encette matiere,
a n'importe laquelle des propositions pr~sentees juSqu'ici par un des Membres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, a la condition que 1'Inde consente a
faire de ineme en meme temps.
8. Mon gouvernement regrette que l'Union sovietique
ait bloque par son veto [773eme seance] le projet de
resolution presente par quatre puissances [S/3787]. La
situation au Cachemire constitue une grave menace
pour le maintien de la paix internationale, et le peuple
et le gouvernement du Pakistan ont ete douloureusement etonnes d'apprendre qu'une grande puissance
comme l'URSS ait cru devoir etoufferparsonveto une

7. I wish to state clearly and definitely that the Government of Pakistan has at all times been ready and,
indeed, eager to carry out all its obligations under the
resolutions of the Commission, including the obligation
of the withdrawal of its troops in accordance with the
terms of the resolutions. On no occasion has there been
any agitation or equivocation On the part of Pakistan in
respect of the discharge of its obligations. Pakistan has
been so anxious to proceed towards a settlement of this
question in accordance with the resolutions of the Commission that on occasions it has been willing to do
more, and earlier, than the resolutions call for, so that
rapid progress might be made. I repeat that Pakistan
is Willing to proceed with this matter in accordance
with any of the proposals hitherto made by any of the
United Nations representatives, provided India is
willing to do its part at the same time.
8. My Government deplores the exercise of the veto
by the Soviet Union [773rd meeting] in respect of the
four-Power draft resolution [S/3787]. The situation
in Kashmir constitutes a grave threat to the maintenance of international peace, and it has come as a
shock to the people and the Government of Pakistan
that a great Power like the USSR should have seen fit
to veto a resolution designed to promote a solution of
2

this very grave and thorny problem through peaceful
methods.
9. It has been said that India objects to the consideration of the Pakistan proposal for the introduction of
a United Nations force on its own side of the ceasefire line. The sole purpose of this proposal was to
facilitate the withdra'Vffl.l of Pakistan troops to which
India attaches so much importance, so that the process
of demilitarization could be put into operation and
completed thereafter in accordance with the terms of
the resolution of the Commission. It was never intended
to be utilized in the holding of a plebiscite as the representative of the Soviet Union mentioned in his speech
[773rd meeting, para. 21]. The task of organizing and
actually holding the plebiscite is, under the terms of
the resolutions, assigned to the Plebiscite Administrator. In a sense, the introduction of a United Nations
force would amount merely to an augmentation of the
United Nations observers. It could thus be tantamount
to a use of those procedures which have so far been
followed with some success under Chapter VI of the
Charter.
10. This is one of those instances where Pakistan
has been willing voluntarily to do more than it had
undertaken to do under the resolutions of the Commission to meet India's objections. We are at a loss to
understand for what reasons the consideration of this
proposal made by Pakistan was considered objectionable by the USSR.

resolution visant a resoudre ce grave et epineux
probl~me par des methodes pacifiques.

9. On a dit que l'Inde s'opposait a l'examep par le
Conseil de la proposition du Pakistan relative au stationnement d'une force des Nations Dnies de son cote
de la ligne de cessez-le-feu. Le seul but de cette
proposition etait de faciliter le retrait des troupes
pakistanaises, auquell'Inde attache tant d'importance,
afin de pouvoir mettre en pratique la demilitarisation
conformement aux dispositions de la resolution de la
Commission. Cette force n'a jamais ete destinee a
servir pour l'organisation d'un plebiscite, comme l'a
pretendti le representant de l'Union sovietique [773~me
seance, par. 21]. La tache d'organiseretd'executerle
plebiscite est, d'apr~s les resolutions, impartie 4
l'Administrateur du plebiscite. En un sens, la presence d'une force des Nations Dnies equ.ivaudrait
simplement a l'augmentation du nombre des observateurs des Nations Unies. Cela reviendrait en somme a
utiliser des procedures qui, jusqu'a present, ont ete
adoptees avec un cert.!lin bonheur dans le cadre du
Chapitre VI de la Charte.
10. C'est encore un cas ou le Pakistan a accepte
librement de faire plus que ce a quoi il s'etait engage
aux termes des resolutions de' la Commission afin de
prevenir les objections de l'Inde. Nous comprenons
donc mal pourquoi l'OOSS s'oppose a l'examen de la
proposition pakistanaise.

11. The second reason put forward by the USSR is
that, inasmuch as India is not willing to accept the
resolution, the resolution should not be adopted. The
Council is engaged in the very difficult and delicate
task of bringing about a settlement through peaceful
methods of a long-standing dispute which, as I have
said, constitutes a grave threat to the maintenance of
international peace. In carrying out this task, it was
seeking to adopt a resolution which would start the
final stage of achieving the objectives aimed at by the
Security Council from the very beginning and agreed to
by the parties to the dispute and clearly set out in the
resolutions accepted by them. In respect of several
previous efforts of the Council in the same direction,
a similar situation had arisen. India had indicated its
unwillingness to accept the proposed solution. Indeed,
there may have been instances when neither party was
willing to express its acceptance of the resolution in
advance. Nevertheless, the resolutions were adopted,
and both parties thereafter co-operated with the United
Nations Representative in the efforts to carry out the
objectives of the Council's resolutions.
12. The Government of Pakistan is distressed to learn
that a permanent member of the Security Council
should consider the unwillingness of a part to accept a
resolution in advance as sufficient reason for the
exercise of a veto. I venture to submit that such a
negative attitude on the part of a big Power would
hardly be conducive to the settlement of any dispute.
It is surprising to us that the representative of the
Soviet Union should argue that the voice of India alone
Should decide this case, and not that of Pakistan.

11. L'un des arguments avances par l'DRSS est qu'il
ne faut pas adopter cette resolution puisque l'Inde
refuse de l'accepter. Le Conseil se consacre a une
tache tr~s difficile et tr~s complexe: regler, par des
moyens pacifiques, un differend qui dure depuis Jongtemps et qui, comme je l'ai dit, menace gravement le
maintien de la paix internationale. En s'acquittant de
cette tache, il s'est efforce de faire adopter une
resolution qui marquerait le point de depart de la
derniere etape vers les objectifs vises par le Conseil
de securite depuis le debut et acceptes par les parties
au conflit et clairement enonces dans des resolutions
qu'elles ontapprouvees. llenestalledemem.e d'autres
tentatives que le Conseil a faites auparavant dans ce
sense L'Inde a fait savoir qu'elle n'etait pas disposee
a accepter la solution proposee: En fait, il y a peutetre eu des cas ouaucunedespartiesne s'est montree
disposee a approuver une resolution al'avance. Neanmoins, les resolutions ont ete adoptees et les deux
parties ont prete leur concours au representant des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan pour donner
effet a l'objet dE:s resolutions du Conseil.
12. C'est avec regret que le Gouvernement pakistanais a appris qu'un membrepermanentduConseilde
securite estimait devoir recourir au veto sous pretexte
qu'une partie refusait d'accepter une resolution a
l'avance. Je presume qu'une attitude aussi negative de
la part d'une grande puissance n'est pas faite pour
favoriser lereglement d'un differend. 11 estd'ailleurs
surprenant que le representant de l'Union sovietique
pretende que la voix de l'Inde seule, et non celle du
Pakistan, est l'element decisif dans ce cas.

13. To sum up, the position is this. The question of
the accession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to
Pakistan or to India is a matter in dispute between
Pakistan and India. The dispute involves in essence the

13. En somme, la situation est celle-ci: la question
du rattachement de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire au
Pakistan ou a l'Inde fait l'objet d'un differendentre le
Pakistan et 1'Inde. Le conflit porte essentiellemeilt
3

right of ~elf-determination of the people of the state on
this disputed question of accession. Whatever the
defau.lts on tb.e part of India or of Pakistan, the people
of the state possess this right and cannot be deprived
of its free exercise. India and Pakistan have agreed,
and this agreement has been endorsed by the Security
Council, that the question shall be determined through
the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite held under the auspices of the United Nations.
Until the plebiscite is h~ld and is certified by the
United Nations Representative to have been free and
impartial in accordance with the resolutions of the
Commission, the territory of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir is neither part of India nor part of Pakistan.
The de facto position is that India occupies certain
parts of the territory of the State, and the remaining
parts are under the control of the "Azad" Kashmir
authority.

sur le droit de la population de 1I Etata disposer d I ellemame sur cette question litigieuse du rattachement.
Quelles que soient les erreurs commisesparl'Indeou
le Pakistan, la population de l'Etat possMe ce droit
et elle ne peut s'en voir retire I' le libre exercice. Par
un accord que le Conseil de s6curiM a sanctionn~,
l'lnde et le Pakistan ant convenu que cette question
serait d6cidee de fa~on d6mocratique au moyen d'un
plebiscite libre et impartial organise sous les auspices de l'Organisation des NaUons Unies. Jusqula ce
que le pleb,iscite ait eu lieu et que le repr6sentant de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies ait garanti qu'il a
et6 libre et impartial, conform6ment aux resolutions
de la Commission, le territoire de l'EtatdeJammu et
Cachemire ne fait partie ni de l'lnde, ni du Pakistan.
La situation de fait est que l'Inde occupe certaines
parties du territoire et que le reste est sous le controle
du Cachemire "azad".

14. The international agreement is binding upon India
and Pakistan. Indeed, it has been clearly sta~ed on
behalf of India, during these last debates also, that this
agreement is the only binding obligation upon the two
Governments in respect of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, and that the whole of this agreement stands
together-no part of it can be used laterally, repudiated
or frozen. Any such attempt would amount to a repudiation of the principles of the United Nations Charter,
which obligate all Member States to seek a settlement
of their international disputes through peaceful means.

14. L'accord international dont j'ai parle liel'lndeet
le Pakistan; en effet, les parte-parole de l'lnde ont
declare sans ambiguil:e - et ils .1' ont repete au cours
de ces derniers d~bats - que cet accord est la seule
obligation liant les deux gouvernements dans l'affa:ire
de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, et que cet accord
forme un tout - autrement dit, aucune partie ne peut
en etre unilateralement denoncee ou ignoree. Pr~­
tendre le faire equivaudrait a violer les principes de
la Charta des Nations Unies, car celle-ci oblige tous
les Etats Membres a s'efforcer de regler pacifiquement leurs differends internationaux.

15. Finally, Mr. President, about your own mission:
we have already said, and I repeat, that you are most
welcome.

15. Enfin, en ce qui concerne votre mission, Monsieur
le President, je repeterai une fois de plus que vous
serez le bienvenu.

16. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of India.

16. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Jedonnela
parole au representant de 1'lnde.

17. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): We should like to
request a few minutes of recess so as to consider the
statement which has just !leen made.

17. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de 1'anglais]:
Nous voudrions demander une suspension de quelques
minutes afin d ' examiner la declaration qui vient d ' etre
faite.

18. Mr. URRUTIA (Colombia) (translated from Spanish): I venture to make the following observation. It
seems to me that the majority of the delegations are
already convinced that, if the mission to be entrusted
to the President is to be successful, he should be left
entirely free to seek whatever solution he can find. I
therefore think that any prolongation of the debate and
of recriminations here in the Council can only make
that mission more difficult.

18. M. URRUTIA (Colombie) [traduitde l'espagnol]:
Qu'il me soit permis de faire une observation. Il me
semble que la plupart des delegations sontpersuadees
que, si nous voulons voir couronnee de succes la mission que nous envisageolls de confier au President, 11
vaut mieux lui laisser toute liberte dans la recherche
d'une solution. Dans ces conditions, il me semble que
prolOnger au Conseilles debats et les recriminations
ne ferait que rendre sa tache plus difficile.

19. For this reason I venture to suggest to the President of the Security Council that he might request or
recommend the representatives of India and Pakistan
to limit their observations to the text of the new draft
resolution before the Council, since they have already
had ample opportunity for stating their case; we all
know the position. We now wish to hear comments on
the new draft resolution. Just as we, the members of
the Security CounCil, adhere to the order of business,
we may, I think, in all fairness ask the representatives
of Pakistan and India to do likewise.

19. Je me permettrai donc de proposer au President
du Conseil de securite qu'il invite instamment les
representants de l'Inde etduPakistananefaire porter
leurs observations que sur le texte du nouveau projet
de resolution dont le Conseil eSe sais!. Ils ont d6ja eu
toute latitude d'exposer leur these; nous ,connaissons
la question. Tout ce que le Conseil souhaite, clest
d'entendre des observations sur le nouveau projet.
C'est dans cet esprit que nous, membres du Conseil,
nous comportons; il nlest que juste, ilmesemble, que
nous demandions aux· representants de l'Inde et du
Pakistan d I en faire autant.

20. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): I think it would be
fair to the Council and fair to the representatives of
India and Pakistan that whatever statements they have

20. M. ROMULO (Philippin~s) [traduit de l'anglais]:
A mon avis, il ne serait que juste - dans l'intl~ret tant
du Conseil que des interesses - que les representants
4

to make now should be limited to the draft resolution
before the Council. otherwise, this will be an endless
vicious circle.

de 1'Inde et du Pakistan se bornent dorenavant a
traiter du projet de resolution dont est saisi le Conseil. Sinon, nous ne sortirons jamais du cercle vicieux
ou nous nouS trouvons actuellement.
21. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Jedonnela
parole au representant de 1'Inde.

21. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of India.
22. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): All I can say about
the very worthy sentiments that have come from the
representatives of Colombia and the Philippines is that
their expression of opinion has come ten or twelve
minutes too late. If it is the wish of the Security
Council to remove the statement just made by the
representative of Pakistan from the records, that is
one thing. But at this stage to introduce very acrimonious, challenging and entirely untrue· statements in
regard to India, cannot go unchallenged even if I, for
variouS reasons, do not want to make a speech.

22. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit del'anglais]:
Tout ce que je puis dire au sujet des sentiments
louables que viennent d'exprimer les representants de
la Colombie et des Philippines, c'est qu'ils ont parle
dL'C ou douze minutes trop tard. S'il plait au Conseil
de securite de rayer du proces~verbal la declaration
du representant du Pakistan, je n'aurai aucune objection. Mais a 1'heure actuelle, je n.e puis laisser sans
reponse les declarations entierement fausses et
remplies d'acrimonie que 1'on vient de lancer comme
un defi a l'Inde, meme Si, pour diverses raisons, je
ne desire pas faire de discours.

23. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): On a point of order,
Mr. President: I think that this should be a discussion
between the members of the Council.

23. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit del'anglais]:
Question d'ordre, Monsieur le President: cette discussion devrait etre limitee aux membres du Conseil.

24. The PRESIDENT: The Council has before it a
request for a recess. As there is no objection to this
request, the Council will now recess for ten minutes.

24. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla~): LeConseil
est saisi d'une motion de suspension: comme il n'y a
pas d'objection, la seance va etre suspendue pendant
10 minutes.

The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. and resumed at 3.45 p.m.

a 15 h. 45.

25. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of India. I hope that he will take into consideration
the remarks of the members of the Council with regard
to the Council's further procedure.

25. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La parole
est au representant de 1'Inde. J'esp~re qu'il tiendra
compte des remarques des membres du Conseil relatives a. la conduite des debats a. partir de maintenant.

26. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): lam deeply beholden
to the President and to the Council for their kindness
in allowing us a few minutes in which to think this
matter over. We think that there is considerable merit
and cogency in the statements made by the representative of Colombia and the representative of the Philippines to the effect that at this stage further detailed
debate consisting of answering controversial points
raised is not only not of value but, perhaps, not appropriate in view of the protracted proceedings. It is
the intention of my delegation, therefore, not to take
that course.

26. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de 1'anglais]:
Je suis profondement reconnaissant au President et
aux membres du Conseil, qui ont bien voulu nous
accorder quelques minutes de reflexion. Nous estimons
que le representant de la Colombie et le representant
des Philippines ont eu tout a fait raison d'affirmer
qu'a ce stade une discussion de detail oudes reponses
sur des points litigieux nepresentent non seulement
aucune valeur mais encore seraient deplacees, car
elles prolongeraient indument des debats qUin'ontque
trop dun~. Ma delegation se propose donc de ne pas
s'engager dans cette voie.

27. Thanks to the very kind courtesy of the delegation
of Pakistan, we have been able during the recess to
look at the script of the statement which the representative of Pakistan made before the Council. It is
necessary, for purposes of record, for us to say that
we dissociate ourselves totally from a large number
of the statements contained in it-the approach that is
made to the problem-and to point out the fact that the
statement itself really reopens the whole ambit of the
discussion and that, therefore, any piecemeal reply to
it would be unsatisfactory.
28. I shall, therefore, confine myself to the draft
resolution that is before us [S/3792 and Corr. 1].

27. Grace a la tres grande courtoisie de la delegation
pakistanaise, nous avons pu, pendant la suspension de
seance, lire attentivement le texte du discours que le
representant du Pakistan a prononce devant le Conseil. Pour le proces-verbal, il nous est n~cessairede
declarer que nous contestons absolument un grand
nombre de points qui figurent dans cette declaration la conception generale du probleme, par exemple - et
de souligner qu'en fait la declaration rouvre tout le
debat et empeche, par consequent, de repondre surtel
ou tel point particulier.
28. Je me bornerai done a examiner le projet de
resolution dont le Conseil est saisi [S/3792].

29. Wit.1t regard to this draft resolution, the position
of my Government is what I have repeated several
times before. We are not members of the Security
Council; we are only asked to offer observations. We
have already referred to the facts. It is my duty to tell
the Council that the draft resolution will be commu-

29. L'attitude de mon gouvernement au sujet de ce
projet de resolution est bien connue. Nous ne sommes
pas membres du Conseil de securite, on nous a simplement demande de presenter des observations. Nous
avons deja maintes fois rappeIe les faits. Il est de mon
devoir de dire au Couseil que le projet de resolution

_La seance est suspendue a 15 h. 35; elle est reprise

5

nicated to the Government of India, and that the Government of India will take it into consideration, with such
advice as we are able to receive from you, Mr. President, because the draft resolution places you in a
particular context. The statements made at the 773rd
meeting by the delegations of the United States and the
United Kingdom-or other statements-do they form
part, in any sense, not of the draft resolution but of
your mission? So far as we are concerned, there are
several points which we have to make clear, and I
shall do that in a very few minutes.

sera communiqu~ au Gouvernement indien et que le
Gouvernement indien l'~tudiera en tenant compte des
avis que vous pouvez nous donner, Monsieur le
Pr~sident, car ce projet vous place dans une position
particuli~re. Les interventions que les d~l~gationsdes
Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni ont faites a. la 773~me
s~ance - ou d'autres d~clarations - font-elles partie, d'une fac;on quelconque, non du projet de r~so­
lution, mais des instructions concernant votre mission? Quant a nous, nous devons ~lucider plusieurs
points, et c'est ce que je vais faire en quelques
minutes.

30. First of all, the only resolutions in which my
Government feels engaged-and I use the word "engaged" deliberately-are those which it has accepted.
For resolutions passed by the Security Council under
Chapter VI of the Charter have no binding effect upon
Member States unless they consent. We have rejected
them, and indeed the Commission, after our rej ection,
had proceeded on the basis that we had not accepted
them. Therefore, while we cannot object to this exercise by the Council of recalling resolutions, what its
value is would be. for the Security Council to decide in
the future.

30. Tout d'abord, les seules r~solutions par lesquelles mon gouvernement s'estime li~ - c'estadessein que j'emploie le terme "li~" - sont celles qu'll
a accept~es. En effet, les r~solutions adopt~es par le
Conseil de s~curit~ en vertu du Chapitre VI de la
Charte n'ont pas force obligatoire pour les Etats
Membres - a moins que ceux-ci donnent leur consentement. Nous les avons rejet~es et, effectivement, la
Commission, apr~s notre refus, a agi co~me si nous
ne les avions pas accept~es. C' est pourquoi, bien que
nous ne voyions aucune objection a ce rappel de
r~solutions par le Conseil, ce sera au Conseil de
s~curit~ de d~cider plus tard quelle valeur il a.

31. We deeply regret what is in our opinion the unnecessary and provocative pinpointing of the resolution
of 24 January 1957 [S/3779], especially as the generic
phrase "its previous resolutions" had been set out. The
same applies to the wordS "haVing regard to the previous resolutions of the Security Council". My Government freely confesses that the Security Council
must have regard to its own resolutions, but so far as
Member States which are not members of the Security
Council are concerned, when proceedings under Chapter VI are being pursued, its relevance to them is
based only upon consent. 'That is all there is to it.

31. Nous regrettons profond~ment que l'on ait inutilement fait un geste provocateur en mOiltant en ~pingle
la r~solution du 24 janvier 1957 [S/3779], d'autantplus
que l'on a mis en relieflaformuletres generale: "ses
resolutions ant~rieures". 11 en va de meme des termes
!'compte tenu des resolutions ant~rieures du Consell
de s~curit~". Mon gouvernement admet volontiers que
le Conseil de s~curite doit tenir compte de ses propres r~solutions, mais les Etats Membres qui ne sont
pas membres du Conseil de securiten'ontale faire s'il s'agit du Chapitre VI - que s'ils y consentent.
C'est tout ce que j'avais a dire la-dessus.

32. I wish to state that our approach to this problem
is based upon the following and the fundamental considerations which have been advanced before the Security
Council from 1 January 1948 until 20 February 1957.

32. Je tiens a declarer que, en abordantleprobl~me,
nous nous fondons sur les consid~rations suivantes,
ainsi que sur les consid~rationsfondamentales qui ont
ete expos~es devant le Conseil de sGcurite entre le 1er
janvier 1948 et le 20 fevrier 1957.
.

33. First, the State of Jammu and Kashmir is a constituent unit of the Union of India by law, by equity, by
every moral and political consideration, and the only
authority that can legally separate the State is the
sovereign Parliament of India. This is not only municipal law, but law which must be recognized as international, more particularly by the delegations of the
United Kingdom, the United States, Australia and
France, which have recognized in their legal systems
that municipal laws which obtain general currency
automatically become part of international law.

33. Premi~rement, l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire est
partie constituante de l'Union indienne en droit, en
equit~ et en ve:.:tu de toutes les considerations morales
et politiques que l'onpourraitinvoquer. Aussi, laseule
autorite l~galement qualifiee pour prononcer la separation de cet Etat est le Parlement souverain de
l'lnde. Ce n'est pas simplement une question de droit
interne, mais de considerations juridiques quidoivent
etre reconnues sur le plan international, notamment
par les delegations du Royaume-Uni, des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, de l'Australie et de la France, car le
syst~me juridique de ces quatre pays reconnait que les
principes de droit interne gen~ralement reconnus deviennent automatiquement partie du droit international.

34. Secondly, there is the principle that the territorial
integrity of the State of Jammu and Kashmir is inviolable. We cannot accept the situation of so-called
de facto occupation mentioned in the statement of the
representative of Pakistan. The sovereignty of the
Jammu and Kashmir Government over the whole area,
the responsibility of the Government of the Union of
India for the security of the Union as a whole, are

34. Deuxi~mement, l'int~grj.t~ territoriale de l'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire est inviolable. Nous ne
pouvons pas accepter la situation, que l'on qualifie
d'oceupation de facto, dont le repr~sentantdu Pakistan
a parIe. La souverainet~ du Gouvernement du Jammu
et Cachemire sur la region tout entiere et la responsabiliM de l'Union indienne en ce qui concerne la
s~curite de l'Union toute entiere sont des facteurs
6

'., ' webasicat factors
from which we cannot depart. Neither can
any time abandon the commitments we have made
J in the light of deliberate and public assurances given

fondamentaux dont nous ne pouvons faire abstraction.
Nous ne pouvons non plus abandonner a aucun moment
les engagements que nous avons pris a la suite des
assurances publiques formelles qui nous o,nt ~te
dOni~es et qui ont conditionne l'acceptation par le
Gouvernement indien des propositions qui lui etaient
faites.
35. En outre, dans les conditions actuelles, 1'Inde ne
peut se permettre de negliger les probl~mes de
s~curite interieure et exterieure de son territoire d'ailleurs, aucun pays vivant dans les conditions oil
nous vivons ne pourrait se le permettre. Sous ce
chapitre, il faut tenir compte des enormes quantites de
materiel de guerre livrees au Pakistan au titre de
l'aide militaire ameriCaills, qui, comme je l'ai dit
hier [773~me seance, par. 103 a 108], permettent
l'eventualite - immediate ou non - d'un recours aux
armes atomiques tactiques; c'est une eventualite a
laquelle le commandant en chef des forces pakistanaises a fait allusion.
36. Toutes ces considerations - que je les aie presentees aujourd'hui ou hier au nom du Gouvernement
indien - definissent la position de ce gouvernement en
ce qui concerne le probl~me qui nous interesse.

,.

1 to us, which are part of the consent that the Government of India has proffered to the propositions placed
before it.
35. Equally, in the conditions of today, India cannot
afford to disregard-as no country can, in the conditions in which we live, afford to disregard-the internal
and the external security of our land. And under that
heading there must be included in the account the
enormous amount of war material that has come into
Pakistan through United States military aid and which
includes, as I said yesterday [773rd meeting, paras. 103
to 108], either the present or the future possibility of
the use of tactical atomic weapons, to which the Commander-in-Chief of Pakistan referred.

36. These and the other factors set out in the statement I made yesterday on behalf of the Government of
India are part of the approach of the Government of
India to this problem.
37. At the same time, I repeattwopropositions: First,
the President of the Security Council will always be
welcome in India. The hospitality of our land and the
courtesies of our Government would be at his disposal.
Secondly, India is not in a position-and I say this not
with any desire to cause delay-to consider any matters
of high policy until a new Government is established in
the country, which will take place, at t.'le earliest, in
the latter half of March.

37. Par la meme occasion, je repete deux propositions: premierement, le President du ConSeil de
securite sera toujours le bienvenu en Inde. L'hospitalite de notre pays et la courtoisie de notre gouve:o'nement lui seront toujours acquises. Deuxiemement,
l'Inde n'est pas en mesure - cela dit sans lemoindre
desir de causeI' des retards - d'examiner les 1'1'0blames qui mettent en cause les principes memes de
sa politique avant qu'un nouveau gouvernement ne soit
etabli dans le pays, ce qui aura lieuau plus tot a la fin
du mois de mars.

38. I shall not take the time of the Council any longer
except to reiterate these conditions. But it is appropriate to point out two things. Any new attempt in this
direction, if it is even to open the first pages of a new
book, has to start with the calling off of the dogs of the
war of hatred. We will not sit under the crusade of a
"holy war". Secondly, I want to invite the attention of
the representative of the United Kingdom toadispatch
that has come from Muzaffarabad, in West Kashmir,
which is the Pakistan-occupied area. This dispatch
appeared a few days ago in the "Daily Telegraph" of
London. It points out that" Azad" Kashmir forces, which
are technically under t.'1e Pakistan General Command,
are stated to number 35,000, and it goes on to say that
the Minister of the "Azad" Kashmir Government
"claimed that this figure could be increased overnight
to 80,000, of whom 70,000 are trained ex-soldiers".

38. Je n'abuserai pas davantage du tempsduConseil,
si ce n'est pour reiterer ces conditions. Mats il
convient de souligner deux choses. Avant de faire une
nouvelle tentative dans cette direction, meme pour
reprendre le probleme de z~ro, il faut mettre fin a la
campagne de haine. Nous nous refusons a vivre sous
la menace d'une croisade ou d'une "guerre sainte".
Deuxiemement, je desire appeler l'attentiondu representant du Royaume-Uni sur une depeche en provenance
de Muzaffarabad, dans le Cachemire occidental, qui
est la region occupee par le Pakistan. Cette d~peche
a ete publiee il y a quelques jours par le "Daily
Telegraph" de Londres. Elle soulignait que lesforces
du Cachemire "azad", qui sont techniquement sous les
ordres du haut-commandement pakistanais, sont
evaluees ii 35.000 hommes, et que le Ministre du
Gouvernement du Cachemire "azad" "affirme que ce
nombre pouvait du jour au lendemain etre porte a
80.000, dont 70.000 anciens soldats entrames".

39. These are all well-known facts, as are the facts
about the vast quantity of munitions, of war material,
that has flowed into Pakistan, and they are to be considered against the background of the statement made
by the Pakistan Commander-in-Chief about tactical
atomic weapons in order to deal with the enemy across
the "riverine obstacles" [. ,~rd meeting, para. 108].
(I am sorry that Mr. Lo(\ ';' was not here during the
773rd meeting, but I am sure this ha.s been conveyed to
him.) In those circumstances, the sovereign duty and

39. Ce sont la desfaitsbiencornus, commed'ailleurs
tous les faits relatifs aI' enorme quantite de munitions
et de materiel de guerre qui a ete introduite au
Pakistan; ces faits, il faut les envisage l' en fonction
de la declaration faite par le commandant en chef
pakistanais au suj et des armes atomiques tactiques
susceptibles d'etre utilisees contre l'ennemi stationne
au-deIa des "obstacles fluviaux" [773~me seance, par.
108]. (Je regrette que M. Lodge n'ait pas ete ici
pendant la 773eme seance, mais je suis persuade que
7

responsibility of any country is to look after its
security.

ce propos lui a ~t~ rapport~.) Dans ces circonstances
le devoir et la responsabilit~ de tout Etat souver~
est de veiller a sa propre s~curit~.

40. Finally, I should like to say that I will take steps
to communicate the Council's resolution to the Government of India, which will take it into consideration as
soon as a new Government is formedafterthe general
election.

40. Pour terminer, je tiens a d~clarer que je communiquerai la r~solution du Conseil au Gouvernement
indien, qui l'~tudiera aussitot qu'un nouveau cabinet
aura ~t~ constitu~ apr~s les ~lections g~n~rales.

41. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I should like to make
a few comments on the draft resolution proposed by
the delegations of Australia, the United Kingdom and the
United States [S/3792 and Corr. 1].

41. M. SOBOLEV (Union des R~publiques socialistes
sovi~tiques) [traduit du russe]: Je voudrais pr~senter
quelques observations au sujet du projet de resolution
qu'ont presenM les d~Iegations de l'Australie, des
Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni [8/3792].

42. In view of our general position on the Kashmir
problem, which we have already explained in the
Security Council, we accept the basic idea of this draft
resolution, which is that the President of the Security
Council should be requested to visitIndia and Pakistan
and to negotiate with the Governments of those countries with a view to finding a solution of the Kashmir
problem acceptable to both sides.

42. Etant donne la position g~n~rale qu'elle a prise
dans la question du Cachemire, et qu'elle a deja
exposee au Conseil de securit~, la d~legation sovietique Juge acceptable l'idee centrale de ce projet, qui
est de charger le President du Conseil de securite
d'aller dans l'Inde et au Pakistan pour s'entretenir
avec les gouvernements de ces deux pays en vue de
chercher une solution du probleme du Cachemire qui
convienne aux deux parties.

43. The text of the three-Power draft resolution is
superior to the original four-Power draft [S/3787].
Under the terms of the revised draft, the President of
the Security Council will, in the exercise of his task,
not be hampered by provisions which have proved
unacceptable to one of the parties and would doom his
mission to failure. We are bound to note that the
reference to previous Council resolutions in the threePower draft resolution may render Mr. Jarring's
negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan
more difficult; our present attitude should not be based
on resolutions adopted many years ago but on the realities of the international situation and the existing
conditions in the region concerned.

43. Le texte du projet de r~solution des trois puissances presente des avantages par rapport au projet
initial, presente par quatre puissances [8/3787].
D'apr~s le nouveau projet, le Pr~sident du Conseil de
securite ne sera pas lie, dans l'accomplissement de
sa mission, par des dispositions qui n'ont pu etre
accept~es par l'une des parties et qui auraient voue sa
mission a ltechec. Il faut bien VOir, cependant, qu'en
se referant aux resolutions anterieures du Conseil de
securite, le projet des trois delegations risque de
gener M. Jarring dans ses pourparlers avec les
Gouvernements de Flnde et du Pakistan: au lieu
d'invoquer aujourd'hui des resolutions qui remontent
a tant d-tannees, il faudrait partir sur des faits reels
qui caracterisent la situation internationale et des
conditions qui existent actuellement dans cette r~gion.

44. It must not be forgotten that our problem is the
pacific settlement of the Kashmir question in keeping
with Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, which
provides for the pacific settlement of disputes and
excludes any measures of compulsion and any attempt
to impose on one of the parties solutions unacceptable
to it. The reference to previous Council decisions
which, as will be readily understood, are not acceptable
to the Government of India, may therefore render the
task entrusted to the President more difficult.

44. On ne doit pas oublier qu'il s'agit d'un r~glement
pacifique de la question du Cachemire, conformement
au Chapitre VI de la Charte des Nations Unies,
chapitre qui institue une procedure pacifique de
reglement des dillerends et qui exclut toute mesure
de coercition, de meme qU'il interdit d'imposer :i
l'une des parties des solutions qu'elle juge inacceptables. 80us ce rapport, le rappel des resolutions anterieures du Conseil qui ont paru, pour des raisons
plausibles, inacceptables au Gouvernement de l'Inde,
risque de compliquer la mission que le Conseil de
securiM veut confier a son President.

45. We would draw attention to the circumstances in
which the representatives of the United States, the
United Kingdom and Australia introduced their new
draft resolution. In the course of the previous discussions the delegations of those countries rejected
the amendments proposed by the Soviet Union and by
Colombia to the four-Power draft resolution. In effect,
these delegations thus refused to co-operate in the
preparation of an acceptable Security Council resolution capable of promoting a solution of the Kashmir
problem. They refused to take into account the legitimate interests of one of the parties. Thus the impression was created that the sponsors of the four-Power
draft did not wish to take India's position into consid-

45. Il Y a lieu de mentionner les circonstances dans
lesquelles les representants des Etats- Unis, du Royaume-Uni et de l'Australie ont depose hier leur nouveau projet. Precedemment, les delegations de ces
pays ont repousse les amendements que la delegation
de l'Union sovietique et celle de la Colombie avaient
presentes au projet de resolution des quatre puissances. En fait, ces delegations ont refuse de collaborer a la redaction d'une resolution du Conseil de
securite qui soit acceptable et qui puisse faciliter le
r~glement du probl~me du Cachemire. Elles ntont
pas voulu respecter les iluterets Mgitimes de l'une
des parties. Les auteurs du projet des quatre puissances ont donn~ l'impression qu'ils ne voulaient pas
8

eration and that they are seekin g to impose on India a
decision unacce ptable to any sovere ign State.

tenir compte de la positio n de l'Inde et quiils entendaient lui impos er une d~cision inacce ptable pour un
Etat souver ain.

46. In their statem ents, the repres entativ es of the
United States, the United Kingdom and Austra lia attempted to presen t the Soviet positio n in an unfavo urable light, to throw doubt on the sinceri ty of the Soviet
delegation's desire to find a just settlem ent of the
Kashm ir proble m. There is no need to refute such
insinuations. The Soviet delega tion is not unduly concerned at the clamou r with which the repres entativ es
of the Wester n Power s usually greet the casting of our
vote. In the eyes of all those who sincer ely wish for
the peacef ul settlem ent of unreso lved interna tional
problems, talk about the alleged misuse of the veto
cannot concea l the fact that our delega tion has taken up
a position of justice , that it always advoca tes decisio ns
in keeping with the interes ts of the people s concer ned
and with the princip les of the United Nation s Charte r.

46. Dans leurs intel'Ventions, les repr~sentants des
Etats-U nis, du Royaum e-Uni et de l'Austr alie ont
tenM de d~nigrer l'attitu de delad~Mgationsovi~tique;
ils ont voulu mettre .en doute la sinc~rite des efforts
que nous deployons pour obteni r un r~glement equitable de la questio n du Cachem ire. nest inutile de
refuter de pareill es insinua tions. La d~legationsovietique ne s'emeu t guere du tapage dont les representan ts des puissa nces occide ntales entour ent habituellem ent ses votes au Consei l. Leurs discou rs sur
ce qu'ils appelle nt l'abus du droit de veto ne feront
pas oublie r aux partisa ns sincer es du reglem ent
pacifiq ue des proble mes interna tionaux le bien-fo nde
de la positio n adopte e par la d~Mgationsovietique,qui
defend in~branlablement les decisio ns confor mes aux
int~rets des peuple s et aux princip es de laChar
te des
Nation s Unies.
47. Quant a la metho dequif aitvote rautom atique ment
des resolut ions dont on sait diavan ce qu'elle s sont
inacce ptables pour l'une des parties interes sees, elle
n'est pas digne des tra:vaux du Consei l de securiM , et
encore moins lorsqu 'il s'agit de regler pacifiq uemen t
tel ou tel proble me.
48. En conclu sion, jedirai quelad elegat iondel 'Union
sovieti que, bien qu'elle reieve des defauts consid erabIes dans le projet de resolut ion des trois puissances , ne s'oppo sera pas a son adoption, dans l'espo ir
que les entreti ens que le Pr~sident du Consei l de
s~curi te aura avec les Gouve rnemen ts de 1'Inde
et du
Pakist an pourro nt donner des r~sultatspositifsetpermettre la reprise des negoci ations directe s entre les
deux gouver nemen ts interes ses. La delega tion sovietique s'absti endra donc sur ce texte.

47. The method of mecha nically voting in favour of
resolutions which are known to be unacce ptable to one
of the parties concer ned is unsuita ble for the work of
the Securi ty Council, particu larly in cases concer ning
the peacef ul settlem ent of a proble m.
48. In conclusion, I should like to say that the delega tion of the Soviet Union, while discern ing seriou s
shortcomings in the three-P ower draft resolut ion, will
not. oppose its adoption, in the sincer e hope that the
conversations of the Presid ent of the Securi ty Council
with the Govern ments of India and Pa.1dstan may yield
a positive result and lead to the resump tion of direct
negotiations betwee n the two Govern ments concer ned.
The Soviet delega tion will abstain in the vote on the
draft resolut ion.
49. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): The submis sion of a new draft
resolution by the delega tions of Austra lia, the United
Kingdom and the United States clearly shows the deep
desire by the Power s concer ned to lay down a basis for
a settlem ent of the Kashm ir dispute and the spirit of
realism shown with regard to the urgent need for taking
positive steps with a view to lesseni ng the tension in
the region and to establi shing conditions of a durabl e
peace. We highly apprec iate the spirit which motiva ted
the three Power s in trying to preven t a break in the
continuity of the search for a solutio n of the Kashm ir
dispute. We believe that the new step which has been
taken by the three Power s expres ses a desire for progress by those who are anxiou s to see a rapid settlement of the dispute . It also reflect s their convic tion
that there is an urgent need to bring the two parties
together, thus promo ting conditi ons for peace in that
general region.

49. M. JAWAD (Irak) [tradui t de -l'angla is]: En
deposa nt un nouveau projet de resolut ion, les del~­
gations de l'Austr alie, des Etats-U nis etduRo yaume Uni montre nt clairem ent combie n elles desire nt
etablir des bases qui perme ttront de regler la questio n
du Cachemire~ elles montre nt aussi leur realism e en
reconn aissan t qu'il faut de toute urgenc e prendr e des
mesur es positiv es afin d'atten uer la tension qui r~gne
dans la region et d'y faire naitre les conditionS! d'une
paix durabl e. Nous savons gre a ces trois puissa nces
d'essa yer d'empe cher que 1'0n cesse de cherch er a
r~soudre le differe nd relatif au Cache mire.
Nous
somme s persua des que la nouvelle demar che des trois
puissa nces exprim e l'attitu de de ceux qui sont impatients de voir le differe nd regIe etleur convic tion qu'il
est necess aire de rappro cher les deux advers aires et
de favoris e r ainsi l' etablis semen t de conditi ons de paix
dans toute la region.

50. The draft resolut ion is charac terized by its spirit
of conciliation and realism . Its genera l terms offer a
great opport unity for taking the differe nt points of view
into account, while at the same time it leaves ample
latitude for the Presid ent Qf the Counci l to make an
apprais al of the situatio n as it appear s at the presen t
time. This approa ch will still permit the Counci l to
take approp riate action in accord ance with its previo us
decisions and in the light of the findings of its President.

50. Le projet de resolut ion est caract erise par son
esprit de concili ation et de realism e. Dans ses grande s
!ignes, il perme t de prendr e en consid eration les differents points de vue, tout en laissan t en meme temps
au Presid ent du Consei l de securi te une gl'ande liberte
d'appr eciatio n qui lui perme t de faire le point de la
situatio n actuell e. Cela n'empe che pas le Conse il de
prendr e les mesur es voulue s, confor memen t a ses
decisio ns anterie ures et compte tenu des conclu sions
de son Presid ent.
9

51. The centra l point in this draft resolut ion which
deserv es specia l empha sis is that it will enable the
Presid ent of the Counc il to examin e, with the Govern ments of India and Pakista n, any propos al which might,
in his opinion, contrib ute to a settlem ent of the dispute .
ThE'1 assista nce and collabo l'ation of the two Govern ments concer ned is therefo re extrem ely import ant, and
it is to be hoped that such assista nce will be provid ed
in the spirit of the Charte r and without any reserv ations. We have every reason to hope thatthe two Governme nts will avail themse lves of this opport unity to
demon strate, in acts as they have done in words, their
desire to settle their differe nces in the interes ts of
their people s and the people of Kashm ir, inconf ormity
with the princip les of law and justice . Since this draft
resolut ion has, so to speak, been freed from all elements to which objecti on has been raised by one side
or anothe r, we sincere ly hope that it will receiv e the
assent of the Council.
52. Mr. ROMULO (Philip pines): For the purpos es of
the record , I wish to state that at the previo us meetin g
the repres entativ e of India made this statem ent:
"The repres entativ e of the Philipp ines makes a
fundam ental error, which he could easily rectify if
he read the resolut ions of the Comm,ission. He says
that the resolut ion places both parties on the same
b~.sis. That is exactly what it does not do." [773rd
meetin g, para. 68.]
53. This is what I said:
"More over, if the letter addres sed to the Presid ent
of the United Nations Comm ission on 20 August 1948
by the Prime Minist er of India is mentio ned by the
Colom bian amend ment in order to incorp orate the
clarifi cation s of the Comm ission to the Govern ment
of India, iUs believe d that a simila r referen ce should
be made to the clarific ations of the Comm ission to
the Govern ment of Pakist an, so that the two Govern ments could be placed on an equal footing vis-a- vis
the two resolut ions of the United Nation s Comm ission." [Ibid., para. 35.]
54. I empha size the words: "could be placed on an
equal footing tl • I did not make the statem ent attribu ted
to me by the repres entativ e of India.
55. Speaking now on the draft resolut ion before us, my
d'elegation cannot but deplor e the fact that at the 773rd
meetin g the Soviet Union used its veto. Thatth e Soviet
delega tion might disagr ee with other memb ers of the
Counc il should be expected, but in a matter where the
commo n positio n seems to be that agreem ent betwee n
the partie s to the dispute should be encour aged, it is
believe d that a memb er is under an obligat ion not to
stand in the way of a consen sus in the Council as to how
agreem ent betwee n the parties might be promo ted.
Since the lone vote of the Soviet Union has preven ted
the carryin g out of the majori ty vote of the Counc iland it was not a mecha nical vote-i t behoov es us to
make anothe r try. It would seem that memb ers of the
Counc il have first to achiev e unanimity before they can
expect to secure agreem ent betwee n the parties .

51. Dans le projet de r6solut ion, le point essent iel
qu'il convie nt de soulignerplusparticuli~rementestle
fait que le Pr6sid ent du Conse il de s6curit 6 aura la
possib ilit6 d'exam iner, avec le Gouve rnemen tde l'Inde
et celui du Pakista n, toute propos ition qu'il jugera de
nature a contrib uer au r~glementduconIlit.11estdonc
extrem ement import ant d'avoi r l'appui et le concours
des deux gouver nemen ts int6res s6s, et il faut esp6re r
que cet appui sera fourni sans r6serv e, comme le
deman de l'espri t de la Charte des Nation s Unies. Nous
avons toutes raison s d' esp6re r que les deux gouver nements profite ront de cette occasi on pour d6mon trer
par leurs actes, comme ils l'ont d6ja fait par leurs
parole s, leur souci de r6gler leur diff6re nd dans l'int6ret de leurs peuple s et du peuple du Cachem ire,
la justice .
confor m~ment aux princip es du droit et de
asse
d6barr
6t6
dire
ainsi
Le proj et de r6solut ion a pour
parties
l'autre
et
l'une
ls
auxque
ts
el6men
les
de tous
avaien t trouv6 a redire, et nous esp6ro ns donc sinceremen t qu'il recevr a l'appro bation du Consei l.
52. M. ROMULO (Philip pines) [tradui t de l'angla is]:
Pour le proces -verba l, je d6sire rappel er la d~cla­
ration que le repr6s entant de l'Inde a faite a la prec6dent e s6ance . 11 a dit:
tiLe repr6s entant des Philipp ines comme t une
grave erreur , qu'il pourra it ais6me nt corrig er s'il
lisait les r6solut ions de la Comm ission. 11 dit, en
effet, que la resolut ion met les deux parties sur un
pied d'6gali t6. C'est exacte ment l'oppos~ de la
v6rite. tI [773eme s~ance, par. 68.]
53. Voici ce que j'ai dit:
tiDe plus, l'amen demen t propos e par la Colombie
fait mention de la lettre adress ee le 20 aout 1948
par l'Inde au Presid ent de la Comm ission des
Nation s Unies afiD. d'inco rporer a. la resolut ion les
explica tions que la Comm ission a fournie s au Gouvernem ent de l'Inde, et nous penson s qu'il y aurait
lieu, dans ce cas, de mentio nner 6galem ent les
explica tions que la Comm ission a fournie s au Gouvernem ent du Pakista n, afin de .placer les deux
gouver nemen ts sur un pied d'egali te a l'egard des
deux resolut ions de la Comm ission des Nations
Unies. tI [Ibid., par. 35.]
54. J'insis te sur les mots: "afin detl placer les deux
gouver nemen ts sur un pied d'egali te • Je n'ai jamais
pronon ce la declara tion que m 'attribu e le repres entant
de l'Inde.
55. Passan t mainte nant au projet de resolut ion dont
nous somme s saisis, ma delega tion ne peut que deplorer que l'Union sovieti que ait fait usaged udroit de
veto a la 773eme seance . Onpou vait sans doute s'atten dre a ce que la delega tion sovieti que ne soit pas
d'acco rd avec d'autre s memb res du Consei l; mais
etant donne que tout le monde semble d'acco rd sur la
necess ite d' encour ager un accord entre les parties
au differe nd, nous aurion s cru que chaque membr e se
serait senti tenu de ne pas s'oppo ser al'opin ion generale des memb res du Consei l sur la fa<$on dont on
pourra it favori ser la conclu sion d'un. accord entre les
parties advers es. Puisqu e le seul vote de l'Union
sovieti que a fait echec a la volonte de la majori te du
Consei l - et il ne s'agiss ait pas d'un vote mecanique - il nous faut faire une nouvelle tentati ve. La
conclu sion parait etre que les memb res du Consei l
10

doivent d'abord arriver al'unanimit~ avantdepouvoir
esp~rer faire aboutir un accord entre les parties.
56. Ma d~l~gation approuve done enti~rement l'initiative prise par l'Australie, les Etats-Unis et le
Royaume-Uni, qui ont d~pos~ un autre proj et de r~so­
lution. 11 est ~vident que le reste des membres du
Conseil ne peut c~der a toutes les exigences de 1'Union
sovi~tique. Si l'on veut parvenir aun modus vivendi, il
faut que l'Union sovi~tique fasse quelques concessions
lorsque les autres membres en font autant. Le repr~­
sentant de l'Union sovi~tique, j'ai ~t~ heureux de
l'entendre, vient de dire qU'il ne formulait aucune
objection ;:\ l'~gard du projet de r~solution dc~t nous
sommes actuellement saisis. C'est dans cet esprit qlle
ma d~legation annonce son intention de voter pour le
projet de r~solution que nous ~tudions aujourd'hui
[S/3792].
57. Ma d~Iegation est sincerement persuad~e que ce
projet de r~solution ne devrait clonner lieu a. aucune
grave controverse. Apres tout, il est fond~ sur des
r~solutions ant~rieures du Conseil. Le mains que nous
puissions ou que nous devions faire est de montrer un
certain respect a l'~gard des d~cisions du Conseil. Je
rappelle que jamais auparavant, ni par son veto ni par
son vote, 1'Union sovietique n' est all~e;:\1'encontre des
r~solutions du Conseil relatives a cette affaire. nest
evident que le proj et de resolution ne mentionne pas la
proposition du Pakistan tendant a utiliser une force
temporaire des Nations Unies dans l'Etatde Jammuet
de Cachemire. Les Philippines continuentde croire que
cette proposition pourrait permettre de realiser la
demilitarisation, que non seulement elle n' est pas
contraire a la Charte, mais encore qu'elle est en
accord avec les buts et les principes de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.
58. Ma del~gation aura l'honneur de voter en faveur
du projet de r~solution, qui, espere-t-elle, permettra
au Conseil de s~curite de progresser dans le reglement
de la question du Cachemire. Nous avons pratiquement
marque le pas dans cette affaire, et notre prestige ne
peut qu'en souffrir beaucoup devant l'opinion publique
mondiale. C'est maintenant qu'il faut agir. 11 ne faut
pas laisser le probleme du Cachemire s'envenimer;
nous devons agir, et, comme premiere mesure, nous
avons le devoir d'adopter la presente resolution a.
l'unanimite.
59. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais]: 11
apparait maintenant que le projet de resolution present~ par l'Australie, les Etats-Unis et le RoyaumeUni sera adopt~ par le Consei!. La d~legationchinoise
votera certainement pour, mais auparavant elle sauhaite dire quelques mots au sujet du projet.
60. Jusqu'a present, nOus n'avons pas entendu de
critiques touchant le projet, sauf, sij'ai bien compris,
des objections - moderees d'ailleurs - au sujet du
rappel de certaines resolutions anterieures et aussi a.
propos des termes "compte tenu des resolutions ant~­
rieures du Conseil de securib~n. La delegation chinoise
voterait pour le projet meme si l'on en retirait ces
mats. Je n'attache pas beaucoup d'importance a. la
question du rappel de resolutions anterieures. Meme
si nous ne nous conformions pas aux resolutions antedeures, nous appliquerions certainement la Charte,
qui constitue, j'en suis sur, une base suffisante pour
un reglement satisfaisant du differend.

56. My delegation is therefore in full agreement with
the initiative shown by Australia, the United Kingdom
and the United States in submitting another draft
resolution. Understandably, the remaining members of
the Council cannot yield to all the demands of the
Soviet Union. If there is to be any modus vivendi, the
Soviet Union must yield part of its position if the other
members are also to yield part of their position. I am
happy to note, after listening to the statement just
made by the representative of the Soviet Union that he
does not object to the draft resolution now before us.
It is in that spirit that my delegation announces its
support of the draft resolution which is before us today
[S/3792 and Corr. 1].

57. My delegation sincerely believes that the draft
resolution should not give rise to serious controversy.
After all, it is founded on previous resolutions of the
Council. The least that we can do or should do is to
shoW some respect for the decisions of the Council.
It is recalled that the Soviet Union has never before,
by its veto or by its vote, opposed those resolutions of
the Council. It is plain that the draft resolution does
not mention the Pakistan proposal for the use of a
temporary United Nations force in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir. My delegation still believes that that
proposal could reasonably be expected to achieve
demilitarization, that it is not only not contrary to the
Charter but consistent with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.

58. My delegation will have the honour to vote for the
present draft resolution in orqer to allow this Council
to move forward to the liquidation of the Kashmir
dispute. We have remained virtually at a standstill on
this question and we are bound to suffer a great loss of
prestige in world public opinion. The time to act is now.
We cannot allow the Kashmir problem to fester like a
sore; we must have action, and at a further step we
have the duty to adopt this resolution unanimously.

59. Mr. TSIANG (China): It now appears that this
present draft resolution introduced by Australia, the
United Kingdom and the United States will be passed
by this Council. My delegation will certainly vote for
it. Before we pass to the vote, I wish only to say a few
words in regard to this draft resolution.
60. So far we have not heard any criticism of this
draft except a mild criticism, ifIunderstand aright, in
regard to the recalling of past reslJlutions and also in
regard to that phrase "having regard to the previous
resolutions of the Security Council". So far as my delegation is concerned, if we should omit that feature of
the draft resolution I will still vote for it. I do not
attach much importance to the reciting of past resolutions. Even ifweshouldnotfollowourpast resolutions,
we certainly will follow the Charter. I think the Charter
is a sufficient basis for an appropriate settlement of
this 'dispute.
11

61. The particular principle which would be applicable
to this dispute would be the principle of self-determination of peoples. If any party should wish the
Council to start all over again and wipe off the slate any
previous resolutions we have passed, I am agreeable.
I would be glad to start all over again and go back to
the fundamental principles of the Charter. I believe
with the Charter in hand we could find an appropriate
solution.

61. Le principe que l'on pourrait applique l' dans le
cas pr~sent pourrait etre celui du droit des peuples a.
disposer d'eux-memes. Si l'une despartiesdemandait
au Conseil de repartir a. z~ro et de ne tenir aucun
compte des r~solutions adopt~es ant~rieurement, j'y
consentirais. Je serais heureux de re~artir de zero et
d' en revenir aux principes fondamentaux de la Charte.
Je crois qu'en se fondant sur la Charte nous trouvericns une solution satisfaisante.

62. Now, however, we take the draft resolution as it
stands. This draft resolution leaves considerable discretion to you, Mr. President. I do not envy you the
task that you are assuming. I anticipate, and I am sure
you anticipate, a hard and difficult assignment and
journey.

62. Cependant, nous sommes a. l'heure actuelle saisis
d'un projet de r~solution pr~cis. Ce projetvouslaisse
beaucoup d'initiative, Monsieur le Pr~sident, et je dois
dire que je ne vous envie gu~re. Je crois - comme
vous, j'en suis certain - que la mission et le voyage
seront difficiles et p~nibles.

63. A strange feature of this whole dispute from 1948
to the present time is that we started with an agreement, namely, that the question should eventually be
decided through a free and fair plebiscite. Our efforts
have been hampered, blocked and even balked by the
conditions preliminary to a plebiscite. It is this question of conditions that has prevented any fruitful action.
To my mind, there are two kinds of conditions that we
can face-and in fact we have faced two types of conditions. One category of conditions demanded by one State
or another relates to the freedom and fairness of the
plebiscite. One party or the other is anxious or worried
that unless a certain condition is fulfilled the plebiscite
will not be free or fair. So far as conditions of that
category are concerned, conditions which aim at increasing the freedom and fairness of the plebiscite, I
think the Council and I am sure the President will be
very sympathetic in considering them. Indeed, it is the
duty of the President and the members ofthe Security
Council to consider sympathetically any condition
which would make the plebiscite fair and free.

63. Ce qu'il y a d'~trange, dans toute cette affaire,
c'est que depuis 1948, 011 1'0n a commenc~ par convenir de r~gler la question, en fin de compte, au moyen
d'un pl~biscite libre et impartial, nos efforts ont ~t~
entrav~s, contrecarr~s, ils ont mame ~chou~, acause
de la question des conditions pr~alables a unpMbiscite.
C'est cette question des conditions prl!alables qui a
rendu impossible tout progr~s. A monavis, 11y a deux
esp~ces de conditions; en fait, nous les avons rencontr~es toutes les deux. Dans le premier cas, il
s'agit de conditions ayant trait a la libert~ et a. l'impartia1it~ du pMbiscite. L'une ou l'autre partie craint
que, si une condition d~termin~e n'est pas remplie, le
pl~biscite ne soit pas libre ou impartial. Lorsqu'il
s'agit de conditions de ce genre, qui visent a accroitre
la libert~ et 1'impartialit~ du pl~biscite, le Conseil, je
pense, et le Pr~sident, j'en suis stir, les examineront
tr~s favorablement. Le Pr~sident et les membres du
Conseil de s~curit~ n'ont-ils pas pour devoir de consid~rer avec bienveillance toute condition tendant ~
assurer l'impartialit~ et la libert~ du pMbiscite?

64. However, in the course of our deliberations during
the last nine years, we have had to face another category of conditions, conditions which have nothingtodo
with the freedom or fairness of the plebiscite 'but which
are aimed at weakening or strengthening the existing
claims of one party or the other. It seems to me that
that type of condition does not deserve consideration.
We cannot afford to write juto the conditions of the
plebiscite speeches that would strengthen or weaken the
claims of one party or the other. We would and we
should accept conditions which contribute to the freedom and fairness of the plebiscite.

64. Cependant, au cours de neuf ans de discussions,
nous avons eu a envisager une autre esp~ce de conditions et je dois dire qu'elles n'ont rien a. voir avec
la libert~ ou l'impartialite du pl~biscite, celles-l~;
elles visent uniquement a. affaiblir ou a. renforcer les
revendications de l'une ou de l'autre partie. A mon
aviS, elles ne m~ritent pas d'etre prises en consid~­
ration. Nous ne pouvons pas faire figurer dans les
conditions requises pour le pl~biscite des d~clarations
qui renforceraient ou affaibliraient les revendications
de l'une ou l'autre partie. Nous souhaitons - et
d'ailleurs nous devons - accepter les conditions qui
visent a assurer la libert~ et l'impartia1it~ du pMbiscite.

65. This draft resolution leaves you, Mr. President,
ample discretion. So far as my delegation is concerned,
we have every confidence that you will exercise your
discretionary powers with wisdom.

65. Le projet de r~solution vous donne, Monsieur le
une tr~s grande latitude. La dEn~gation
chinoise est persuad~e que vous en userez avec
sagesse.

66. Mr. URRUTIA (Colombia): I am going to speak a
few words in English because I am amazed to see what
awful translations you can get at the United Nations.

66. M. URRUTIA (Colombie) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je
vais dire quelques mots en anglais parce que je suis
stup~fait de voir les traductions d~testables que 1'0n
nous donne a. l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

67. At the 773rd meeting my delegation said-and I
am quoting from the verba.tim record of the Spanish
text:
"Si nuestras enmiendas no son aceptadas, quedan
en todo caso coma constancia, y pudiera acurrir que,
en el casa de que esta vez no se lograra un acuer-

67. Ma d~l~gation a d~clar~ a la 773~me s~ance - et
je cite le compte rendu st~nographique en espagnol:

Pr~sident,

"Si nuestras enmiendas no son aceptada!;, quedan en
todo caso como constancia, y pudiera ocurrir que, en
el caso de que esta vez no se lograra un acuerdo

12

do ..• , . ml1s adelante estas sugestiones nuestras
podrfan volver a ser consideradas." Y

( ... ), ml1s adelante estas sugestiones nuestras podrfan volver a ser consideradas l/. "

The English interpretation of what was said is completely different in the record: "It might happen if, in
this case, some agreementis not reached •.. then other
points could be considered."

L'interpr~tation anglaise que lIon trouve dans le
compte rendu sMnographique mim~ographi~ est enti~­
rement diff~rente: "Il pourrait se produire, Si, dans ce
cas, aucun accord n'~tait obtenu ( ... ) que d'autres
points pourraient etre examin~s."

68. I am very happy that it was this sentence which
made me speak in English, because now I see that we
were very right. As a matter of fact, when at the previous meeting my delegation said that if our amendments were not approved we wanted to have them on
the record because later on they could be considered,
we were thinking in terms of severalweeks. We never
thought that within ten minutes they were going to be
approved. So when we saw this draft resolution with all
our amendments, we were quite gratified. We consider
it is on the right path and we are going to vote for it.

68. Je suis tr~s heureux que ce soit cette phrase qui
m'ait amen~ it parler en anglais, car je constate
maintenant que nous avions enti~rement raison. A vrai
dire, lorsque ma d~l~gationa dit ala pr~c~dente s~ance
que, si nos amendements n' ~taientpas approuv~s,nous
d~sirions qu'ils figurent au proc~s-verbalparcequ'on
pourrait les r~examiner plus tard, nous pensions it
plusieurs semaines. Jamais nous n'avons pens~qu'ils
seraient approuves en l'espace de 10 minutes. Lorsque
nous avons constat~ que le projet de r~solutionconte­
nait tous nos amendements, nous avons ~t~ tr~s
heureux. Nous estimons que l' on est maintenant sur la
bonne voie, et nous voterons en faveur du projet.

69. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the Council wishes to speak, I shall call on the representative
of India.

69. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisque
aucun autre membre du. Conseil ne demande laparole,
je la donne au repr~sentant de l'Inde.

70. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): I am not going to
make another statement. There are a couple of sentences which I wish to add to my previous statement.

70. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Je n'ai pas l'intention de faire un nouveau discours,
mais j'ai deux choses it ajouter it ce que j'ai dit prt1c~demment.

71. One is that whatever I have stated today on behalf
of the Government of India is not in any sense to be
regarded as superseding the statements made over the
past several days, but as only arising from them, and
the whole of them are relevant in any future consideration.

71. Primo, ce que j'ai d~clar~ aujourd'hui au nomdu
Gouvernement indien ne doit etre considere en aucune
mani~re comme annulant les d~clarations faites ces
derniers jours, mais seulement comme en d~coulant,
et c'est de toutes ces d~clarations qu'il faudra tenir
compte.

72. The second is a point which escaped my mind, as
I was not speaking from notes. It is that whatever considerations the Government of India may have given to
or even Whatever provisional sympathies it may have
expressed with certain proposals of exploration during
the last seven or eight years, they are not binding upon
our Government for two reasons. First of all, they
arose iFr the course of long discussions with all the
surrounding circumstances that have taken place in
different conditions-and whether the friends around
this table like to accept the view or not, changed conditions have to be taken into account. Therefore, no
exploratory, hypothetical or provisional considerations or propositions that we might have put forward or
entertained or considered or viewed with sympathy in
the past are binding upon our Government. My Govern~ent is most anxious that in no circumstances should
we lay ourselves open again to what we regard as the
erroneous suggestion that we are going away from
commitments. Therefore, we have to be doubly careful
in any exploration of this kind.

72. Secundo, je veux r~parer un oUbli; la chose m'a
~chapp~, car je n'avais pas de notes. Quelle que soit
la mani~re - eut-elle meme semble provisoirement
favorable - dont le Gouvernementindienapuconsid~­
rer certaines propositions ayantuncaract~red'explo­
ration faites durant les sept ou huit derni~resann~es,
. ces propositions ne lient pas le Gouvernement indien,
et cela pour deux raisons. Tout d'abord, elles ont t1t~
pr~sentt1es au cours de longues discussions, dans des
circonstances diff~rentes. Que ceux qui sont assis it
cette table l.e veuillent au non, il convient de tenir
compte de I'~volution de la situation. Par cons~quent,
le Gouvernement indien n'est li~ par aucune consid~­
ration ou proposition de caract~re conjectural,
hypoth~tique ou provisoire, que nous aurions pu. pr~­
senter, accueillir ou meme envisager avec sympathie
dans le pass~. Le GouvernE!ment indienest rt1so1uc\ ne
preter en aucune fa~on le flanc it l'accusation - ~
notre avis sans fondement - selon laquelle il ne tient
pas ses engagements. C'est pourquoi nous devvns redoubler de prudence dans toute exploration de ce genre.

73. I want to thank you, Mr. President, and the Council for the patient hearing that you have given to the
Views of the Government of India. If, in the course of
arguing a very legitimate. but a difficult case before a
~atively hostile Council in regard to our point of

73. Je dt1sire vous remercier, Monsieur le Prt1sident,
aim,. que les membres du Conseil, de la patience avec
laquelle vous avez t1coutt1 le point de vue du Gouvernement indien. Si pour plaider - devant un Co.nseil
assez hostile it notre point de vue - cette affaire (dans

V "If our amendments are not accepted, they will nevertheless be on record, and it may happ'en that if an agreement
is not reached this time ••• , our suggestions will be reconSidered at a later date." [773rd meeting, para. 31.]

Y "Si nos amendements ne sontpas acceptes, ils demeureront cependant comme texte de reference, et il se peut que,
au cas oil un .accord n'interviendrait pas cette fois (•••), le
Conseil reprenne plus tard nos idees en consideration."
[773eme seance, par. 31.]
13

view, we have had to take up firm positions and
reiterate them with a degree of firmness, I hope that
we have not said anything that may be regarded as
unparliamentary or that has caused any ill feeling; and
that the discussions in the past few days will have
assisted to clarify the problem and the position of the
Government of India.

laquelle notre bon droit est ~vident, mals qui n'en est
pas moins difficile), nous avons dti prendre des posi.
tions nettes et les souligner a. plusieurs reprises avec
vigueur, j'esp~re que nous n'avons rien dit qUi puisse
@tre consid~r~ comme contraire a. la courtoisie par.
lementaire ou blessant. J'esp~re ~galement que les
d~bats de ces derniers jours auront contribu~ a. bien
faire comprendre le probleme, ainsi que la position
du Gouvernement indien.

74. Finally, of all the people around this table and of
all the Member states of the United Nations, our Government, our people, are far more concerned about the
safety and the stability of our land and the millions of
people that inhabit it. At no time, in the rather strenuous circumstances in which we live today in our part
of the world, can we throw that consideration to the
wlilds.

74. Enfin, la s~curit~ et la stabilit~ de notre pays et
des millions de personnes qui y vivent pr.~occupent
certainement bien plus le gouvernement et le peuple
de 1'Inde que tous ceux qui sont assis a. cette table et
que tous les Etats Membres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Eu ~gard a. la situation assez tendue qui
r~gne aujourd'hui dans cette partie du monde, c'est
une consid~ration que l'on n' a jamais le droit d'oublier.

75. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers. I
suggest that we recess for ten minutes in order to
arrange for consecutive interpretation. After that, we
shall vote.

75. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): n n'y a
plus d'orateurs inscrits. Je proposeune suspension de
10 minutes, le temps d'organiser le syst~me d'inter.
pr~tation cons~cutive. Nous passerons ensuite au vote.

76. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Could we not vote under
the present system of interpretation? If we couldconslder the question in those conditions, I think we should
be able to vote quite satisfactorily.

76. M. SOBOLEV (Union des R~publiques socialistes
sovi~tiques) [traduit du russe]: Ne pourrions-nous
voter en laissant le syst~me d'interpr~tationtel qu'il
est? Si nous pouvions examiner la question dans ces
conditions, je pense qu'il nous serait possible de
passer au vote.

77. Mr. ROMULO (philippines): I think we can proceed
with the vote. We do not need a recess.

77. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Je pense que nous pourrions passer au vote. Une suspension de s~ance parait inutile.

78. The PRESIDENT: It is in order. I have nothing
against it. We shall proceed to the vote.

78. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Cette suggestion est conforme au r~glement, et je n'ai aucune
objection. Nous allons donc passer au vote.

79. The Council has before it a draft resolution submitted by Australia, the United Kingdom and the United
states of America [S/3792 and Corr. 1].

79. Ja mets aux voix le projet de r~solutionpr~sent~
par l'Australie, les Etats-Unis d'Am~rique et le
Royaume-Uni [S/3792].
11 est proc~d~ au vote a. main lev~e.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Votent pour: Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba,
France, Irak, Philippines, Su~de, Royaume-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis

In favour: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France,
Iraq, Philippines, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United states of America.

d'Am~rique.

Abstaining: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'abstient:

l'Union des

R~publiques

socialistes

sovi~tiques.

The draft resolution was adopted by 10 votes to none,
with 1 abstention.

Par 10 voix, avec une abstention, le projet de r~so­
lution est adopt~.

80. The PRESIDENT: The resolution which the Council has now adopted entrusts to me a certain task in
connexion with the India-Pakistan question. In accepting this mission I wish to say that I am honoured and
glad to place my services at the disposal of the Council
for the purpose it has indicated.

80. Le PRESIDENT (tradult de l'anglais): La r~so­
lution que le Conseil vient de voter me confie une
mission en ce qui concerne la questionInde-Pakistan.
J'accepte cette mission et voudrais vousdirecombien
je suls heureux et honor~ de me mettre a. la disposition
du Conseil pour remplir la tache qu'il m'a assign6e.

81. The mandate is that I should examine with the
Governments of India and Pakistan proposals which, in
my opinion, are likely to contribute toward the settlement of the question, having regard to the previous
resolutions of the Security Council and of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. I will have
to report at the specified date to the Security Council
on the result of the task I have undertaken. The contents, positive or negative, of this report will largely
depend upon the extent of collaboration which I can

81. J'ai pour mandat d'examiner avec le Gouvernement indien et le Gouvernement pakistanais les propositions qui, a. mon avis, sont de nature a. contribuer a.
un r~glement du diff~rend, compte tenu des r~solutions
anMrieures du Conseil de securite et de la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. J'aurai a.
faire connaJ.tre au Conseil de s~curit~, a. une date
donn~e, les r~sultats de ma mission. Le caract~re
positif ou n~gatii du rapport que je ferai alors d~pendra
dans une large part de la collaboration que m' auront

14

obtain from the Governments of India and Pakistan.
My acceptance is based on the express understanding
that the parties declare themselves willing, in accordancewith the operative paragraph 2 of the resolution,
to co-operate with me in the performance of my functions.

Member countries which I have previously had a great
experience of getting to know and appreciate.

accord~e les Gouvernements de I'lnde et du Pakistan.
Mon acceptation s'entend sous r6serve quelesparties
se d~clarent express6ment dispos~es, conform~ment
au paragraphe 2 du dispositif de la r~so~ution, a.
collaborer avec moi pour m'aider a.m'acquitterdema
mission.
82. Je suis, quant a moi, extremement heureux de
pouvoir rendre service - j'esp~re pouvoir le faire a. deux Etats Membres que j'ai d~ja. eu l'occasion de
bien connaJ.tre et de beaucoup appr~cier.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Frank P.
Graham, United Nations Representative for India and
Pakistan, took a place at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du Pr~sident, M. Frank P. Graham,
representant des Nations Unies pour l'Iride et le
Pakistan, prend place a. la table du Conseil.

83. Mr. GRAHAM (United Nations Representativefor
India and Pakistan): I wish, Mr. President, to give you
my co-operative and loyal good wishes for your most
important mission. I congratulate you on the opportunity to negotiate with the Governments of two great
peoples whom I not only respect, but, if I may say so,
have come to love for themselves-their history, their
heritage, their heroic struggles with gigantic problems
and yet, Withal, with a joyous and youthful hope.

83. M. GRAHAM (repr6sentant des Nations Unies pour
1'Inde et le Pakistan) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je voudrais,
Monsieur le President, vous assurer de mon devouement et vous exprimer mes vooux les plus sinc~res a.
l'occasion de la mission si importante dont vous etes
charg~. Je suis heureux pour vous que vous ayez
I' occasion de n~gocier avec les gouvernements de deux
grands peuples que non seulement je respecte, mais
encore - j'ose le dire - que j'ai appris a. aimer pour
leur histoire, leurs traditions, la mani~re Mrorque
dont ils luttent contre des difficult~sgigantesques sans
rien perdre de leur gaiet~, de leur jeunesse et de leur
optimisme.

84. I congratulate the Council on your acceptance of
this mission, Mr. President, for which you are by
ability, experience and disposition so eminently qualified and to which' you bring the prestige of the office
of President of the Security Council itself. Godspeed to
you on ~ ." mission, to the efforts of the Security
Council, ';0 the co-operation of the two Governments
with you and to the untiring work of an ably led and
dedicatea fl~cretariat, as they all work together and
stand fin.;. on the moral foundations of the life and
values of thl' United Nations in this time of hazard and
hope.

84. Je suis heureux aussl pour le Conseil que vous
ayez accept~ cette mission pour laquelle vous etes si
~minemment qualifi~ par votre comp~tence, votre
exp~rience et vos qualit~s; vous l'assumerez enoutre
avec tout le prestige que vous conf~re votre fC.lction
de pr~sident du Conseil de sdcurite. Je vous souhaite
bonne chance dans votre mission et je forme des
vooux pour que les efforts du Conseil de securibi,
votre collaboration avec les deux gouvernements
interess~s et le travail inlassable d'un Secretariat
d~vou~ et bien dirig~ portent leurs fruits. Tous tra- .
vaillent de concert et s'en tiennent fermement aux
fondements moraux de la vie et aux valeurs que representent les Nations Unies dans cette periodetroublee,
mais ouverte a. l'espoir, qui est la notre.

85. The Member States of the United Nations must
apply, with equal justice under the Charter, the principles of the United Nations to all nations, large or
small, friend or foe, east or west. Problems, situations, disputes, cases on the agenda of the United
Nations have their ups and downs and come and go, but
the United Nations goes on, deep in the minds and
hearts of the people as they do their day's work and
pray and hope, in the great adventure of building a
freer and fairer peaceful world for all peoples in all
lands.

85. Les Etats Membres doivent appliquer dquitablement, conformement a. la Charte, les principes de
l'Organisation des Nations Un:ies a. toutes les nations,
grandes ou petites, amies ou ennemies, qu'elles soient
a. l'est ou a. l'ouest. Les probl~mes,les situations, les
diff~rends, les questions inscrites a.l'ordre dujour des
organes des Nations Unies connaissent des sorts divers
et changeants, mals l'Organisation continue, profondement enracin~e dans l'esprit et dans le coour des
peuples qui s'acquittent de leur tache quotidienne tout
en priant et en faisant des vooux pour le succ~s de
cette grande entreprise qu'est l'edification d'un monde
pacifique plus libre et plus juste pour les hommes de
tous les pays.

86. The PRESIDENT: I want to thank Mr. Grahamfor
the kind and encouraging words which I have just heard
from him. I am very happY to know that I shall be able
to draw upon his great wisdom and experience in the
matter we have before us.

86. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je tiens a.
remercier M. Graham de ses bonneset r~confortantes
paroles. Je suis heureux de pouvoir compter dans
cette affaire sur son jugement et son experience.

87. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): As I said at
the previous meeting, the United Kingdom ardently
desires to see progress made towards a settlement of

87. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais): Comme je l'ai dit a. la prec~dente seance,
le Royaume-Uni desire ardemment que des progrAs

82. For my part, I am most happy to have this opportunity to serve, as I hope I will be able to do, two

15

the Kashmir problem. I am convinced that the resolution we have just adopted will contribute to this end.

soient r~alis~s vers un r~glement de la question du
Cachemire. Je suis convaincu que la r~solution que
nous venons ~'adopter y contribuera.

88. We have faith in the mission which you, Sir, are
undertaking. We have the fullest confidence in the
wisdom and experience which you bring to it. We have
confidence in the country from which you come, with
its traditions of peace and justice. We have confidence
in the authority of this Council which goes with you in
this task.

88. Nous croyons, Monsieur le Pr~sident, enl'utilit~
de la mission que vous allez entreprendre. Nous avons
la plus grande confiance dans la sagesse et l'exp~­
rience que vous y apportez. Nous avons confiance dans
le pays auquel vous appartenez, bien connu pour ses
traditions de paix et de justice. Nous avons confianee
dans l'autorit~ du Consell de s~eurit~, qui vous assistera dans l'ex~cution de votre mandat.

89. To aid you in your task, you will have the great
experience, wisdom and understanding of the United
Nations Representative for India and Pakistan, Mr.
Frank Graham. We have admired his uhtiring efforts
since he was appointed by this Council in 1951, his
patience and his skill in negotiation. It is a matter of
the deepest regret that all his painstaking toil, which
seemed at one time to hold so much promise for a
settlement, has not come to full fruition, but it has not
been without fruit, and the detailed experience that he
has acquired in his dealings with this matter has not
been in vain, for this experience is still able to contribute-indeed, I feel sure it will be an invaluable
contribution-to the mission which you, Sir, are undertaking under this resolution.

89. Pour vous aider it remplir votre tache, vous
pourrez faire appel ;l la grande exp~rience, it la
sagesse et itl'intelligence du repr~sentant des Nations
Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan, M. FrankP. Graham.
Nous avons admir~ les efforts inlassables quIll a
d~ploy~s depuis que le Conseill'a nomm~ en 1951, la
patience et l'habilet~ quIll d~ploie dans les n~go­
ciations. Nous regrettons profond~mentqueses efforts
et sa peine, qui;l un moment semblaientfaire entrevoir
un r~glement, n'aient pas abouti, maisilsn'ontcependant pas ~t~ inutiles, et les enseignements quIll a tir~s
de cette exp~rience, loin d'etre vains, peuvent encore
contribuer puissamment, j'en suis' certain, au succ~s
de la mission que cette r~solution vous confie, Monsieur le Pr~sident.

90. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): Mr.
President, the United States appreciates your Willingness to accept the assignment that the Security Council
has asked you to undertake. We hope that your understanding of the peoples of India and Pakistan and your
experience in the United Nations will enable you to
make some real progress towards solving this dispute.

90. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Am~rique) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Les Etats-Unis vous savent gr~, Monsieur
le Pr~sident, de bien vouloir accepter la mission que
le Consell de s~curit~ vous a confi~e. Nous esp~rons
que votre connaissance des peuples de l'lnde et du
Pakistan et l'exp~rience que vous avez acquise a.
l'Organisation vous permettront d'accomplir des progr~s r~els vers la solution de ce differend.
91. Nous pensons que la r~solution qui vient d'etre

91. We think that the resolution which has just been
.adopted will give you enough scope and enough guidance.
The consensus of the Council on the major problems
involved was expressed in the draft resolution [SI
3787] which failed at the 773rd meeting only because of
the Soviet veto. It would have been more satisfactory
if the specific ideas embodied in the four-Power draft
resolution could have been kept, but the resolution that
the Council has now adopted does not retreat from those
ideas. Nor are the facts changed by the Soviet veto.
You are authorized to consider any proposals which
might help solve the problem, having regard to the
pertinep.t resolutions. We trust that your mission will
be of great help to India and Pakistan as well as to the
Council.

adopt~e vous donne i\.lafois une latitude et des directi-

ves suffisantes. L'opinion quasi-unanime du Conseil
sur les principaux probl~mes qui se posent a ~t~
exprimee dans le projet de resolution qui n'a eJe
rejet~ ;lla 773~me s~ance qu'en raison du veto sovi~­
tique [S/3787]. Si les id~es exprim~es dans le projet
de r~solution des quatre puissances avaient pu etre
conserv~es, cela eut ~t~ pr~f~rable, mais la r~so­
lution que le Conseil vient d'adopter n'impliquenullement l'abandon de ces id~es. Le veto sovMtique ne
modifie en rien la situation. Vous etes autoris~ a.
examiner toutes propositions qui sont de nature a.
faciliter la solution du probl~me, compte tenu des
r~solutions pertinentes. Nous sommes surs que votre
mission aidera beaucoup l'lnde et le Pakistan, ainsi
que le Conseil.

92. The fact that you will be able to draw upon the
extensive experience and the ability of Mr. Frank P.
Graham-who, may I say, has just made a noteworthy
statement-should make it possible for you to function
effectively:in a short period. Mr. Graham will be able.
to make a contribution which, it seems to us, no one
else could make. The Council is lucky that he is
available to help, and we appreciate his offer of cooperation.

92. Vous pourrez MntUicier de l'exp~rience ~tendue
et des capacit~s de M. Frank P. Graham - qui, soit
dit en passant, vient de faire une d~claration remarquable - et cela devrait vous permettre d'arriver
rapidement ;l un r~sultat. M. Graham sera en mesure
de vous aider comme nul autre-, me semble-t-il, ne
pourrait le faire. Le Conseil se f~1icite de pouvoir
faire appel ;l lui, et nous le remercions du concours
quIll s'offre ;l nous preter.

93. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): The Philippine delegation would like to place '1n record its appreciation
that the President of the C "~'Yell has decided to accept

93. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit de l'anglais]:
La d~lt!gation des Philippines tient it remercier
expresst!ment le Pr~sident du Conseil d'avoir accept~

16

11""

,.

,.~,-,.~~-_

...

this delicate and difficult mission that has been entrusted to him. We wish him success and Godspeed.

la mission d~1icate et difficile qUi lui a ~t~ confi~e.
Tous nos vceux l'accompagnent.

94. My delegation also wishes to pay tribute to the
statesmanlike performance of Mr. Frank P. Graham,
who also addressed us this afternoon. We are deeply
indebted to him for his great devotion to duty, his
impartiality in weighing the facts as he found them and
the clear manner in which he has placed the issues
before us for our guidance and consideration. I am
confident that he has won the respect of both parties to
the Kashmir dispute, as well as the admiration of the
world. I have had the pleasure of going through his
reports and I am satisfied that he approached his task
with an eminently judicial mind and that his findings
constitute a fair and accurate basis for a judgement
in this case. In the name of my Government, I wish to
thank Mr. Graham for his fidelity to this most difficult
duty which the Council has assigned to him.

94. Ma d~l~gation souhaite ~galement rendre hommage ~ la maitrise des affaires politiques que p'ossMe
M. Frank P. Graham, qui a pris la parole ici cet apr~s­
midi. Nous lui sommes profond~ment reconnaissants
d'etre si d~vou~ ~ sa tache et de tout consid~rer avec
une objectivit~ remarquable; nous lui savons gr~ de la
lucidit~ avec laquelle il nous a expos~ le probl~me,
et qui nous en facilite l'examen. Je suis sur que
M. Graham a forc~ le respect des deux parties au
diff~rend du Cachemire, ainsi que l'admiration du
monde. J'ai eu le plaisir de lire ses rapports, et je
suis persuad~ qu'il a abord~ sa tache dans un esprit
~minemment objectif et que ses conclusions constituent
une base ~quitable et sure pour juger cette affaire. Au
nom de mon gouvernement, je tiens <\ remercier encore
M. Graham pour son d~vouement a la tache tr~s
difficile que le Conseil lui a assign~e.

95. Mr. WALKER (Australia): As one oftheco-sponof the resolution which the Security COl.mcil has
now adopted, I wish to associate myself with the remarks of the representatives of the United Kingdom and
the United States, to join in thanking Mr. Graham for
the inspiring statement he has just made before the
Council.

95. M. WALKER (Australie) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Je suis un des auteurs de la r~solution que le Conseil
de s~curit~ vient d'adopter et, a ce titre, je d~sire me
joindre aux repr~sentants du Royaume-Uni et des
Etats-Unis et remercier avec eux M. Graham de
l'expos~ d'une haute tenue qu'il vient de faire au
Conseil.

96. Finally, Mr. President, I wish to extend to you the
most sincere wishes of the Australian Government for
the success of your mission, a mission which interests
our country very closely indeed in view of our close
relations with India and Pakistan.

96. Je voudrais enfin, Monsieur le Pr~sident, vous
presenter les vooux tres since res que le Gouvernement australien forme pour le succ~s d'une mission
qui int~resse vivement notre pays, ~tant donn~ ses
relations ~troites avec l'Inde et le Pakistan.

The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

La s~ance est lev~e <\ 16 h. 40.

SOl'S

17

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA.AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard. A.M.P. Bldg., 50 Miller
St., North Sydney;
90 Queen St., Melbourne.
Melbourne University Press, Carlton N.3,
Victaria.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. Wiillerstorff, Markus Sittikusstrasse 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM·BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la Presse S.A.,
14.22, rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
W. H. Smith & Son, 71.75, boulevard
Adolphe·Max, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA.BOLlVIE
Libreria Selecciones, Casilla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL.BRESIL
Livraria Agir, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
and Belo Horizonte.
CAMBODIA.CAMBODGE
Papeterie-Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Por·
tail, 14, avenue Boulloche, Pnom·Penh.
CANADA
Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West,
Toronto.
CEYLON.CEYLAN
Lake House Bookshop, The Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P. O. Box
244, Colombo.
CHILE.CHILI
Editorial del Pacifico, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
Libreria Ivens, Casilla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA·COLOMBIE
Libreria America, Medellin.
Libreria Buchholz Galeria, Bogota.
Libreria Nacional Ltda., Barranquilla.
COSTA RICA.COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos, Apartado 1313, San
Jose.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'Reilly 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
~eskoslovensky Spisovatel, Narodnr Trida
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK·DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., Nllrregade 6,
Kllbenhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Librerra Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu·
dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
I.ibrerr" Cientifica, Guayaquil and Quito.
EL SALVADOR·SALVADOR
Manuel Navas y Cra., la. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 KeskuskaTu,
Helsinki.

FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY·ALLEMAGNE
R. Eisenschmidt, Kaiserstrasse 49, Frank·
furt/Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Haupstrasse 101, Berlin·
Schoneberg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wies·
baden.
W. E. Saarbach, Gereonstrasse 25.29,
Koln (22c).
GREEC!:·GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadion Street,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Economico Financiera, Edificio
Briz. Despacho 207, 6a Avenida 14·33,
Zona I, Guatemala City.
HAITI
Librairie "A la Caravelle", Boite postale
111.8, Port·au·Prince.
HONDURAS
Libreria Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG·HONG·KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE
Bokaverzlult Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INbIA·INDE
Orient longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, Ma.
dras and New Delhi.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Delhi and Calcutta.
1'. Varadachary & Co., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
"Gulty", 482, avenue Ferdowsi, Teheran.
IRAQ·IRAK
MackenzIe's Bookshop, Baghdad.
ISRAEL
Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35 Allenby
Road, Tel·Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Via
Gina Capponi 26, Firenze.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori·Nichome,
Nihonbashi, Tokyo.
LEBANON·L1BAN
Librairie Universelle, Beyrouth.
LIBERIA
J. Momolu Kamara, Monrovia.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
MEXICO·MEXIQUE
Editorial Hermes S.A., Ignacio Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
NETHERLANDS·PAYS·BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, "lange Voorhout
9, 's·Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE·ZELANDE
United Nations Association of New Zealand, C.P.O. lOll, Wellington.
NORWAY·NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kr. Au·
gustsgt. 7A, Oslo.

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales agents have
not yet been appointed may be sent to: Sales and Circulation
Section, United Nations, New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,
United Nations Office, Palais des NatiQns, Geneva, Switzerland.

Litho. in U.N.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co-operative Book Society,
Dacca, East Pakistan (and at Chittagong).
Publishers United Ltd., Lahore.
Thomas & Thomas, Karachi, 3.
PANAMA
Jose Menendez, Plaza de Arango, Pa·
nama.
PARAGUAY
Agencia de Librerias de Salvador Nizza,
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39.43, Asuncion.
PERU·PEROU
Libreria Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
lima and Arequipa.
PHILIPPINES.
- Alemar's Book Store, 749 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
livraria Rodrigues, 186 Rua Aurea, lisboa.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR
The City Book Store, Ltd., Winchester
House, Collyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
Libreria Bosch, 11 Ronda Universidad,
Barcelona.
libreria Mundi.Prensa, lagasca 38, Ma·
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A.S,
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND·SUISSE
librairie Payot S.A., lausanne, Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Road,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY.TURQUIE
librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi,
Beyoglu, Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA·
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE
librairie "la Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
Libraide Universelle, Damas.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stationery Office, 1'.0. Box 569,
london, S.E.l (and at H.M.S.O. shops).
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS.UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service, Colum·
bia University Press, 2960 Broadway,
New York 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoriales, Prof. H.
D'Elia, Av. 18 de Julio 1333, Monte·
video.
VENEZUELA
Libreria del Este, Av. Miranda, No. 52,
Edf. Galipan, Caracas.
VIET.NAM
Papeterie·Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Por·
tail, Boite postale 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA.YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalozba, ljubljana, Slovenla.
Drzavno
Preduzece,
Jugoslovenska
Knjiga.. Terazije 27/11, Beograd.
(58B2)

Les commondes et demandes de renseignements emanant de
pays oil iI n'exisfe pas encore de deposifaires peuvent etre
adressees Cl la Section des ventes et de la disfribution,
Organisation des Nations Unies, New·York (ftats·Unis d' Ame·
rique), ou Cl la Section des ventes, Organisation des Nations
Unies, Palais des Nations, Geneve (Suisse).

Price: $U.S. 0.20; 1/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 0.75
(or equivalent in other currencies)

3676 - May 1958 - 1,800
