S/PV.8191

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8191st meeting

Tuesday, 27 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05341 (E)
*1805341*

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging, Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): This
is my last briefing to the Council before my assignment
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen
comes to an end.
I began my assignment in April 2015, when Yemen
was already embroiled in a conflict that has gradually
destroyed its economy, health-care services, housing,
roads and schools — everything that Yemenis need in
order to live and prosper. The parties have maintained
the destructive pattern of zero-sum politics that has
plunged the country into more poverty and destruction.
The decision makers in the conflict perceive concessions
as weakness and dissent as a threat. Regrettably, they
have consistency taken irresponsible and provocative
actions that ignore the daily suffering of Yemenis
generated by this conflict.
The past two months have witnessed a renewed
and large-scale escalation of military confrontation in
Al-Hudaydah, Al-Jawf, Sana’a and Al-Bayda, as well
as areas along the Yemeni-Saudi border. The Houthis
continue to fire ballistic missiles into the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. Fighting in Taiz governorate has been
particularly bloody and destructive, while Aden and
the neighbouring governorates have been the scenes
of continuous clashes. During the latest outbreak of
2/21

27/02/2018

violence in the city on 28 January, dozens of people
were killed and hundreds more were injured. I reiterate
my call on all stakeholders in Aden to demonstrate
self-restraint and avoid any inflammatory speech. I
urge them to resolve their differences in a peaceful and
constructive manner through dialogue.
I am also seriously concerned about reports from
several humanitarian organizations on the recruitment
of thousands of child soldiers by all parties to the
conflict, which constitutes a flagrant violation of
children’s rights. While the reports indicate that all
warring parties have engaged in such practices, the
systematic recruitment of children by the Houthis
may have negative implications for the future of the
country. Parties must adhere to international law
and international humanitarian law. Any intentional
or direct attack on civilians or civilian objects is a
serious violation of international humanitarian law.
The parties must respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and ensure the access
of affected populations to humanitarian assistance.
As the conflict has deepened, the economic and
humanitarian crisis has deepened with it, making Yemen
the world’s largest man-made humanitarian crisis. John
Ging will brief the Council on that issue. Since 2015,
Yemen’s economy has shrunk by almost 40 per cent. In
2017, the value of the Yemeni rial dropped by more than
50 per cent. The decline of the currency and the related
sharp increase in prices have had a negatively affected
the economy and have thereby hampered the delivery
of basic supplies.
These factors have had a direct affect on the private
sector and the payment of salaries of the public-sector
employees. Undoubtedly, the non-payment of salaries
for more than a year constitutes a massive burden
on Yemeni citizens. Indeed, it has become clear that
revenues that should be contributing to salary payments,
maintaining basic services and stimulating the economy
are instead being used to fund the war. Moreover,
informal taxation and other forms of corruption are
flourishing, exacerbating the humanitarian situation.
These factors mean that Yemeni households are losing
their purchase power and access to basic services. Some
22.2 million Yemenis are now in need of some form of
humanitarian assistance, compared to 15.9 million in
March 2015.
In the context of these appalling and vast
humanitarian challenges, I welcome the generous
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

pledge of $1 billion by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates to support humanitarian
action and reconstruction in Yemen, as well as their
commitment to raising an additional $500 million from
other donors in the region. I hope that these initiatives
will materialize and that the funds pledged will be
disbursed as soon as possible so as to improve the
current precarious situation.
Yemeni women humanitarianave suffered some
of the worst effects of the conflict. The space for
women to exercise their rights is shrinking every day.
I have heard many Yemeni women saying that they
live in a big prison where their freedom of speech
is restricted. Those who speak up face the constant
threat of persecution and violent attempts to silence
them. However, despite these daily challenges, Yemeni
women are remarkably resilient and their inclusion in
the peace process is critical. The same applies to young
people in Yemen.
I would like to express my gratitude to the World
Bank for its innovative approach in Yemen, which is
unique to a country in conflict. The partnership between
my Office and the World Bank, in collaboration with
the United Nations country team, has contributed not
only to the alleviation of the suffering of some of the
most vulnerable families, but also to the long-term
preservation of Yemen’s institutions.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the
group of 18 Ambassadors with accreditation to Yemen
and the States that have hosted talks with the parties,
including Switzerland, Kuwait and Oman. During the
past few weeks, I have visited several countries of
the region, as well as the Gulf Cooperation Council
secretariat. They are fully aware of the importance of
a peaceful solution to this conflict in order to stabilize
the region and fight terrorism.
Over the past three years, and throughout my
continuous meetings with the parties, I have come
to believe that a solid foundation for an agreement
has been laid through the endorsement of the general
framework in Biel in 2015 and the discussions that
took place in Kuwait in 2016. Those who follow the
Yemen file closely will acknowledge that the United
Nations has spared no effort to help the Yemeni parties
reach a peaceful solution. During the course of my
interactions with the parties, we have discussed all
the details of a peace road map with a clear timeline,
taking into account the parties’ needs and challenges.

S/PV. 8191

Today, I would like to announce, for the first time, that
we were about to reach agreement on a peace proposal,
developed in consultation with the parties, but they
refused to sign at the last minute. By the end of the
consultations, it had become clear that the Houthis
were not prepared to make concessions on the proposed
security arrangements or even to go into details about
a comprehensive security plan. This has been a major
stumbling block towards reaching a negotiated solution.
We see daily reports of civilians dying of poverty,
hunger or illness, but we should not forget that many
politicians from all sides are profiting from this
conflict, from trading in arms to exploiting public
property for personal purposes. In their speeches, these
politicians may stir up strife to deepen the rift in the
Yemeni society; at other times, they declare pro-peace
positions, while in private they are indifferent to the
suffering of their people. Whoever wants peace offers
solutions, not excuses.
We have a peace road map for Yemen. The practical
suggestions to launch it and build confidence among
the parties have been agreed. The only part missing is
the commitment of parties to making concessions and
giving priority to the national interest. This is what
makes us doubtful of their real intention to end the war.
I wish the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
every success in his efforts, which I have no doubt will
benefit from his wide-ranging experience in diplomacy.
I hope that the road map will constitute a cornerstone
for moving forward and activating the peace process.
To conclude, let me offer a promise, convey my
thanks and issue an appeal.
I promise the Yemeni people that I will follow up
on the file with the concerned and share my experience
and knowledge of the Yemeni issue in any possible way
that will contribute to peace. I was in Yemen before
becoming a Special Envoy and I have experienced the
courage and manners of the people of Yemen. I will
follow the progress of the file until Yemen returns to
Yemen, even after the end of my assignment.
My thanks also go out to the members of the
Council and the international community for their
support to the United Nations-led mediation efforts
during the past three years, including the efforts of the
Gulf Cooperation Council.
The call goes to the Yemeni parties, who are
solely responsible for everything that is happening. I

18-053413/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

call on them to turn the page on this appalling war in
history of Yemen. The United Nations is facilitating the
path towards peace, and the international community
is creating a favourable environment for it. Only the
Yemeni decision-makers can stop the war and the
bloodshed. I repeat: only they can do that.
The regional scenario is replete with challenges,
political and sectarian disputes and economic pressures.
There is no doubt that the developments in recent months
in Yemen will reshuffle the political cards and change
some internal blocs, especially considering the pressure
and challenges encountered by the General People’s
Conference, in addition to the emergence of popular
calls from the south voicing their demands. I call on the
parties to cease hostilities and reactivate negotiations
aimed at a peaceful settlement. I urge them to allow
the culture of coexistence to prevail over the rhetoric
of war, so that Yemen becomes a beacon of light in the
Middle East and a model for peace and security where
men and women, young men and women, from the east
and the west and from the north and south participate
in decision-making.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: I provide this update to the Security
Council today on behalf of Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
After three years of conflict, conditions in Yemen
are catastrophic. A record 22.2 million people need
humanitarian assistance or protection, including
8.4 million people who are severely food-insecure.
About 400,000 children under the age of 5 are so
severely malnourished that they are 10 times likelier
to die without treatment than their healthy peers.
Approximately 2 million people remain displaced,
90 per cent of whom fled their homes more than a year
ago. Nearly 1.1 million are suspected of having cholera.
That has been reported since April 2017, in what
experts have called the world’s worst cholera outbreak.
An estimated 3 million women and girls are at risk of
gender-based violence.
Those figures represent an urgent call to action that
humanitarian workers, the vast majority of whom are
Yemeni citizens, are striving to answer. Working with
nearly 200 partners, the United Nations-coordinated
4/21

27/02/2018

response is making a tremendous difference for millions
of people across the country. In 2017, we progressively
increased the number of people receiving emergency
food assistance every month, from 3 million to more
than 7 million. We delivered enough medicine to health
facilities to treat 3.2 million people and conducted
1.5 million medical consultations. By maintaining
public water networks, we ensured access to drinking
water for 2 million people, in addition to trucking water
directly to nearly 1 million more of the most vulnerable
in December alone. The Famine Early Warning Systems
Network estimates that nine of Yemen’s 22 governorates
would be one step closer to famine, or worse, without
humanitarian assistance.
And yet people’s lives have continued to unravel.
Conflict has escalated significantly since November,
driving an estimated 100,000 people from their homes,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. More people are going
hungry, and famine remains a real threat. Although
cholera cases are in decline, the disease is not yet beaten
and is likely to rebound in the upcoming rainy season.
In the meantime, a diphtheria outbreak has emerged,
the first since 1982. Those are the consequences of a
man-made crisis that only a political solution can bring
to an end.
The most urgent task for all parties is to cease
hostilities and engage meaningfully with the United
Nations to achieve a lasting political settlement. In the
meantime, as noted by the Under-Secretary-General
and Emergency Relief Coordinator to the Council in
November, there are other areas where we need to see
immediate progress. Those priorities were conveyed to
the Governments of Yemen and Saudi Arabia, as well
as to the authorities in Sana’a, with assurances from
all parties that they would swiftly be implemented.
Therefore, allow me to update members on where
we stand.
The first issue concerns the resources needed for
an effective response. In January, the United Nations
and partners released the 2018 Yemen humanitarian
response plan, which requires $2.96 billion to assist
13.1 million people. Securing full funding for the plan
is a top priority, which is why the Emergency Relief
Coordinator allocated $50 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund at the beginning of the
year — the largest single allocation in its history. Later
in January, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
announced a generous joint pledge of $1 billion for Yemen,
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

including $930 million for the humanitarian response
plan. They also committed to raising $500 million from
other donors in the region. In discussions this month,
the Saudi and Emirati Governments confirmed that they
would transfer $930 million by 31 March and outlined
grant management terms very much in keeping with the
spirit of the “grand bargain”. Other donors have also
stepped forward. But even with the support announced
to date, the humanitarian response plan would remain
only about one-third funded. On 3 April, the SecretaryGeneral will convene a pledging conference in Geneva,
hosted by Sweden and Switzerland, where all donors
will have an opportunity to work together to provide
the resources needed for the response.
The second issue is humanitarian access into and
within the country, which all parties are required to
allow and facilitate under international humanitarian
law. Such access must be safe, rapid and unimpeded.
Access within Yemen — particularly in areas
controlled by the Sana’a authorities — has deteriorated.
Authorities in Sana’a continue to delay humanitarian
movements and to impose bureaucratic impediments
that interfere with humanitarian action. They include
long delays in customs clearance for essential supplies,
such as diphtheria treatment and fuel, ad hoc restrictions
on movements of humanitarian partners and refusal to
authorize humanitarian assessments. In recent weeks,
humanitarian staff have also been temporarily detained
without justification and their equipment confiscated
at checkpoints. In practice, those restrictions are often
eventually resolved through dialogue, but the time
lost represents an unacceptable delay for people who
need assistance. While the restrictions appear to have
intensified in recent months, we remain optimistic that
the Sana’a authorities may still honour the assurances
given to the Emergency Relief Coordinator during his
visit in October.
Access into Yemen has improved after the blockade
imposed by the Coalition came to an end in December.
United Nations flights and vessels have been travelling
as scheduled since 26 November, and regular
humanitarian staff rotations and cargo shipments have
mostly resumed. We have also received assurances that
there will be no further disruption to those services.
Today our main challenge in entering Yemen is the
Coalition policy to divert containerized cargo to
Aden, including relief items shipped in containers
aboard commercial vessels, which is often the most
cost-effective option. That policy creates delays and

S/PV. 8191

higher operating costs. Sana’a airport remains closed
to commercial traffic, thereby preventing thousands of
patients from travelling abroad to seek medical care.
We are hopeful that solutions can be found shortly.
The third issue is related to commercial imports.
Even before the crisis, Yemen imported about 90 per
cent of its staple food and nearly all medicine and
fuel. Maintaining the flow of commercial imports
through all ports is essential to people’s survival.
Most imports have historically arrived via Hudaydah,
which is the closest port to 70 per cent of people in
need. Disruptions to commercial import flows have
immediate consequences, including in food prices,
which are increasing, against the backdrop of the risk of
famine. In January 2018, a food basket was on average
55 per cent more expensive than before the escalation
of conflict in 2015.
Commercial food and fuel imports have only
partially recovered. One factor appears to be the lack
of confidence among commercial shippers. The number
of vessels seeking clearance to enter Hudaydah and
Saleef ports has halved since the blockade. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mission is an
effective system for screening imports bound for those
ports, and there have recently been efforts to strengthen
it further. Vessels cleared by that mechanism should
be able to proceed directly to port without additional
delays. Fuel imports are crucial for Yemen, including
for the operation of public water networks and medical
facilities. In January, United Nations agencies received
175,000 litres of fuel, provided by the Coalition, and
distributed it to 16 health centres and water networks
in the north and south. Such imports, which increase
the commercial and humanitarian fuel supply, as well
as other goods, must continue. For that to happen,
Hudaydah and Saleef ports must remain open without
time limits or other restrictions that may discourage
commercial shipping companies from serving them.
The last major issue where we had hoped to see
immediate progress relates to civil servant salary
payments. Since August 2016, 1.2 million public
employees and their families, or one quarter of the
entire population, have not received regular salaries.
Non-payment of salaries, including for approximately
30,000 health workers and 193,000 teachers, has
accelerated the decline in public services, as workers
seek alternative livelihoods. That has left families
struggling to make ends meet. The resulting collapse
in basic services has become a major driver of the

18-053415/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian crisis. The United Nations and its
partners cannot replace the public sector and, while
some salaries have reportedly been paid in the south,
regular salary payments must quickly resume across
the country.
Finally, it remains important to emphasize that
protection concerns remain at the centre of the response.
As mentioned, conflict has recently escalated, putting
civilians at even greater risk. All parties to the conflict
are obliged to take constant care to spare civilians and
civilian infrastructure in military operations. Yet we
continue to see civilian harm. Houthi-affiliated forces
continue to shell populated areas, often resulting in
civilian casualties. On 26 December, a Coalition air
strike on a market in Taizz killed at least 60 civilians,
including eight children, and wounded 32, including
six children.
There are many such examples on all sides of the
conflict. I call on all parties to uphold their obligations
and responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Likewise, I
urge Member States to take all possible steps to ensure
that the parties to the conflict comply with the law and
to support accountability for violations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ging
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, I would like
to thank our briefers for their updates on the situation
in Yemen. I also want to warmly thank Mr. Ismael Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his tireless efforts over the past
three years to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We recognize that it has been an incredibly challenging
task and we appreciate everything he has done to bring
the parties back the table and to create the conditions
for sustainable peace, often at great personal risk to
himself. I thank him on behalf of the United Kingdom.
I would also like to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Martin Griffiths as the new United Nations Special
Envoy. I pledge the United Kingdom’s full support for
his future efforts.
As we have just heard from the United Nations,
the conflict in Yemen has caused the world’s most
devastating humanitarian crisis. More than 22 million
people, more than three-quarters of the population,
are now in need of humanitarian assistance. Of those
6/21

27/02/2018

22 million people more than half require immediate
help to save or sustain life. They will not survive
unless they receive assistance. The United Kingdom
is committed to providing that assistance to the people
of Yemen. We are the second-largest donor the United
Nations Yemen appeal, and the third-largest donor to
the United Nations overall. We provided $286 million
to the appeal in the financial year 2017-2018. We also
continue to work hard in order to reach consensus on a
draft presidential statement from the Security Council
aimed at responding to the recent developments on
the ground.
Despite the devastating humanitarian situation, last
year’s appeal was only 70 per cent funded. This year, as
the situation deteriorates further, we have just heard that
the United Nations is requesting a record $2.96 billion.
The recent pledge made by Saudi Arabia and United
Arab Emirates to contribute $930 million to the 2018
appeal is very welcome, as is their commitment to
disburse it by the end of March. The upcoming pledging
conference, to be hosted by Sweden and Switzerland, is
also an opportunity to respond to the United Nations
appeal to help the starving people of Yemen. We call
upon all donors to answer this call and ensure that all
pledges are disbursed in a timely manner.
However, aid alone will not address the needs of
the Yemeni people. Imports of food, fuel and medicine
continue to remain well below levels of need. All parties
to the conflict must allow unhindered commercial
and humanitarian access throughout Yemen, which is
essential to avert the risk of mass starvation. All plans
and efforts to improve access are welcome. However,
that can be no substitute for full and unhindered
commercial and humanitarian access to the Red Sea
ports of Hudaydah and Saleef. Eighty per cent of
Yemen’s imports enter the country through those ports.
Other ports lack the necessary berthing, storage and
milling capacities, and it takes days to transport goods
by road across multiple conflict front lines to reach
those in need.
The ongoing conflict in Yemen has not only given
rise to the world’s largest humanitarian crisis, it has
also created ungoverned spaces in which terrorist can
operate, posed security threats to regional countries
and international shipping and fuelled regional
tensions. That is demonstrated by the ballistic missile
launches by the Houthis against civilian targets in
Saudi Arabia and their stated intention to launch
attacks against the United Arab Emirates and to block
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the Red Sea international shipping lane. We agree with
the Panel of Experts’ conclusion that missiles fired by
the Houthis — of Iranian origin and provided after the
imposition of the arms embargo — mean that Iran is in
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution 2216
(2015). We call upon Iran to cease all and any activity
that fuels the conflict in Yemen. Until an enduring
political settlement is reached, the sanctions regime is
a critical tool to deter those who would otherwise use
violence to achieve their political aims.
Humanitarian aid and access will provide only
temporary relief for the people of Yemen. Ultimately,
a political settlement is by far the best way to address
the humanitarian crisis and security threats emanating
from Yemen. We call upon all parties to engage
constructively with the incoming Special Envoy and to
abandon preconditions in order to restart the political
process. All members of the Council should employ
all of their influence over the parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Before I start, I
would like to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber
of the members of the Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands Parliament. Their attendance
today is a great honour for my delegation.
I would like to convey our particular gratitude to
Special Envoy Ismael Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his final
briefing to the Security Council, and especially for his
persistent efforts over the past three years in trying to
bring the parties together to solve this terrible conflict.
His words instil in us a powerful sense of urgency.
The human tragedy in Yemen, man-made and
entirely avoidable, is one of the largest food and health
crises the world has seen in decades. Today I will
focus on three issues, namely, the political process, the
humanitarian imperative and accountability.
First, regarding the political process, it is essential
that all parties seize this moment to turn the negative
trend of the past year around. As pointed out by the
Panel of Experts, there is a grave risk of fragmentation
in Yemen. If local grievances and regional divisions are
not addressed, a political agreement is unlikely to last.
Therefore, the political process must be an inclusive
one. It should include a broad range of Yemeni groups,
with the meaningful participation of women and youth.
That brings me to my second point, namely, the
humanitarian imperative. In the absence of a political

S/PV. 8191

settlement, we draw the Council’s attention to the
humanitarian crisis. The protection of civilians from the
armed conflict must be front and centre in our efforts.
We have consistently condemned all indiscriminate
attacks that have had a disastrous impact on the civilian
population, including the Houthi ballistic missiles
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The people of
Yemen suffer from the incessant fighting, and, as least
as much, from the lack of food, water, sanitation, fuel
and access to health care. Ensuring safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access is not an act of mercy, it is an
obligation under international law.
We welcome the positive steps that have been
taken, including the installation of cranes at Hudeydah
port and the generous pledge of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to the
humanitarian response plan. Nonetheless, further steps
are still needed, such as full and sustained access for
all humanitarian and commercial shipments to all of
Yemen’s ports and airports. The Yemeni people cannot
survive on humanitarian aid alone. Furthermore, all
parties should fully cooperate with the work of the
United Nations verification and inspection mechanism.
Fast clearing services for shipping companies
transporting commercial imports are pivotal. We call
on all member States to refrain from inspecting vessels
that have already been cleared by the mechanism.
We will continue to work with all our partners in
the Council to have those issues addressed in the
presidential statement to be made in the coming days.
Let me also take this opportunity to salute those
working both outside and inside of the country to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni population. The
humanitarian community works under very difficult
circumstances and it deserves our praise, gratitude
and support.
My third point is on the issue of accountability. In
recent months we have seen an increase in the number
of civilian casualties. The obligations of all parties
under international humanitarian law are very clear.
We once again urgently call on all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law. Together we
must foster adherence to the law. The Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen was mandated by the Human Rights
Council to carry out a comprehensive examination
of all alleged violations and abuses and to identify
those responsible. In that context, let me highlight
in particular the rampant gender-based violence, as
highlighted by Mr. Ging earlier. The Group of Experts

18-053417/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

has begun its work, and should receive full support and
access from all parties to fulfil its mandate.
In conclusion, we again demand meaningful
political negotiations, humanitarian access and respect
for the law. My Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sigrid
Kaag, recently visited the region. She raised concerns
about these persistent issues with all counterparts,
thereby demonstrating our long-standing commitment
to the Yemeni people. This year the Kingdom of the
Netherlands marks 40 years of bilateral development
cooperation with Yemen. We are long-standing
partners. Therefore, Yemen remains a priority for us,
both inside and outside of the Council.
My Minister also received encouraging messages
suggesting that many parties are eager to engage
with the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths.
We welcome his appointment and assure him of our
full support. Let us give him sufficient time to build
on the work already done, talk to the parties and put
forward his initial ideas. The Council should then
consider further concrete steps on how to support his
efforts. Only when the parties show the courage and
leadership to make the necessary compromises and put
the interests of the Yemeni people before their own will
a sustainable political solution be possible.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would like to warmly thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, for his excellent briefing, outstanding
work, exemplary commitment, tireless efforts and his
determination in spite of difficult challenges and risks
to his own life. I would like to convey my country’s
profound respect and gratitude for his efforts. I also
thank Mr. John Ging for his briefing, which again
underscored the extreme gravity of the situation.
I will focus my statement today on four main
points — the political and security stalemate in Yemen,
the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
the impact of the crisis on the region and the importance
of an urgent resumption of the political process.
The situation in Yemen has become increasingly
complex over recent years and weeks. Following the
assassination of former President Saleh, a coalition of
groups from the south of Yemen opposed to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour has assumed control
of the vast majority of Aden, where Government
headquarters is located. That recent development has
diminished the prospects for a political settlement, but
8/21

27/02/2018

should not serve to call into question the territorial
sovereignty of Yemen, to which we are all deeply
committed. There are several conflicts: between
the Government of President Hadi and the Houthis,
between the Houthis and the Arab coalition, between
the supporters of former President Saleh and the
Houthis, and between the groups from the south of
Yemen and the Government. Al-Qaida- and Da’eshaffiliated groups are also present and active as the
primary beneficiaries of the prevailing chaos.
The main victims of the many conflicts are civilians.
The Yemeni people are plagued by a humanitarian
disaster. Three quarters of the Yemeni people are in
need of assistance. More than 2 million of them are
displaced. More than 18 million are affected by food
insecurity and at risk of starvation. There is dearth of
basic necessities and health risks, such as diphtheria
and cholera, remain high, as was eloquently mentioned
earlier, at a time when health and medical infrastructure
has been crippled. Our priority must be to address
one of the worst crises in the world by delivering
comprehensive, secure, unimpeded humanitarian access
to the people affected in all Yemeni governorates. That
access must guaranteed and sustained. The coalition’s
humanitarian plan is an encouraging step forward and
should be commended. It is critical to ensure that it
be effective and delivered in full cooperation with the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations.
Financial assistance for the Yemeni Central Bank
is another step in the right direction in the light of
economic difficulties that have just been mentioned.
It is also essential that humanitarian and commercial
goods transit through all ports, including Hudeydah
and Saleef, and all airports, in particular Sana’a. The
blockade must be lifted again to enable the greatest
amount of predictability for humanitarian and
commercial actors. Inspection efforts conducted by the
United Nations verification and inspection mechanism
to ensure that cargo entering Yemen does not contain
goods that violate the embargo must continue. We
continue to emphatically condemn any attempt to divert
humanitarian assistance. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians must cease. International humanitarian law
must be fully respected. The crisis also has an impact
on security in the region. We are concerned about
the continued deterioration of regional stability and
security. Yesterday we voted on a technical roll-over
of the sanctions regime, which will enable the Panel of
Experts to continue their important work. However, we
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

regret that the Council was not able to agree on the first
draft resolution vote on (S/2018/156).
We have voiced our concerns about the conclusions
of the report of the Panel of Experts on Yemen issued
on 15 February and have repeatedly condemned the
ballistic-missile launches staged by the Houthis,
specifically against Saudi Arabia. As we mentioned
yesterday, France will remain galvanized on the
question of the transfer of technology and ballistic
material throughout the region in the months to come.
This is an issue that the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, will address in Tehran
during his visit on 5 March.
In this critical context, France’s demands are clear,
namely, a ceasefire and secure, comprehensive and
unfettered humanitarian access. This is not optional
but an obligation under international humanitarian law
that is binding on all parties, which we would stress
to all parties to the conflict. The more entrenched
the conflict becomes, the more evident it appears
that there can be no military solution in Yemen. The
appointment of the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Martin Griffiths, affords an opportunity
for all parties to meaningfully re-engage, without
preconditions, in the negotiations. We must continue
to convey to regional actors a clear message about the
importance of playing a responsible and constructive
role in Yemen; this is critical.
Our common goal must remain to arrive at a
lasting cessation of hostilities and to encourage the
parties to rekindle dialogue, with a view to arriving at
a comprehensive and inclusive political agreement in a
manner that respects the country’s territorial integrity.

S/PV. 8191

last three years. It is hard to imagine a more difficult
job. Let me also thank John for his sobering and frank
briefing on the humanitarian situation.
It has been almost three months since the Council
last met to discuss the situation in Yemen. This does
not reflect the urgency on the ground. Since we last
met, the violence has escalated, and civilian casualties
have continued to mount; the humanitarian situation
for ordinary Yemenis is deplorable and only getting
worse. This suffering stems first and foremost from
the conflict.
The Council’s current efforts are clearly insufficient
to meet our responsibility to alleviate the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis and to end this bloody
conflict, which is now in its fourth year. In recent
weeks, despite the well-known differences within the
Council’s membership, we have worked together to find
consensus on responding to the humanitarian situation
in Syria. It is now incumbent upon us to make the same
effort when it comes to Yemen.
Today I would like to focus on how we can step
up our efforts on both the humanitarian and political
situation in Yemen.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, we have just
heard from Mr. Ging what is needed to alleviate the
indescribable suffering of the 22 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance or protection.
First, the Council must strongly reiterate the call
for a durable cessation of hostilities that we made in our
presidential statement last June (S/PRST/2017/7).

In concluding, let me say that we hope that the
resumption of the political process will help to break
this disastrous deadlock. Let us be cautious, in this
context, to avoid creating divisions among us that could
have serious consequences. The unity and commitment
of the Security Council on this issue are prerequisites
to arrive at this necessary resumption of the political
process. France will continue to spare no effort to
achieve that end.

Secondly, we must demand that all parties fully
meet their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. This includes ensuring the
protection of civilians, including the most vulnerable,
by taking all precautions to avoid harm to civilians
and civilian infrastructure. All attacks on civilians,
including missile attacks by the Houthis, must be
strongly condemned. We are also worried about
reported attacks and threats against and the unlawful
detention of journalists and other persons promoting
freedom of expression.

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like
to begin by thanking the Special Envoy, Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, for his briefing to the Council today.
As this is his final briefing as Special Envoy, I would
like to acknowledge his determination, unwavering
commitment and indispensable optimism over these

Thirdly, we must help to ensure full and unhindered
access for humanitarian and commercial shipments. The
recent positive steps taken by the coalition, including
the resumption of humanitarian flights and the delivery
of cranes to Hudaydah, are welcome. It is now essential
to ensure that all of Yemen’s ports remain open and

18-053419/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

fully functional and that their capacities increase. We
call on all parties to refrain from any action that would
restrict the flow of life-saving food, medicine and fuel.
Fourthly, the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan needs to be fully funded in order to allow the
United Nations and its partners to respond to the
massive humanitarian needs. To that end, and as
has already been noted this morning, Sweden and
Switzerland, together with the United Nations, will
host the 2018 High-level Pledging Event for Yemen on
3 April in Geneva. We encourage all Member States to
participate and to pledge generously. We appreciate the
generous pledges already made by the coalition.
Finally, as we were able to do over the weekend
in response to the humanitarian situation in Syria, the
Council should speak clearly and set the standards for
responding to the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
We should now focus our efforts on uniting around
this task.
Moving to the political situation, the appointment of
a new Special Envoy offers an opportunity to relaunch
the political process. It is essential that the Council unite
in giving strong practical support to the new Special
Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to create the conditions
needed to seize this opportunity. Members of the
Council and regional actors must use all their influence
to ensure that the parties engage constructively with
Mr. Griffiths, his Office and the United Nations-led
process in good faith.
A political solution can be achieved only through
a broad and inclusive political process. We should
strive to help the Special Envoy to rekindle the initial
spirit of the National Dialogue Conference and insist
on meaningful political participation by a broad
range of Yemeni actors, including women, youth and
marginalized groups.
The situation in Yemen is desperate. Civilians live
in constant fear for their lives. It is high time that the
international community, including the Council, give
the situation the attention it deserves.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
First, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his tireless commitment
to resolving this conflict. The United States appreciates
his leadership and advocacy for peace and security,
especially his efforts on behalf of Yemeni women and
children, the most innocent victims of this conflict.
10/21

27/02/2018

We wish him all the best in his future endeavours and
appreciate his commitment to stay engaged in this issue.
We also thank John for his sober and sombre assessment
of the situation on the ground. We are grateful for
the work that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations agencies
are doing to alleviate human suffering in Yemen.
Now more than ever, it is critical that the United
Nations continue its work towards resolving the
situation in Yemen. Yemen is witness to the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis today, After three years of
brutal civil war, 75 per cent of the population is now
in need of humanitarian assistance. The most basic
Government services are missing in many parts of
the country. Houthi aggression, with the support of
Iran, threatens stability in the region, and terrorist
groups such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida have exploited
this opportunity to pursue their twisted agendas. Only
a political solution will provide the enduring peace
and stability that the people of Yemen deserve, so
we must do all we can to achieve that outcome. The
leadership of the United Nations is absolutely essential,
and the Council must give it full support to facilitate a
successful political process. But as we work towards a
political solution, it is imperative that we do everything
we can to ensure that the humanitarian needs of the
people of Yemen are met.
First, the people of Yemen must have access to
and be able to afford essential goods. Since Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed’s last briefing, we have been heartened
by the arrival of the four mobile World Food Programme
(WFP) cranes funded by the United States. Now that
they are in place at Hudaydah port, it is imperative
that we work to reduce the time to offload muchneeded supplies. The United States welcomes the
continued efforts by the Saudi-coalition to address the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, including a pledge to
provide $930 million by 31 March to the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations.
We will continue to coordinate with the Saudi-led
coalition, the United Nations, our international partners
and humanitarian organizations to refine the Yemen
comprehensive humanitarian operations plan, in order
to ensure that it is thorough and coordinated with the
international humanitarian response. The United States
has provided more than $760 million in lifesaving
humanitarian assistance since September 2016. We will
continue to do our part to fund those urgent needs, as
the United States always has. Similarly, we are pleased
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that the Saudi-led coalition has agreed to keep the port
of Hudaydah open to all commercial and humanitarian
goods, including fuel. The most efficient and effective
way to get food and fuel to those in need is through
that port. The United States will continue to work
with countries in the Saudi-led coalition to achieve
additional improvements in humanitarian access.
In addition to addressing Yemen’s humanitarian
concerns, however, we must also recognize the very real
security concerns of Saudi Arabia. As we discussed in
the Council yesterday (see S/PV.8190), it is incumbent
on the Council to directly address verifiable threats to
peace and security in the region, and the main culprit
behind them. As the Panel of Experts report (S/2018/68)
makes clear, Iran is violating the targeted arms
embargo laid out in resolution 2216 (2015). Specifically,
the Panel found that missiles fired by Yemen’s Houthi
rebels into Saudi Arabia last year were of Iranian origin
and introduced into Yemen after the imposition of the
targeted arms embargo.
We saw the Russian delegation wield a veto
yesterday to prevent the Yemen sanctions resolution
from including a mention of Iran’s activities in
Yemen. However, the evidence shows quite clearly that
ballistic missiles were Iranian in origin. Last month
in Washington, D.C., Council members saw at firsthand some of the evidence implicating Iran. Eleven
Council members agreed with us that such concerns
merited mention in the sanctions resolution, and
only two Council members voted against it. We will
continue to stand up and remind the Council that we
have an obligation to call out malign and destabilizing
behaviour whenever and wherever we see it. Iran cannot
violate Security Council sanctions with impunity. The
Council must hold accountable those that, like Iran,
violate sanctions, and ensure that Iranian military
technologies, ballistic missiles, waterborne improvised
explosive devices, sea mines, military unmanned
aerial vehicles and other weaponry are prevented from
reaching designated individuals and entities in Yemen.
Doing more to address the severe humanitarian
needs of the Yemeni people, while taking measures
to prevent the free flow of weaponry into Yemen, is
essential to paving the way for the political solution
that we all agree is necessary. We need to see genuine
engagement from the parties, and we are prepared to
support all efforts to that end. In that regard, we look
forward to working with the newly appointed Special
Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and hope that

S/PV. 8191

we will see real progress in 2018 towards a lasting and
peaceful solution to the conflict in Yemen.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed and Mr. John Ging for their briefings,
and we commend Mr. Ahmed for his work in his post
and his contribution, as well as his efforts to reach a
settlement to the conflict in Yemen. We also want to
thank the Permanent Representative of Peru for his
work as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
We felt it was important that yesterday we succeeded
in extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts on
Yemen in a largely technical and apolitical manner.
That has helped us preserve a window of opportunity
for further non-confrontational cooperation with the
aim of making progress towards a settlement in Yemen.
The Yemeni conflict is exceedingly difficult and
complicated. We must find ways to launch the peace
process without preconditions rather than looking
for scapegoats and creating the results desired for
geopolitical agendas.
We listened attentively Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed’s
analysis of recent events in Yemen, leaving us a singular
historical legacy of the attempts to establish a political
process. We hope the new Special Envoy will draw the
requisite conclusions from the work that has already
been done. We are obliged to conclude that so far we
have been unable to get an effective process going. At
the same time, the situation on the ground, particularly
on the humanitarian front, has all the appearances of
a disaster. The official statistics from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs suggest
that 22 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance, although in reality things are far worse.
Millions of Yemenis are starving. The country is in the
grip of cholera and diphtheria epidemics. The estimated
numbers of casualties of the conflict are more than
9,000 dead and 52,000 wounded. Some 1.5 million
Yemeni civil servants in the north and south have not
been paid for more than a year and a half.
We see and note the fact that a great deal is being
done to improve the humanitarian situation. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations, as well as
the individual contributions of a host of Member States,
including Yemen’s closest neighbours, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates. However, the characteristics
of such regional conflicts lead us to believe that

18-0534111/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian assistance alone cannot deliver viable
long-term solutions. It is essential to immediately shift
the current situation onto a track leading to political
dialogue. In this critical situation, it will be important
for the United Nations to have a clear plan for further
action. Martin Griffiths, the new Special Envoy, will
have a key role to play in that, and we wish him every
success. We hope that in his consultations with all the
parties to the conflict he can come up with a plan of
action and present it to the Council in his next report.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
for his briefing. We thank and commend him for his
hard work. We would also like to affirm our support
to the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, whose
task will be focused on bringing together the parties and
reaching a political solution to the conflict. I would also
like to thank Mr. John Ging for his detailed briefing on
this critical situation.
We are once again driven to lament the fact
that, despite the Security Council’s repeated calls
to the parties to resume a political dialogue, as well
as the tireless efforts of the international community
to mitigate the severe humanitarian crisis that is
overwhelming Yemen, we are again witnessing a
dangerous escalation in armed clashes, with a high
humanitarian cost. It is deeply regrettable that the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/7) adopted on
15 June 2017 by the Security Council, which calls
on the parties to commit to guaranteeing immediate
and unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance,
agreeing to a ceasefire and initiating dialogue with a
view to reaching a political solution to the conflict, has
been completely ignored and violated by the parties.
There is evidence for that in the alarming increase in
violence in Hudaydah governorate, which has caused
the displacement of more than 14,000 families since the
beginning of this year, now unfortunately added to the
more than 85,000 people who have been forced to leave
their homes since December 2017, leading to a total of
more than 2 million internally displaced persons today.
Furthermore, the reports from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs say that the
road that links the people of Al-Jarrahi and Hays in
Hudaydah governorate is blocked, and other reports
state that anti-personnel mines may have been planted
along it. That situation constitutes an imminent threat
12/21

27/02/2018

to the civilian population travelling along it or using
it to flee the clashes, as well as to convoys delivering
humanitarian assistance that rely on it.
The worrying increase in bellicose language and
activities have created a highly precarious situation
in Yemen, putting more than three fourths of the
population in need of urgent humanitarian assistance
just to survive. It is essential to ensure and to facilitate
access for, and the free movement of, cooperation and
humanitarian aid agencies to provide the assistance
and medical care needed to deal with the outbreak of
cholera in 22 of the 23 governorates, which, according
to the briefing that we have just received, has infected
more than 1 million people and caused more than 2,200
deaths. In addition to that, there is the dangerous spread
of diphtheria, which, according to the World Health
Organization report of 10 February of this year, has
led to more than 1,000 suspected cases and 64 deaths
linked to the disease.
In that context, we are concerned about the reports
of the precarious situation in which health-care centres
must operate, such as the Hays hospital, the main
health-care centre of Hudaydah governorate, which
has not functioned since 10 December, when it was
seriously damaged by aerial bombardments.
Bolivia echoes the statement of the SecretaryGeneral on 3 December calling on the parties to restore
access to all ports and to re-establish the entry of the
imports on which the lives of 22 million people, who
urgently need some kind of humanitarian assistance,
depend. The Security Council must be clear when
calling on all parties to ensure the full and continuous
operation of all ports, airports and their access roads, in
particular to Hudaydah and Saleef seaports and Sana’a
airport. The parties must also be urged to comply with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).
For all those reasons, we reiterate our call for the
Council to maintain a unanimous and firm stance
in condemning the belligerent acts and campaigns
that exacerbate the crisis in Yemen and give rise to
a dangerous instability that threatens the lives of
the 27 million innocent people living in the country.
We call on the States and international actors with
influence on the parties and stakeholders involved to
exercise their good offices to prevent the crisis from
becoming the greatest failure of the Organization since
its establishment.
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to express
my gratitude to Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Yemen,
for his comprehensive briefing and his efforts in
supporting Yemen’s return to a peaceful political
transition. I appreciate the very objective briefing
by Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Allow me to
share our observations.
Poland is deeply concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the disastrous humanitarian situation
in Yemen, where a record number of 22 million people
are currently in need of humanitarian assistance. Swift
and decisive actions are required in order to put an
end to the worst man-made humanitarian disaster. The
continued flow of food, fuel and medical supplies must
be guaranteed and the continuity of imports must be
ensured. To that end, it is paramount that all Yemeni
ports remain permanently open to both humanitarian
and commercial shipments. We therefore urge all actors
to comply fully with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to end administrative obstacles
to the delivery of humanitarian and commercial goods.
Poland welcomes the United Nations 2018
humanitarian response plan for Yemen, as well as the
pledge by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
to support humanitarian action in Yemen. We call for
the quick implementation of that initiative in order to
improve the living conditions of the Yemeni people.
We are gravely alarmed by the recent upsurge in
violence in Yemen, especially in Taiz and Hudaydah
governorates, which has resulted in an increase in
civilian casualties and the further displacement of
thousands of Yemeni citizens, who have been forced
to flee their homes. We call on all parties to cease
attacks against civilians as well as the indiscriminate
use of weapons in populated areas, which continues
to exacerbate the humanitarian situation. Under
international humanitarian law, all parties are obliged
to ensure the protection of civilians. Furthermore,
we would like to stress the need for a firm and swift
response to deal with all violations of human rights in
Yemen committed by any party involved in the conflict.
We consider any such action to be a clear violation of
international law.
We strongly believe that there will be no significant
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation

S/PV. 8191

in Yemen until a long-term political solution to the
conflict is reached. We therefore strongly support
the resumption of the United Nations-facilitated
intra-Yemeni inclusive political process with the full
participation of all relevant parties and stakeholders, as
well as all sectors of Yemeni society, including women
and young people.
We look forward to the assumption by Mr. Martin
Griffiths of his post as the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Yemen. We call on all parties
to engage constructively with him in good faith and
without preconditions. We also call on the parties
to agree on the modalities for a durable cessation
of hostilities.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
We greatly appreciate his service and tireless efforts to
bring about a diplomatic solution to the Yemeni crisis.
He was entrusted with a very difficult, complex and
challenging task. I would add that we believe that he
did his utmost to discharge his responsibilities with
courage and commitment. We also thank Director John
Ging for his briefing, and we reiterate our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
their dedicated and selfless service to provide aid under
the extremely difficult circumstances in Yemen. We
appreciate the update that we received.
The multifaceted crisis in Yemen continues to
be a source of grave concern. After three years of
devastating war, it is deeply worrying that, as a State,
Yemen has all but ceased to exist, as the Panel of Experts
on Yemen stated in its final report (see S/2018/68). That
is something that one finds very painful and that leaves
one numb — a State virtually disappearing when it
would have been possible to prevent it. Perhaps it is
not too late, and we believe that it is not. The claim
that the State has all but ceased to exist may be a
slight exaggeration.
All the same, the escalation of military activities
continues unabated, claiming the lives of civilians and
resulting in the destruction of civilian facilities. The
territorial integrity of Yemen is yet to have an effective
custodian. Furthermore, it is deeply disturbing that
there is not any progress towards a peaceful political
settlement of the conflict. Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
have not hesitated to exploit the crisis, continuing their
attacks, including the most recent suicide bomb attacks

18-0534113/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

on Saturday, with the ultimate goal of acquiring and
governing territory.
We are concerned that that is threatening the
security of the region and beyond, including the Horn
of Africa. The deep-rooted and multifaceted crisis in
Yemen demands an urgent and comprehensive political
solution that addresses both the suffering of Yemenis
as well as the concerns of the countries of the region.
Given the catastrophic situation in Yemen and its
spillover effects in the region and beyond, we stress
the primacy of diplomacy in order to find durable
political solutions, while respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yemen. We therefore reiterate
our position that the Yemeni crisis can be resolved only
through a comprehensive political solution. We support
the diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, and we urge
the parties to cease hostilities and resume political talks
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the new Special Envoy. We call on all parties to seize
this opportunity to engage with the newly appointed
Special Envoy to reinvigorate the political process.
As Director Ging stated, we are also deeply
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian crisis.
The country is on the verge of famine. The devastating
conflict has turned Yemen into the worst humanitarian
crisis of our time wherein we have witnessed one of the
worst cholera outbreaks in recent times. The economic
crisis is worsening with the likelihood of the collapse
of the Yemeni banking and financial system. Public
services, including the health and educational systems,
are collapsing. In addition, access to the effective
delivery of humanitarian and commercial supplies
remains a major challenge.
It is not necessary to say more concerning the
painful challenge than what Director Ging has
already said, for which we are grateful to him. The
international community should continue to support
the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its
partners in a coordinated manner. In that regard, we
encourage donors to extend their generous support
in financing the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan, which requires $2.96 billion. Accordingly, we
hope that the 2018 pledging conference to be held in
Geneva in April will be successful. Furthermore, to
provide life-saving aid to all Yemenis who are facing
unprecedented needs, regular, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access is critical. The protection of
civilians and civilian facilities also remains imperative.
14/21

27/02/2018

Lastly, we hope that the Council will reach a
consensus on the draft Yemeni presidential statement,
which, we believe, would send a unified message in
support for the people of Yemen at this very critical
time, but this is a man-made humanitarian tragedy,
as has already been said. A quick resolution will be
possible if there is a political will on the part of all. We
are hopeful that the latter will be forthcoming before
all is lost.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this
meeting on Yemen, which allows the Security Council
once again to discuss the serious crisis that has been
raging in the country over the past several years.
First of all, my country thanks Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging, Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for their excellent briefings, as well as
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, in his capacity as
Chair of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) for the work that he is doing.
I will centre my statement on two points: the
political process and the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. As we can see, the political process in Yemen
is currently at an impasse that has been the source of
concern and a call to action for the entire international
community for more than a year. The parties to the
conflict continue to clash, and the prospects for a
political settlement are becoming increasingly remote,
thereby running the risk that Yemen will become a
failed State, to the detriment of its people, who ask only
to live in peace and in the pursuit of happiness, like
other peoples throughout the world. Concerning that
escalation, which is jeopardizing the stability of the
entire region, Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties to reach
an immediate cessation of hostilities and commit in a
meaningful way to a political settlement of the crisis.
It is up to the Yemeni parties to realize the tragedy
that their country is undergoing and take ownership of
the political process through an inclusive and sincere
dialogue, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, with a view to
peacefully resolving the crisis. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire commends the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to Yemen in the framework of
consultations with the Yemeni parties, aimed at giving
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

new impetus to the political dialogue in that country.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the commitment of the parties
to the conflict to taking part in the forthcoming
peace talks in Muscat, and urges them to participate
meaningfully and in good faith in those talks.
Côte d’Ivoire also remains concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Indeed,
with more than 22 million people in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance, the situation in the country
appears to be one of the worst humanitarian crises in the
world, and the number of internally displaced persons
continues to rise. We are being told that approximately
2 million children — and, I might add, women — are
suffering from malnutrition. The dramatic worsening
of the humanitarian situation is a direct result of the
political, security and economic instability that Yemen
has experienced for more than three years. Côte
d’Ivoire calls on the parties to the conflict to reach
a ceasefire that would ensure the unhindered flow
of humanitarian assistance pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
My country urges the international community
to take appropriate measures to prevent the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Côte
d’Ivoire accordingly welcomes the reopening by the
Arab coalition of the various ports, thereby allowing
for the delivery of food and enabling all forms of
humanitarian activity. My country requests that the
coalition do more insofar as it remains possible.
Moreover, the Ivorian delegation also welcomes the
United Nations launch of the Yemen 2018 humanitarian
response plan, to which the generous contributions of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are to be
commended, and calls on other donors to contribute to
funding the programme so as to meet the needs of the
Yemeni people.
Concerning violations and abuses committed by
the parties to the conflict, the gravity of which the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General underscored
earlier, my country calls for an immediate halt to such
violations and urges the parties present to facilitate the
mission of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen,
established by the United Nations Human Rights
Council in September 2017 under the provisions of
international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire thanks Special Envoy
of the Secretary General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed
for his tireless efforts to resolve the crisis in Yemen

S/PV. 8191

and commends him for the outstanding work that he has
been able to accomplish. At the same time, it welcomes
the appointment of the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, to whom it wishes him every success in the
accomplishment of his mission and assures him of its
full cooperation.
In order for all the good we wish for Yemen to
occur, the Council will have to work as one with a
single objective in mind: to put an end to the conflict
in that country.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We wish to begin our statement by welcoming and
paying special tribute to the efforts of Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, who has performed his role with great
responsibility, prudence and perseverance in extremely
difficult circumstances. We also thank Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for his precise yet broad
overview of the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Peru is dismayed by the humanitarian situation in
Yemen and considers it urgent to reach an inclusive
political solution to the conflict. After more than three
years of violence and pain, in which none of the warring
parties has achieved military or territorial gains, it is
clear that there is no military solution. We therefore
consider it essential that the new Special Envoy,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, be able to count on the strong
support of the Security Council and on the assistance
required for the complex task of re-establishing dialogue
among all parties involved so as to resolve the conflict.
That will require a major coordination effort between
the Council and those countries with the capacity to
influence the warring parties, based on a cautious
and balanced approach to developments in Yemen.
In that spirit, we strongly condemn the violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
Yemen attributable to the various actors involved in
the conflict. These must be properly investigated, and
those responsible must not go unpunished.
It is imperative that the Council remain united
and consistent in assuming its responsibility to
protect civilian populations in all humanitarian crises,
wherever they occur, in line with international law and
international humanitarian law. In this regard, we must
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches the more

18-0534115/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

than 22 million Yemenis who need it. The humanitarian
crisis must be addressed immediately, in parallel with
and independently of the political process, which
implies the permanent opening of ports, especially
Al-Hudeydah, as Yemen is a country completely
dependent on the importation of food, medicine and
other goods, as well as the opening of Sana’a airport
for commercial flights and emergency medical
evacuations, among other urgent measures. It also calls
for the cessation of all barriers to assistance, threats to
humanitarian workers in the course of their work, and
the establishment of conditions that seek to impose the
place and manner in which aid is distributed. We hope
that these points and others relating to the humanitarian
field will be agreed upon in the presidential declaration
which is currently being negotiated and which we hope
to adopt as soon as possible.
We would like to express our support for the United
Nations 2018 Yemen humanitarian response plan, and
welcome the announcements of significant contributions
from members of the coalition, in particular Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which are
expected to be channelled through the response plan,
as well as other donors. We also welcome the renewal of
Yemen’s sanctions regime, whose 2140 Committee we
have the honour to chair. We therefore believe that it is
important to deter and restrict the ability of individuals
or entities that threaten peace, security and stability and
to contribute to the achievement of a political solution
in Yemen.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to join
others in thanking Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Sheikh Ahmed,
and Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for
their updates.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
the committed efforts of OCHA and other humanitarian
organizations aimed at easing the suffering of Yemeni
people in such difficult and challenging circumstances.
Since this is Ismail’s last briefing, my delegation wishes
to sincerely thank for him for his dedication to his work
and for his contributions to finding a way to resolve the
protracted crisis in Yemen. We wish him every success
in his future endeavours. We welcome the appointment
of the incoming Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
and stand ready to extend our full support to him and
his mission.
16/21

27/02/2018

We are alarmed by the continued dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. It is necessary to increase the
humanitarian response and provide unhindered access
to all areas of the country, in compliance with the rules of
international humanitarian law. We therefore welcome
the decision of the coalition to keep all Yemeni ground,
air and sea ports open, in order to allow the flow of
supplies in and out of the country. In such critical
conditions, it is important that the United Nations
engage with all interested parties to have a clear plan
for further action to ease the humanitarian situation
and reach a comprehensive political settlement.
We welcome the United Nations 2018 Yemen
humanitarian
response
plan,
which
requires
$2.96 billion to assist more than 13 million people. We
express our appreciation to the Governments of Sweden
and Switzerland, together with the United Nations to
host a pledging conference for Yemen in Geneva in
April. We also express our appreciation for the pledge
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates to contribute nearly $1 billion to the
United Nations response plan and their commitments to
raising an additional $500 million from others donors
in the region. We welcome the delivery, with the help
of the United States, of four World Food Programme
cranes to Al-Hudaydah, as well as plans to install four
additional cranes in other ports.
Humanitarian aid may provide a temporary solution
but can never compensate for the absence of a fully
and adequately functioning Government. Efforts are
therefore necessary to settle the intra-Yemeni tensions.
To avoid further deterioration, all sides must demonstrate
sincerity and flexibility so as to adequately resolve the
complex issues of withdrawal of forces, disarmament
and the formation of a Government of National Unity.
We are confident that only a political settlement will be
able to end this human-made crisis, and we call on all
States that have influence on the parties to the conflict
to make every effort to end the hostilities through
inclusive and comprehensive dialogue and negotiations.
In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2402 (2018) yesterday (see S/PV.8190),
which renewed the sanctions regime until 26 February
2019 and extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts
until 28 March 2019, in order to allow the Council
and the international community to work further on
the conflict.
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Envoy Ismail Ould Sheikh Ahmed and
Director John Ging for their briefings. I wish especially
to thank Special Envoy Ahmed for the unrelenting
efforts he has made over the past three years to
facilitate the political process in Yemen. He has been
fulfilling a daunting task in difficult circumstances and
his efforts have been apparent to everyone. We note our
highest regard for him and wish him every success in
his future endeavours.
The situation in Yemen further deteriorated of
late. The political process is stalled, military conflict
continues, and the humanitarian crisis has deepened.
China finds the current situation disturbing and calls
on the international community to step up mediation
efforts, encourage the parties to agree on a ceasefire,
return to the political track and achieve peace, security
and stability at an early date.
China welcomed the Council’s unanimous adoption
yesterday of resolution 2402 (2018), renewing the
mandate of the Yemen sanctions regime and its Panel
of Experts for another year, which should facilitate the
international community’s efforts to promote peace,
and which is consonant with the interests of Yemen and
the other countries of the region. China has consistently
held an objective and impartial position on Yemen,
with no self-interested motives. We support Yemen’s
unity, sovereignty, security and territorial integrity,
and we believe that a political settlement is the only
way for it to achieve lasting peace. We call on the
parties to support the mediation efforts of the United
Nations and — based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, and the outcome
documents of the National Dialogue Conference — to
find an inclusive solution as soon as possible through
dialogue and negotiations.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin
Griffiths as the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and hope that all the parties will support his
mediation work and step up their efforts to promote
peace talks. We urge them to break the political
stalemate as soon as possible and to return to dialogue
and negotiations to resolve their differences. The
international community and the countries of the region
should provide constructive assistance in that regard.
China has noted the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. With the ongoing cholera outbreak

S/PV. 8191

and millions of Yemenis facing the imminent threat of
a serious famine, we fear for the country’s suffering
people. The international community should increase
its humanitarian assistance with a view to alleviating
the suffering on the ground. We will continue to
provide the Yemeni people with aid to the extent we are
able, through both bilateral and multilateral channels.
Ensuring unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
will be crucial to alleviating the situation on the ground.
The parties concerned should make concerted efforts
to provide safe, secure and unhindered humanitarian
access in order to help create the conditions needed to
ease the humanitarian situation on the ground.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to begin this statement by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report, which
we were briefed on this morning by Special Envoy
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who for almost three years
has spared no effort in working to find a solution to
the serious and devastating crisis in Yemen. We thank
and commend him for his noble work. He is leaving his
job with his head held high, after working diligently
to fulfil the task he was entrusted with. We also thank
Mr. John Ging for his similarly informative briefing as
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. Both his and Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed’s reports described an extremely serious
situation on the humanitarian, political and social fronts.
Equatorial Guinea is very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for your excellent stewardship of the
Council and for ensuring that the Council’s work has
been carried out to everyone’s satisfaction, one tangible
proof of which was yesterday’s adoption of resolution
2402 (2018), one of the two resolutions we adopted
yesterday, which will ensure continued dialogue
between all the active political forces in Yemen, in
accordance with previous Council resolutions. We
firmly believe that the new resolution will make it
possible for the international community to achieve
its objectives in the tragic political and humanitarian
situation that Yemen is currently enduring.
In our view, it is the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the maintenance of international
peace and security — which is the chief task of the
Security Council — that we must take into account
if we are to achieve the purposes and objectives of
today’s resolution, with the aim of resolving the current
chaotic situation in Yemen in the areas of peace and

18-0534117/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

security, humanitarian issues and sustainable human
development in its broadest sense. It is urgent that
we take action with the support of the international
community and in accordance with Security Council
rules, in order to provide an appropriate and sustainable
response to the conflict in Yemen, which is likely to
continue doing enormous material and human damage
to its people.
We have seen from the most recent report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2018/68) that the humanitarian
situation in Yemen is devastating, and that is why we
hope that with the adoption of the resolution submitted
by the Russian Federation yesterday, we can achieve the
satisfactory outcome so long desired by every member
of the Council, since the continuing current situation
only encourages the terrorist groups that have sprung
up all over the country. We call on Yemen and its allies
to comply with the resolution with a view to ending
the country’s humanitarian crisis and alleviating the
economic, social and cultural problems facing the
people of Yemen. We commend Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates for their significant support in
that regard.
Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges
Member States to comply strictly with the arms embargo
outlined in resolution 2216 (2015) and to refrain from
creating obstacles to Yemen’s access to humanitarian
assistance, where more than 20 million people are
suffering from critical deprivation. In conclusion, we
call on the parties involved in the conflict to resume
the political process with a view to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis and the war’s severely damaging
impact on the civilian population, as described in
today’s briefings.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings this morning.
The recent developments on the security and
political fronts in Yemen are very worrying and
have exacerbated the situation and the stalemate in
the political process, which is the result of the clear
obstinacy of one of the parties to the conflict, the
Houthis, who have refused to engage with the United
18/21

27/02/2018

Nations efforts to end the crisis or even to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The State of Kuwait reaffirms the fact that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
The only way to settle the conflict is through
dialogue and a political solution that must be based
on the three reference points agreed on — the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome document of the National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015), which
is one of the basic pillars for resolving the crisis
in Yemen.
Historically, Kuwait has worked since the 1970s
as a mediator to bring its brothers in Yemen closer
together. In 2016, Kuwait spent more than 100 days
hosting peace talks between the Yemeni parties under
the auspices of the United Nations, in an effort to
achieve a peaceful settlement to the conflict, based
on the three reference points that constituted a road
map. We made those efforts because we hope to see the
brotherly nation of Yemen enjoy stability and to prevent
bloodshed among its people. Everybody, including the
parties to the conflict, considered the peace talks that
took place in Kuwait a historic opportunity for our
brothers in Yemen to bring an end to the conflict.
There is another aspect of the crisis that should the
Security Council should focus on. We all know about
the Houthis’ firing of ballistic missiles at our brother
country Saudi Arabia.
By 5 February, 95 missiles had already been
launched against Saudi Arabia. Kuwait condemns in
the strongest terms the launching of ballistic missiles
by the Houthis against Saudi Arabia, as well as their
alleged attacks on the United Arab Emirates. This is
a dangerous development that threatens regional peace
and security, challenges the will of the international
community and undermines efforts to reach the aspired
political solution to the crisis. We also affirm Kuwait’s
full support for our brothers in Saudi Arabia and for all
the measures taken by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to safeguard its security and stability. In that context,
we underscore that the Security Council cannot accept
a non-State actor threatening a sovereign State by
launching missiles that endanger the stability and
security of the region. Those rocket attacks must be
condemned every time they occur.
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The security of seaways is also important and we
cannot be complacent in dealing with them. A clear
message must be sent that attacking or threatening
to attack vessels or mining the Mandeb Strait and
the Red Sea is absolutely unacceptable. This must be
condemned as well.
At the humanitarian level, it is important for us to
do more to alleviate humanitarian conditions for the
people of Yemen. In Kuwait, we are well aware of that
humanitarian aspect. We participated in the donor’s
conference held in Geneva in April 2017, where we
committed to providing approximately $100 million
in humanitarian assistance. Countries of the coalition
to restore legitimacy in Yemen are continuing to make
efforts to reduce the suffering of the Yemeni people. On
22 January, the coalition announced a comprehensive
plan of humanitarian operations in Yemen, which
was hailed by Secretary-General Guterres and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock. The plan includes a
generous contribution from Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates amounting to $1 billion in
humanitarian aid, amounting to nearly one-third of
the entire 2018 United Nations appeal for assistance
in Yemen. We hope that the coalition will be able to
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground by
the end of 2018.

S/PV. 8191

salutations to the brotherly people of Kuwait on the
occasion of their national day.
I would like to express our sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We thank him for
the great efforts he has made throughout his tenure of
almost three years with a view to resolving the Yemeni
crisis that was created by the Houthi coup in Yemen.
The coup has destroyed Yemen’s capacities and has set
it back hundreds of years.
I also take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Government of Yemen, to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to appoint Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the new Special Envoy for Yemen. We look forward to
working with him in the same constructive spirit and
flexibility that we have shown thus far, in order to reach
a lasting peace in my country, Yemen, that would put an
end to the state of absolute annihilation and to the war
that the Houthis have been waging against our people
since September 2014.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

On 16 February, and upon the instructions of my
Government, I sent a letter to the Secretary-General
in which I noted the important and sensitive historic
moment that coincides with his appointment of a new
Envoy. In that letter, I expressed the readiness of our
Government to work with him in accordance with the
terms of reference agreed upon by the Yemeni people,
which have enjoyed the support of the international
community. Those terms of reference are the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive national
dialogue that was supervised by the United Nations
throughout 2013 and resulted in a reconciliation
document reflecting the aspirations of all factions of
Yemeni society. It is also in line with the relevant Council
resolutions pertaining to Yemen, especially resolution
2216 (2015), which lays the necessary groundwork for
resolving the conflict in Yemen and is a reflection of
the Council’s understanding of the fundamentals of the
problem in Yemen.

Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month as it draws to a close. I commend your
wise stewardship of the Council’s proceedings and
thank you kindly for giving us the opportunity to speak
before the Council. Moreover, I would be remiss if I
did not convey our most heartfelt congratulations and

As the members of the Council understand, no
sovereign State can accept the presence of armed
militias like the Iranian Hizbullah within its territory,
controlling part of it and using violence and heavy
weaponry to hijack the State and forcefully impose their
own agenda. Moreover, they are attacking neighbouring
States by firing Iranian-made ballistic missiles,
recruiting children, destroying cities and displacing

In conclusion, and since this is the last briefing
of Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, I wish to express
our gratitude for the work he and his team have done
over almost three years since he started working to
resolve the Yemeni crisis. In Kuwait, we have closely
witnessed the efforts he has made in the peace talks.
We hope to be able to work with our new Special Envoy,
Mr. Griffiths. We pledge our full support for him in
carrying out his duties.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18-0534119/21

S/PV.8191

The situation in the Middle East

their population, in clear violation of international,
humanitarian and human rights law.
We beseech the Security Council — which has
been unified and clear-sighted in its position since
the beginning of its engagement in the Yemeni crisis
in 2011 — and Mr. Martin Griffiths to make it their
mission to ensure the Houthis’ compliance with
Council resolutions in order to prevent them from
benefitting from their crimes against humanity. If the
Council and Mr. Griffiths succeed in that effort, armed
militias would no longer be encouraged to continue
their attacks on legitimate entities, and from spreading
terrorism and chaos.
Peace cannot be achieved in my country without
the exit of the Houthi militias from the cities and State
institutions that they have occupied and pillaged.
They must return the weaponry that they stole from
the military and security State institutions, especially
the ballistic missiles that have been provided to them
by Iran. They must end their aggression against
neighbouring States and stop carrying out the functions
of the State. They must stop committing the gravest
violations of international law — the recruitment of
children. That is the only way to ensure lasting peace.
I have repeatedly underscored in the Council that
the Houthis cannot be reasoned with. They will not
abide by international law, humanitarian law or human
rights law. Like the gangs of Da’esh and AlQaida,
their mentality is not bound by legal or historical
frameworks. They will not accept any sustainable
peace that would restore State authority to Yemen.
The Houthis are working — and this is publicly
stated by their masters in Tehran — to destabilize not
just Yemen, but the entire region in order to uphold
Iran’s expansionist agenda. They only understand the
language of violence and they see, in the hesitation and
leniency of the international position, an opportunity to
pursue their expansionist aggressive plot. The Special
Envoy has just said that the Houthis are not willing at
this stage — and I say at any stage — to offer security
concessions or to engage in formulating the details of a
comprehensive security plan. This is the basic dilemma
for a comprehensive solution. In Kuwait, they refused
to sign a full and comprehensive proposal based on
Tehran’s instructions.
Yesterday, the Council failed to send a clear
message to Iran, which will serve only to encourage
that country and its terrorists in the region, including
20/21

27/02/2018

Houthi militias in Yemen, to continue along their path.
The ambiguous messages conveyed by the Council
yesterday will lead to increased levels of violence,
ballistic missiles and further tragedy on the ground. I
would like to thank the States that voted in favour of
yesterday’s draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by
the United Kingdom. The fact that Iran is in a state of
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution 2216
(2015), as concluded by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), is simply clear proof
of its policy to destabilize the entire region. Moreover,
the launch of 95 Iranian-made ballistic missiles
carried out by Houthi militias against the territories
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as mentioned in the
report published by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
(S/2018/68), are proof of an international terrorist plot
masterminded by Iran — a rogue State that sponsors
international terrorism and continues to spend billions
of dollars to support terrorist organizations in the
region, including the Houthis in Yemen, while its own
people suffer a shortage of basic supplies.
The unprecedented humanitarian suffering in
Yemen continues and worsens day by day in the
twenty-first century. The systematic destruction
of all official State institutions, private and public
property and houses of worship; and the intimidation,
terrorization and humiliation of unarmed civilians; and
the recruitment of children sent to die on the front lines
have occurred in all parts of Yemen territories controlled
by coup forces. Citizens starve while the black market
thrives. Our people’s capabilities being eroded in broad
daylight. These are all violations of international law,
values and human norms. In his briefing, Mr. John
Ging mentioned that the Houthis disrupt the delivery of
humanitarian aid every day.
The 2017 annual report submitted by the Panel of
Experts cites staggering statistics of the theft of public
funds and the illegal accumulation of wealth by Houthi
militias, which have stolen more than $5 billion since
they occupied the Yemeni capital of Sana’a. They
continue to plunder the revenue of local industries,
including tax revenue and that of the Al-Hudaydah and
Salif seaports, not to mention the funds derived from
dual taxation imposed on the citizens, and the sale of
oil products on the black market. The report indicates
that all Yemeni companies that import oil products are
newly established and associated with Houthi militias.
Moreover, the Panel estimates that $6.75 billion has been
stolen over the past three years. Coup forces continue to
18-05341

27/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

starve our people in areas under their control and refuse
to pay civil servants or cooperate with the international
community and the Office of the Special Envoy. They
have stated that if the international community wants
civil servants to be paid, it should provide the funds.
Humanitarian suffering has reached appalling
levels. This year the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has estimated its humanitarian
response plan for Yemen will require nearly $3 billion.
Coalition States led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
have pledged and donated $1.5 billion, for which we
are very grateful. We commend the comprehensive
humanitarian plan launched by the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, which includes all
relief sectors, economic relief and recovery efforts on
the road to reconstruction. I call on all members of the
Council and the States Members of the United Nations
to quickly make pledges to cover the requirements of
this year’s humanitarian response plan for Yemen.
The Houthi militias use the humanitarian crisis
of the Yemeni people as a shield, and to advance their
own political agenda. They pretend to be victims
and blackmail the international community. I have
repeatedly warned that some in the Security Council
view the Yemeni issue simply as a matter of providing
humanitarian relief in the absence of a political solution.
The international community’s inability to pressure the
Houthis to come to the negotiating table and implement

S/PV. 8191

the requirements of resolution 2216 (2015) will prolong
the war and the crisis in Yemen. The money that
countries may donate will not be enough to save the
27 million Yemenis facing disaster in the diaspora or
in their own country, which is being destroyed by the
Houthis in a vengeful and vindictive manner. Yemen
is one of the wealthiest and most beautiful lands in the
world. Anyone who has visited can attest to that. I call
upon the Council to put pressure on the coup forces that
reject peace efforts, and hold them accountable before
the entire world.
In conclusion, the people of Yemen beseech the
members of the Council to stand by them at this historic
and crucial time, as they have done since the start of
the political transition crisis in 2011. Our people, with
their glorious past and generous spirit, stand before
the Council and call on its humanity to stop this war
and end the coup. Our people cannot be left begging
for crumbs at the table. Millions of Yemeni youth
cannot be left to drown in a sea of despair or wander in
foreign lands in an attempt to escape the clutches of the
Houthis, Al-Qaida and Da’esh terrorist gangs.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-0534121/21
