A /72/PV.89

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

89th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 22 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 126
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/791)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.54)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.54.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.54,
entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”. The text outlines the links between our
Organization and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU),
and lays out a vision for the future with regard to issues
on the multilateral agenda such as sustainable peace,
rapid technological change and health.
With regard to the links between the United Nations
and national parliaments, the relationship must ensure
that international commitments are translated into
national policies and laws that benefit everyone. In the
light of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, one goal is to strengthen the ability
of legislators to allocate budget resources aimed at
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Our text
calls on the United Nations, national parliaments and the
IPU to engage in closer cooperation and mandates the
Secretary-General to submit a report with a list of best

practices to support parliaments. It also invites them to
become more involved in the system by participating
in the voluntary national reviews for the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development. More
specifically, we have incorporated new perspectives,
such as addressing the issue of violence against women
in politics. We also emphasize the participation of young
people in politics and acknowledged the contribution of
the IPU to the preparatory process for a global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration.
The work of the States Members of the United
Nations would be futile without the efforts led by our
parliamentarians to guide and determine the financing
of national programmes that meet the Organization’s
goals. By strengthening the ties between legislators,
the IPU and the United Nations, we can respond more
effectively to the needs of our citizens. I therefore
invite all delegations to support this draft resolution
and proceed to its adoption.
Mr. Budhu (Trinidad and Tobago): At the outset,
my delegation is pleased to be participating in today’s
plenary meeting to discuss agenda item 126, on the
interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and also
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the subject (A/72/791).
At the very centre of any form of democracy stands
a parliament. It enshrines the democratic values of a
society, encompasses the principles and ideologies of
freedom, human rights and the rule of law and safeguards
transparency and accountability through political

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15564 (E)

*1815564*

A/72/PV.89

dialogue and concrete action. In essence, parliaments
have the honourable task of ensuring Government
by the people and for the people. In the performance
of their functions of legislation, representation and
oversight, parliaments can engage in developing and
implementing laws and policies that promote democracy
and good governance. However, good governance is not
a luxury, but a fundamental requirement for achieving
peace and security, economic and social empowerment
and sustainable development, especially in the goals set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Parliaments can ensure that the principles of the
2030 Agenda are enshrined in national development
strategies by translating the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) into enforceable national laws that respond
to country-specific development priorities, monitoring
their implementation and ensuring that Government is
accountable to the people for national progress on the
SDGs. In that regard, the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago fully recognizes that national ownership of the
SDGs is critical to ensuring that no one is left behind.
However, one of the challenges facing the Agenda
worldwide involves raising awareness of the global
Goals, not only to the broad public but also to those
in key positions of leadership and decision-making. In
order to achieve that, the Goals must be localized from
country to country through inclusive and participatory
approaches, including open and transparent consultation
in parliament. Shortly after the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, therefore, the
Parliament of Trinidad and Tobago passed a motion,
with full bipartisan support, committing to helping
to implement the Agenda through acts of legislation,
including the national budget.
Following that, in 2017 the Government of Trinidad
and Tobago laid its Vision 2030 national development
strategy before Parliament. Vision 2030 is an ambitious
strategic development plan that is aligned with the
Sustainable Development Goals, comprehensive in
scope and cross-cutting in nature in order to ensure
that its implementation is coherent, integrative and
collaborative. Recognizing the important role of
representative participation by all citizens, the strategy
aims to strengthen our democratic institutions.
Mechanisms must be established by which citizens
can participate in national decision-making, thereby
making public policy more responsive to the needs
of the population. That will involve strengthening the
Office of the Parliament, establishing wider and more
2/9

22/05/2018

structured public consultations and enhancing citizen
participation in governance through information and
communications technology.
As a small island developing State (SIDS),
Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report makes specific reference
to the role of parliaments in the prevention of natural
disasters. In that regard, following the devastation of
Hurricanes Irma and Maria in the Caribbean last year,
the Parliament of Trinidad and Tobago, in collaboration
with the United Nations country team in Port of Spain,
hosted a regional parliamentarian retreat on building
Caribbean resilience. The retreat focused on deepening
the knowledge of parliamentarians on Caribbean
resilience in the face of disasters and the policy
strategy and guidelines necessary for building nationaland regional-level resilience. One important session
focused on the question of budgetary mechanisms and
the funding of disaster-risk-reduction programmes that
can adequately address the special circumstances and
vulnerabilities facing Caribbean SIDS.
That multi-stakeholder initiative is just one
example of the shift that is needed to achieve the SDGs.
All stakeholders, from all arms of Government and
corners of society, must be sufficiently empowered and
provided with the relevant information and knowledge,
education and training so that they can effectively
and meaningfully participate in processes converging
towards a common goal. In that regard, Trinidad and
Tobago commends the efforts of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU), other national parliaments and the United
Nations to provide support to translate the SDGs into
action, and further supports deepening the interactions
between the IPU and the United Nations as part of a
broad multi-stakeholder approach to implementing an
integrated and multidimensional 2030 Agenda. On that
basis, Trinidad and Tobago would like to express its
gratitude to the delegation of Mexico for leading us
in the consultative process and is pleased to join with
others in sponsoring draft resolution A/72/L.54.
Mr. Seddik (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
first like to sincerely congratulate the delegation of
Mexico for introducing draft resolution A/72/L.54,
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
We welcome the fact that the text has been sponsored
by several delegations.
18-15564

22/05/2018

I would like to reiterate our support for the President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Ms. Gabriela
Cuevas Barron, and its Secretary General, Mr. Martin
Chungong, and their remarkable efforts, and to
commend the Organization’s excellent relations with
the IPU.
As a member of the IPU since 1977, the Algerian
Parliament has made an active and constructive
contribution to its work, in which I have the honour
to participate as a member of the bureau of the IPU’s
Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs. That
contribution has to do with all of the IPU’s various
areas of action and is based on a productive exchange
of experience and best practices.
My country, Algeria, co-authored the text of draft
resolution A/72/L.54, which, I need hardly point out,
reflects the ever-growing significance of the role played
by parliaments in the multilateral arena and highlights
the importance of strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and national parliaments, represented by
the worldwide organization of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, in all the Organization’s areas of activity. That
cooperation, which is intended to have many aspects,
covers major sectors of our societies with a direct impact
on the daily lives of the citizens whom we represent
and on their very exercise of citizenship, in accordance
with the rule of law. They include democracy, human
rights, gender equality, the empowerment of women,
the combating of violence against women, including in
political life, young people’s participation in peace and
security, disarmament, non-proliferation, sustainable
development and interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue,
as well as the fight against terrorism and the prevention
of violent extremism that can lead to terrorism.
This cooperation also contributes to our goals of
achieving peace and resolving all conflict situations with
the help of parliamentary diplomacy, its mechanisms
and its potential, in the service of our peoples and
nations. We, the parliamentarians, are effective
instruments that we should never neglect to make use
of. We look forward to the holding of the IPU world
conference on interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue, with
the participation of Heads of State, parliamentarians
and representatives of various religions, and we support
the draft resolution’s call to involve the United Nations.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/72/791) on draft
resolution A/72/L.54. We also take this opportunity to

A/72/PV.89

thank the Permanent Mission of Mexico, as the country
holding the presidency of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) and therefore the penholder of the draft
resolution, for its initiative on agenda item 126.
The General Assembly has adopted this biannual
resolution by consensus since 2004. That is clear
testimony to the scope of the cooperation between
the IPU and the United Nations, and demonstrates the
importance of constructive partnership with parliaments
as critical stakeholders in resolving today’s global
challenges. The draft resolution continues to encourage
parliamentarians’ deeper involvement in the work of the
United Nations both as advisers and as implementers
of decisions made in the Organization. Namibia is
encouraged by the IPU’s work in implementing and
mobilizing Government actions across the planet
towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We are therefore happy that
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030 and the Paris Agreement under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
have received special mention. For Namibia, a desert
country dealing with the challenges of addressing the
effects of both droughts and floods, those are essential
instruments and frameworks for ensuring the positive
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Namibia has achieved 47 per cent gender parity in
its Parliament. While we continue to improve in the area
of parliamentary and other local representation, we are
pleased with the work of the IPU in the critical areas
of gender equality, the empowerment of women and
fighting violence against women. Those achievements
cannot be underestimated, considering that less than
30 years ago, at the time of Namibia’s independence,
the percentage of women parliamentarians globally was
at a mere l0 per cent. While that average has grown to
almost 24 per cent today, there is still a long way to go
and we must continue to encourage and support the IPU
in its work in that area.
It is essential that when we make laws and
policies, we ensure that the views of all stakeholders
in society, including women and young people, are
taken into account. It is for that reason that Namibia
greatly appreciates the critical work done by the IPU
in the areas of youth empowerment and ensuring the
participation of young men and women in politics.
In conclusion, it is for those reasons, and those
mentioned by our fellow States Members of the United

18-155643/9

A/72/PV.89

Nations present here today, that Namibia firmly supports
the draft resolution and encourages unanimous support
for its adoption.
Mr. Romero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to participate in this meeting as a member
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), where I was
recently elected President of the Committee on United
Nations Affairs, and as a Senator of Argentina. At the
outset, I would like to express our gratitude for the
support that many countries have shown in promoting
draft resolution A/72/L.54, introduced today.
The interrelationship between the United
Nations, members of parliaments and the work of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union is key. We are all partners
in the common idea of helping our countries achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals and address other
challenges. Through our parliaments, we have a role
in drawing up plans and national strategies through
parliamentary action and Government management so
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can
become a reality, as well as in promoting transparency
and overseeing management, both nationally and at
other levels of Government.
Today we are navigating a complex world. It has
therefore become crucial to enhance South-South
cooperation, in the understanding that the economy
should serve the people through comprehensive social
policies. In the draft resolution introduced today
we have a clear guide to help us make progress in
working energetically to create public policies that are
committed to supporting development with social goals
that can benefit the majority of our citizens.
In 2001, the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights defined poverty as a lack of capacities,
options, security and opportunities for enjoying an
acceptable standard of living. In recent years, the 17
Sustainable Development Goals have influenced the
discussion on fighting poverty at the global level.
However, it has become clear that this discussion calls
for local involvement on the part of every country and
that appropriate national policies and concrete actions
are required to achieve those Goals.
Every one of us has a role to play, especially when it
comes to poverty reduction. The eradication of poverty
in all its forms remains one of the greatest challenges
facing humankind. While the number of people living in
extreme poverty was halved from 1,900 million in 1990
to 830 million in 2015, many human beings continue
4/9

22/05/2018

to live in extreme poverty. While areas such as China
and India account for a large part of poverty reduction,
at the global level rapid global demographic growth
has seen a more modest reduction in the number of
people living in poverty. Progress in other regions has
been limited. For example, in Latin America, poverty
remains high, with around 29 per cent of the population
living in poverty in 2015, up from 28.5 per cent in 2014,
showing what a difficult task this is to achieve.
Child poverty is another of the most visible and
distressing components of poverty because it deprives
many millions of children of access to education as
a way to overcome difficulties. A great deal remains
to be done. However, we are encouraged when we see
that it is possible when we look at countries that have
managed to make progress by pursuing the Sustainable
Development Goals at the local level. Speaking of
education, it is important to note that national growth
is closely linked to access to education for children
and young people. There can be no doubt that access to
education is another important component of the fight
against poverty.
Sustainable growth demands that we strengthen
various productive links — agriculture, industry, the
environment and technology. In the words of Amartya
Sen, it is important to close educational gaps and
remove disparities in access and inclusion to make the
world more secure as well as more fair.
We need collective efforts to identify and share
effective strategies and take action in all countries.
Leaving no one behind means valuing the dignity of
every human being. We must make progress at the
community level a priority. Women, children, the fight
for equality, the harsh realities of poverty — these are
not only economic and financial issues, but together
represent a challenge to be tackled head on and
overcome. By investing more of ourselves each day
as supporters and champions of this fight, we will
generate new horizons for sustainable socioeconomic
development. As legislators, we can work with our
Governments to actively and resolutely uphold the
commitments undertaken here. We can achieve the
2030 Agenda by formulating and pursuing a variety of
legislative initiatives at the national level that reflect its
transformative goals. We all share the responsibility to
ensure that no one is left behind by working to promote
the Sustainable Development Goals.
18-15564

22/05/2018

Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank the delegation
of Mexico for its efforts in facilitating agreement on
the text of draft resolution A/72/L.54, on interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). Our delegation
has become a sponsor of this important draft resolution,
which is aimed at strengthening interaction between
the two organizations and national parliaments, which
in turn can help to enhance the role of parliaments and
foster mutual understanding and dialogue among States.
Russia attaches great importance to the activities
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which makes
a significant contribution to the development of
parliamentary diplomacy. A non-politicized, mutually
respectful and constructive exchange of views among
parliamentarians facilitates effective solutions to
contemporary international problems. In that regard,
strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and that representative inter-parliamentary
organization is significant in the context of both
reinforcing democracy and maintaining peace.
The draft resolution before us reflects two important
initiatives: the establishment of an International Day of
Parliamentarism and the holding of a world conference
on interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue. We view the
establishment of 30 June as the International Day
of Parliamentarism as a milestone. We are pleased
that in 2019 the international community will mark
the 130th anniversary of the first Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, which continues to be
an authoritative forum for exchanging views in an
atmosphere of equality and determination to reach
decisions acceptable to all on a wide range of issues.
As a multinational and multi-faith State, the Russian
Federation believes firmly that the rise of new dividing
lines, including those based on ethnic and religious
differences, is pernicious. In this regard, we note
with satisfaction the IPU’s call for organizing a world
conference on interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue
jointly with the United Nations, with the participation
of Heads of State, parliaments and representatives of
major religions.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
fact that imposing sanctions on parliamentarians is
unacceptable. It is crucial to ensure that States that
hold international events on their territory give people’s
representatives the opportunity to take part in them and
express their views. For example, when Russia hosted

A/72/PV.89

the 137th IPU Assembly in Saint Petersburg in October
2017, we permitted unimpeded entry to parliamentarians
from every country in the world, without exception,
who expressed an interest in taking part. We hope to
see a similar non-discriminatory approach taken by
all States Members of the United Nations organizing
similar international events on their territory.
The President: I now give the floor to the President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Ms. Cuevas Barron (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United Nations; the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, composed of the leaders of
Parliaments; my fellow parliamentarians all over the
world and of course our organization’s team for the
opportunity to work on this draft resolution (A/72/L.54).
I would like to express special thanks to the Permanent
Mission of my own country, Mexico, which worked
and pushed for this draft resolution on behalf of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. I also thank the missions
that have made tireless efforts in contributing ideas and
comments and thereby enriching the text that we worked
on during our most recent meeting in Geneva and that
today has taken its final form as a draft resolution.
This is an important moment for the Inter-Parliamentary
Union. Our partnership with the United Nations started
20 years ago in response to people’s demands for more
transparent, effective and accountable governance.
As the forces of globalization have grown stronger,
people everywhere have felt more vulnerable and
left out of decision-making processes, not just at the
local level but also in the international arena, which
rarely offers concrete solutions to local problems. That
is where the work of parliamentarians comes in, to
ensure that the views and voices of those we represent
can reach the United Nations and are in harmony
with Member States so that they can deliver on their
international commitments.
How far along are we in our journey? We can be
very proud of the results we have achieved. While
we have not yet reached our final destination, the
truth is that every day we are redoubling our efforts.
We are working on new ways of collaborating so that
we can once again achieve effective action and an
ambitious vision. Today, old and new conflicts can
be found threatening peace and security all over the
planet. Climate change is forcing thousands of people
to leave their homes in search of security, food and a
safe roof over their heads. While gender equality has

18-155645/9

A/72/PV.89

improved in some areas, the fact is that we are still
far from fully realizing it, especially where women in
politics are concerned. Income inequality has reached
unprecedented levels and is eroding the foundations
of the social contract that unites us and sustains our
democracy. Politics everywhere is becoming more
divisive and polarized, undermining people’s trust.
That gives us an important opportunity and duty to
use our relationship as a key tool to transform these
challenges into improved global governance.
As a long-serving parliamentarian, I know first-hand
the importance of legislative work for getting results.
Our work as parliamentarians is essential for ratifying
international instruments and modifying our national
legislation to make it reflect those commitments more
accurately, especially in key areas such as human rights,
the development agenda and climate change. And one of
a legislator’s most important jobs is preparing budgets.
As parliamentarians we wield the most important tool
for our countries’ public policies. And, of course, it is
our job to demand clear and timely accountability. In
that way, we are the natural link between citizens, the
people we represent and the global agenda. SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, a former parliamentarian
himself, understands the importance of engaging with
parliamentarians in the decision-making process, and
that is reflected in his report (A/72/791). We know
how essential the participation of legislators is, just
as the Inter-Parliamentary Union is such an essential
link in all aspects of the United Nations system. We
need citizens to be able to participate more closely
in the United Nations system, especially when the
Organization commits to working more closely with
their representatives in its deliberations. That is when
the results reflect the founding principle of the Charter
of the United Nations, “we the peoples”.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the work
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union at the United Nations
in key areas such as democracy and human rights,
peace and security, disarmament, gender equality
and sustainable development. Today’s draft resolution
is a significant reflection of all that work and also
opens the door to new areas of cooperation, including
sustainable peace, inter-ethnic and interreligious
dialogue and strategies for countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. The Inter-Parliamentary
Union has already partnered with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime through a joint programme
to address the challenges of counter-terrorism and
6/9

22/05/2018

violent extremism, and above all to figure out how
parliamentarians can take part in resolving them,
especially where prevention is concerned.
Terrorism is a scourge that affects virtually the
entire world. It should never be linked to any particular
religion or region, nor should our societies ever accept
it. Today our freedoms and democracies require that we
carry out this important work. We will continue to do
so alongside the United Nations so that, as legislators,
we can do our best work to ensure that our laws can
become tools to fight such threats to our democracies
and freedoms.
As legislators and opinion-makers, parliamentarians
have vital leadership roles in their countries. Our job,
as the world organization of national parliaments, is to
help create common ground among parliamentarians
so that their voices across parties and genders can be
articulated into a strong parliamentary perspective on
global affairs. Our most important task is to ensure that,
as representatives of the people, we work on solutions
for all people everywhere and for the sustainability of
the planet itself.
Through parliaments, the IPU promotes ideas
and positive changes in United Nations processes,
conventions and treaties. It also serves as a highly
valuable resource for the United Nations, precisely
because our work focuses on the implementation of
these agreements. For instance, in the context of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the IPU
and its 178 member States are working to ensure that
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals can become
a reality. We are particularly proud when it comes
to Goal 16, because we are working to see concerted
efforts made in favour of inclusivity, representation and
transparent institutions for Governments. That means
that parliamentarians should play a key positive role
in realizing the changes envisioned under the 2030
Agenda. We do so through parliamentary hearings here
at the United Nations, and in the various workshops
we conduct in countries and regions around the world,
where we focus directly on implementation, with a
view to ensuring that the United Nations development
agenda becomes a reality in all our communities.
Like the United Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union will continue working to ensure that absolutely
no one is left behind. Among other things our work
in the High-level Political Forum and with regard to
voluntary national reviews is of great importance.
18-15564

22/05/2018

The IPU holds a side event designed to attract many
parliamentarians so that they can get to know the United
Nations better and work more closely with it. We also
have a Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs
and hold regional seminars with a view to ensuring that
democratic governance always goes hand in hand with
sustainable development and is integrated throughout
our deliberations, decisions and actions. We also work
with the various United Nations agencies to make these
goals a reality.
Two years ago, in the previous iteration of our
biannual resolution (resolution 70/298), the IPU
committed to working with the United Nations on
migration and the humanitarian agenda for refugees.
Today that has become a reality. We devoted
not only our annual hearing but also seminars,
workshops, agreements and the most recent IPU
Assembly in Geneva to ensuring that the voices of all
parliamentarians from all countries, and the people
they represent, are reflected in the IPU’s work on the
global compacts on migration and refugees. We believe
that this debate should focus not on prejudices but on
specific questions, and that agreements must be based
on human rights, not xenophobic political narratives.
We believe that the work of parliamentarians is crucial
to ensuring that voices advocating safe and orderly
migration are heard and that an agreement in favour
of refugees, who have already suffered enough, can be
reached and duly implemented in our countries. That
work, begun two years ago, has now become a reality
and brought results. The IPU has adopted important
resolutions in this regard in the past year and a half.
We are steadfastly committed to turning narratives of
hatred and discrimination into one of the generosity
and love that should unite this entire planet.
The IPU has a very important task in the area of
women’s empowerment and especially violence against
women. While we realize there is a great deal to be done,
we first want to welcome the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, who has shown by example that inclusion
is possible, and that it can produce results almost
immediately. Our work both with the Commission on
the Status of Women and in fighting the discrimination
and harassment faced by many women in politics in their
countries is increasingly important. We know that there
is much to be done, even in terms of changing many
of our parliamentary rules. The presence of women in
parliaments increased by only by 0.1 per cent in the past
year. At that rate, it would take more than 250 years to

A/72/PV.89

reach parity. Our daughters, granddaughters and greatgranddaughters cannot afford that luxury. Today more
than ever, we need to work for women, not just for those
of us who already in politics and have a voice and a
right to vote, but for all the women and girls who want
to realize their dreams and, like us, transform their
communities and the planet.
Parliaments worldwide must become more inclusive
and representative. They must genuinely tackle the
concerns of our societies. In this regard, the IPU Forum
of Young Parliamentarians has an important task,
through the Economic and Social Council and its Youth
Forum, to ensure that the voices of young people are
truly heard in these forums. We have a long way to go,
but as a young parliamentarian and President of the IPU,
I feel obliged to take on this agenda. I am an example
of how we include young parliamentarians in our
organization. Yes, I am still a young parliamentarian,
and I feel the obligation to work to enhance the
participation of young people in decision-making, in
particular in terms of parliamentary access. People
under the age of 30 account for more than 50 per cent
of the world’s population today, but only 1.9 per cent of
its parliamentarians; three of four countries have laws
prohibiting people under the age of 30 from running for
political office.
I want to underscore and acknowledge a very
important step taken with this draft resolution, in that
we reached a historic consensus in favour of recognizing
30 June as the International Day of Parliamentarism.
We hope that will enable recognition of the efforts,
dedication and achievements of the more than 46,000
men and women parliamentarians around the world
who work tirelessly every day to represent their
communities, effect change and find solutions to the
problems we face. The voices, hands and hearts of those
46,000 people are united through the IPU, working to
leave the world a better, more inclusive, peaceful and
just place for future generations.
The work of a parliamentarian comes with many
challenges. Indeed, the hard work never ends. Many
of our colleagues — and it is therefore important to
recognize it — carry out their work with very limited
means. Others are subject to criticism, interference or
marginalization in their own countries, parliaments or
parties. Others are illegally persecuted or silenced.
It goes without saying that the International Day
of Parliamentarism proposed in the draft resolution

18-155647/9

A/72/PV.89

will also recognize the enormous efforts of women
parliamentarians, who often have to work twice as hard
to gain the least recognition.
I would also like to take advantage of this important
forum because I believe that the General Assembly is
a space that inspires, motivates and unquestionably
compels us to become committed. This is a forum
where all the countries of the world engage in dialogue.
In it they find a place to reflect, take decisions and seek
peace. But it should also be an exemplary forum for the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, where we can work without
exclusion and ensure that everyone can participate,
where delegations represent a plurality and where
women’s voices are as powerful as men’s. We will
continue working and seeking the support of the United
Nations so that we can ensure that all the events we hold
here are representative of all the States members of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. We would like to continue
to work here and to work with the United Nations to
ensure that every agreement reached here can become
a reality.
A few years ago, during one of the meetings of
the General Assembly, we said that we must translate
our words into action. That is why we are here. We are
here because we are believe that we can transform our
communities by taking action at the global level. I am
honoured to have this opportunity to work with my
fellow parliamentarians, to whom I am grateful for the
long distances they have travelled to be here today. I
believe that our two organizations will continue to work
together to make a tangible, genuine and significant
difference in the lives of people across the planet. Our
goal is to transform reality, put an end to preventable
misery and devote all of our parliamentary time and
effort to ensuring that our communities, our countries
and our planet continue to be in agreement on the goals
of the United Nations agenda, so that we can preserve
democracy and respect for the promotion of human
rights and the voices of parliamentarians representing
the people who enabled us to be here.
I thank you, Mr. President, for today’s draft
resolution, which will continue to assist those
working with the Inter-Parliamentary Union and
our parliamentarians.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 126.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.54, entitled “Interaction between
8/9

22/05/2018

the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/72/L.54, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, the Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Ireland, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.54?
Draft resolution A/72/L.54 was adopted (resolution
72/278).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine has always
considered the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) to be
the oldest inter-parliamentary institution and a uniquely
authoritative one that, according to its statute, works
for peace and cooperation among peoples, shares the
objectives of the United Nations, supports its efforts
and works in close cooperation with it.
Ukraine is a country whose Parliament plays a key
role and is fully aware of its responsibility with regard
not only to the peace and security of its own country, but
also where international and regional peace and security
are concerned. Since joining the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, Ukraine has always proceeded on a basis of
18-15564

22/05/2018

respect for international law and strict implementation
by all IPU member States of its statutory commitments
and obligations.
At its October 2016 session in Geneva, the IPU
Governing Council took the decision to accept the
invitation of the Parliament of the Russian Federation
to host the 137th IPU Assembly in Saint Petersburg
in October 2017. That decision was taken against the
backdrop of the brutal acts of military aggression
being committed by the Russian Federation against
its neighbours, which in our case led to the temporary
occupation of 7 per cent of Ukrainian territory. Russia
is now committing acts of aggression with all the
hallmarks of war crimes in the Ukrainian Donbas and
Syria, and most recently even in the United Kingdom.
That is why the decision on the venue of the IPU
Assembly has seriously undermined the credibility of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union as an organization based
on principles and values such as the rule of law, human
rights, democracy, the non-use of force or the threat of

A/72/PV.89

force — in contravention of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations — the non-recognition
of territorial acquisitions resulting from the threat or
use of force and respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of its members. It has also brought
into question the IPU’s commitment to acting in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. The delegation of Ukraine therefore
unfortunately has no choice but to dissociate itself from
the consensus on General Assembly resolution 72/278,
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 126?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

18-155649/9
