S/PRST/2000/39

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 December 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4244th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 December 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
East Timor”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Security Council
Mission to East Timor and Indonesia (S/2000/1105) of 21 November 2000, and
endorses the recommendations that it contains. It notes in particular the view
of the Mission that a strong international presence will be required in East
Timor after independence, inter alia for the provision of financial, technical
and security assistance, and agrees that planning for such a presence should
begin as soon as possible. It requests the Secretary-General to report on this
matter in his next regular report to the Security Council.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). It welcomes in
particular the creation of the National Council in East Timor, and stresses the
importance of further work on the transition to independence, including a
timetable and mechanisms for a constitution and elections. It stresses that
urgent consideration should be given to expediting the training of the Timor
Lorosae Police Service and to attracting sufficient resources to develop the
judicial system. It notes the views of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the need to use assessed funding more flexibly.
“The Security Council emphasizes that urgent action is necessary to
resolve the problem of the East Timorese refugees in West Timor. While
acknowledging the efforts of the Government of Indonesia so far, the Council
expresses its belief that a number of further steps must be taken, including:
“(i) decisive action to disarm and disband the militia and put an end to
their activities, including by the separation of militia leaders from
the refugees in West Timor and the expeditious prosecution of those
responsible for criminal acts. The Council welcomes the steps
already taken by the Government of Indonesia and urges it to make
further progress on eradicating intimidation in the camps;
“(ii) action to allow the international relief agencies to return to West
Timor, which will in turn require that the security of their staff be
guaranteed. The Council looks forward in this context to

00-78392 (E)

061200

*0078392*

S/PRST/2000/39

discussions between the Government of Indonesia and the United
Nations on arrangements to facilitate an expert assessment of the
security situation in West Timor. This should be in accordance with
the usual modalities employed by the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator;
“(iii) action to improve the flow of information to the refugees. The
Council urges the Government of Indonesia, UNTAET and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to work together
to develop an information strategy that will allow the refugees to
make an informed decision about their future;
“(iv) a credible, apolitical and internationally observed registration of the
refugees, carried out in close cooperation with United Nations
agencies and other relevant actors.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for measures to address
shortcomings in the implementation of justice in East Timor. The Council
welcomes the adoption of Indonesian legislation for the establishment of ad
hoc human rights tribunals. It also underlines the need to bring to justice those
responsible for violent attacks in East and West Timor, including attacks on
United Nations personnel and in particular the murder of three humanitarian
workers and two United Nations peacekeepers. It regrets that those responsible
for the murder of the peacekeepers have not been arrested, and calls for action
in this regard and for an early start to the trials of those accused of killing the
humanitarian workers.
“The Security Council highlights the importance of the bilateral
relationship between UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia. The Council
underlines the need to resolve the outstanding issues of payment of pensions to
former civil servants and the proposed transit arrangements between the
Oecussi enclave and the remainder of East Timor. It encourages in this regard
further progress in the dialogue between the Government of Indonesia and
UNTAET.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.”

2
