UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

RECORDS
YEAR

2147th

MEETING:

NEW

12 JUNE

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 147).,,....................................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13384) . . . . . . ..*................................................

1
1
1

1

WPV.2147

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Suppkments of the Oflciai Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decirions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2147th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 June 1979;‘at 3 pm.
President:

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia; China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist. Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisionai agenda (S/Agenda/2147)
1. Adoption of the .agenda
2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 130 May 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13356);
Report of the SecretaryGeneral
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13384)

lXe meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.

of Israel to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestinian Liberation Organization to take a place at the side of
the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tut%i@ebanon) took
a place at the Council table; Mr. Bhan (Israel took the piace
reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber and Mr.
Abdel Rahman (Palestine Liberation Organization) took the
place reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russia;): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic containing a request that he be invited to
take part in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In
the light of established practice and with the consent of the
Council, I propose to invite him to take part in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian
Arab Republic) took the place reservedfor him at the side of
the Council chamber.

Expression of thanks to tbe retiring President
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian): Since
this is the fmt official meeting of the Security Council in the
month of June, I should like, on behalf of the Council, to
pay a tribute to my predecessor, the representative of Portugal, Ambassador Futscher Pereira, for the tireless efforts
and great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
proceeding of the Council in May. I believe that those
words also express the view of all members of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation In. tb+ Middle East
Letter dated 30 May 1979 fromh the Permanent Representative of J..ebanonto tbe United Nations address&o
the President of the, s*y
corn@ (wl;3356);
Report of the Seererary&eneraI on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (Wl3384)
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at the
2146th meeting, E invite the representative of Lebanon to
take a place at the Council table. I invite the representative

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to draw the Council’s attention to document
S/13384 which contains the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim, Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period from 13 January to 8 June 1979. I should also
like to draw the Council’s attention to the following documents: S/13379 which contains the text of a letter dated 6
June from the representative of Kuwait transmitting the
text of a letter dated 25 May from the Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization addressed to the Secretary-General, and S/13387
which contains the text of a letter dated 11 June from the
representative of Lebanon addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.
-5; I call on the Secretary-General’ who wishes to make a
statement.
6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Council has
before it my report on UNIFIL which describes the activities of the Force up to the morning of 8 June. Since that
time, the UNIFIL Command has reported to me that there
have been renewed exchanges of tire between the Palestinian armed elements in the vicinity of Chateau de Beaufort
and the de fucto forces in. the Marjayoun area, particularly
on the afternoon and evening of 8 June. There were also on

that day attacks by Israeli aircraft against targets north of
the UNIFIL
area of operation, in the Nabatiyah and
Amoun areas.

12. I feel also obliged to mention the financial asnect of
the UNIFIL
operaGon. In the’-existing circumsta&es, it
seems regrettably to be the fact that the troop-contributing
countries cannot expect anything near the reimbursement
to which they are entitled under the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly..This is an unacceptable
addition to the burden which those Governments already
have to bear as a result of their voluntary participation in
UNIFIL. I take this opportunity to’ appeal to the members
of the Council, as well as to all Member Governments of the
United Nations, to consider urgently the measures they can
take to alleviate this burden.
,

7. These new incidents, just as the Security, Council is
about to consider the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL,
serve to emphasize both the inherent instability of the situation in Southern Lebanon and the great difficulties confronting UNIFIL.
8. As indicated in my report, despite the obstacles which
have so far prevented UNIFIL from fulfilling all its tasks,
the Force is actually performing an indispensable function
in bringing calm to a sorely affected area and in reducing the
active threat to international peace and security. For this
reason, I have felt obliged to recommend a further extension of the mandate of UNIFIL. Taking into account both
the political and practical factors concerned, I have recommended that the period of extension be for six months. The
Lebanese Government fully agrees with this recommendation.

13. In concluding, I wish to express once again my deep
appreciation to all the commanders, officers and men of
UNIFIL and to their civilian colleagues. All of them have
carried out the important tasks entrusted to them by the
Security Council with remarkable efficiency, dedication
and courage. In this connexion,: I ‘wish to pay a special
tribute to the memory of those soldiers who have died in the
service of peace in Lebanon.

9. In my report, I have commented in some detail on the
difficulties and the problems confronting UNIFIL,
and
there is no need to reiterate them here. .I wish, however, to
emphasize one point to which I attach special importance.

14. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from Russian): The
first speaker is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I
,.
now call.
;.
15. Mr. TIJENI (Lebanon): There would have been no
need for me to speak again in this debate, which we view as a
continuation of the meeting held on 31 May [214&h meeting]. However, the publication of the Secretary-General’s
report of 8 June calls for some remarks, which I shall make
very briefly, reiterating my hope that our discussions will
remain pragmatic and calm and that we shall all try together
to achieve concrete results, lest a further deterioration of the
situation in Southern Lebanon really lead, in the very words
of Mr. Waldheim, to an “active. threat to international
peace and security [S/13384, para. 421.

10. While recommending the extension of the mandate of
UNIFIL, I have pointed out that UNIFIL cannot continue
to function unless certain essential conditions are fulfilled:
These essential conditions are, first, the establishment of an
adequate security zone around Naqoura; secondly, the cessation of the harassment of the civilian population and of
UNIFIL personnel by the de facto forces; thirdly, a change
in the position of the Israeli authorities, without which no
significant progress can be achieved, fourthly, the continued over-all cooperation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The fulfilment of these conditions would
enable UNIFIL to achieve a significant and steady rate of
progress in fulfilling the tasks assigned to it by the Council.
On the other hand, if these conditions cannot be met, there
is no real possibility for the Force to complete the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council. In such circumstances, it may
well become necessary even to envisage the withdrawal of
the Force before it has fulfilled its mandate, despite all the
dangers that that would entail. I feel that I should make this
clear, particularly because I do not consider it would be
right to ask the troop-contributing countries and their contingents to continue indefinitely to bear their heavy and
often
dangerous burden, if the essential minimum condi‘.
uons for the effective functioning of UNIFIL cannot be met.

16. But first, Mr. President, in lieu of the conventional
words addressed to the President on his assumption of the
presidency of the Council, I should like, as a tribute to your
foresight and perspicacity, to quote from your speech made
before the Council 15 months ago, on 18 March 1978:
“The present act of open aggression has been dictated
by Israel’s desire to fulfil its -age-old design: to occupy
Southern Lebanon to destroy utterly the Palestine resistance movement. . . . It is becoming more and more
obvious that Israel has elevated terror and the spreading
of fear to the level of State nolicv. Israel’s attacks on its
neighbours under the pretext of strengthening its own
security, its expansion under the pretext of seeking living
space, the deprivation of a whole people or of whole
peoples of their elementary rights. . . .” [2073rdmeering,
paras. 37-38.1
1

11. If the Council decides to extend the mandate of
UNIFIL,
I hope that the members of the Council, and
especially those in a position to bring influence to bear, will
exert all possible efforts to achieve the objectives I have just
outlined. I shall, of course, instruct the Force Commander,
as well as the Chief Coordinator
of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Missions in the Middle East, to contact
immediately all the parties concerned with the same end in
view. I myself shall take every opportunity to facilitate
progress in the right direction. Let me once again here
express the hope that all the parties concerned will respond
to these efforts and will extend to UNIFIL the co-operation
and support that it requires.

I

17. The most elementary right which my country and my
people now seek is that of peace-the right to live in peace,
and liberty. And we cannot fail to remember with you, Mr.
President, how much the Russian people have suffered
through the ages from war, from destruction, from invasions and from terror. And though we may not be-and I
.say this very candidly-your
country’s closest allies in the
.Middle East, yet we strongly believe that you probably
understand us best and have, in historical perspective, a
2

greater interest thanmany,others and a greater stake in our
independence and in, the freedom without which we cannot
survive either as a nation or as a system, a freedom, which we
have granted others as well as ourselves, .confident that
history will ultimately bring justice to those who suffer and
sacrifice for human rights.
‘. ._ . ’
18. It is in this spirit that, with your permission Mr. President, I invite the members of the Council and ail those
interested to share ,with, us the viewing of a documentary
film on Southern Lebanon. It is the story of a village in the
war, and we shall present it, with your permission and the
Secretariat’s co-operation, as an argument in support of our
case for peace.
.. .

would be no less pretentious, for there is nothing to.add that
could be of equal significance. My final remark is therefore
the following: in my presentation of 3 1 May I suggested that
the Council should adopt an action-oriented resolution that
would put -an end to hostilities in Southern Lebanon by
checking ‘Israeli aggression, giving UNIFIL greater means
to achieve success in the full implementation of its mandate
and restoring the General Armistice Agreement of 1949,
which was concluded in response to an injunction by the
Security Council.
23. At this point I have no arguments to add in my plea
for, such a resolution save the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s report makes it still more imperative than it
appeared to be two or three weeks ago.

19. I should now like to address the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim,.not to express to him thanks or appreciation, which he hardly, needs, but to tell him of the heartfelt sentiment of intellectual and moral comfort that his
report inspires. Courage, displayed with such simplicity and
realism-almost
as a matter of fact-is what gives his analysis of the situation its greatest credibility and sense of
urgency.

24. Many members of the Council, particularly those,
such as the Government of the United States, which have
invested tremendously in resolution 425 (1978) and in
efforts at its implementation, have looked at our proposal
with interest and support. The troop-contributing
countries, to which Lebanon owes so much, will have to have a
major share in deciding what course we should follow. Our
other friends have all indicated their concern in one way or
another.

20. I should like, in the same simple terms, to emphasize
the following conclusions-which
Mr. Waldheim has, in
fact, just reemphasized in his statement-that
I have
reached from his reading of events: first, that the situation
during the period under review has deteriorated rather than
improved, secondly,-that UNIFIL is encountering greater
difficulties and is experiencing, as a result of attacks on it
and of frustration, an erosion of authority and capabilities;
thirdly, that the fulfilment of the mandate is contingent
upon a basic change in the attitude of Israel; fourthly, that
the international community, in response to Lebanon’s fulfilment of its undertakings, has “an obligation to give a very
high priority to assistance to the Lebanese Government in
its efforts to restore its authority and sovereignty”; fifthly,
that the Palestine Liberation Organization, despite certain
incidents, is now more officially and practically committed
to cooperating with UNIFIL
and the Government of
Lebanon in preserving peace and security in Southern
Lebanon.

25. Such a resolution, if and when adopted, should not be
looked upon as just another resolution in the already long
yet unproductive list of rhetorical condemnations. It will
have to produce an immediate return to the cease-fire,
which should in turn be conducive to a solution of the
stalemate reported by the Secretary-General.
26. All this will require the full authority and co-operation
of the Council as such and of all its members. For in such
instances we view the Council not only as the supreme
executive instrument of the world Organization but also as
the only valid point of encounter for the Member States
when they are genuinely interested in international peace
and security.
27. To all members, therefore, I reiterate Lebanon’s
appeal for peace and my people’s call for the right to live
again free from terror and tragedy. Five years of war, of
dispersion and destruction are more than enough. So give
US back our land; for never shall we cede, nor forget, nor
forgive.

21. Dwelling for a moment on this last point, I ask the
Council whether it is not strange indeed that the PLO
communiquC announcing a most positive step, which we
had all worked for, should have been saluted immediately,
not by an Israeli response but by a breach of the cease-fire
and a resumption of hostilities. Could it be that Israel does
not even want the Palestinians to accept peace? I feel very
gratified that, after a week now of intense shelling and air
raids, the PLO has been relatively able to control itself and
not to be trapped into escalating the war or transforming it,
as was done once before, into a civil war with the Lebanese
in which Israel can assist both, attack both, and prompt
both to tight its war for it, vicariously-a
terrible, horrible
war of attrition-in
the strangest triangular pattern ever
seen.

28. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, I should !ike
at the outset on behalf of the delegation of Kuwait to
express to you warmest congratulations on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for the month of June.
It is, I understand, a busy month, but your patience, skill,
tolerance and experience are in my view formidable allies
for us in ensuring success in the work of the Council this
month. I pledge to you, Sir, our co-operation and our
sincere dedication and, indeed, to some extent, our obedience. I wish you good luck.

22. To review all the facts and observations in the
Secretary-General’s report would be an abuse of the Council’s time, as I am sure that report has already been carefully
and thoroughly examined by all concerned. Adding to it

29. I should also like to thank the outgoing President, the
representative of Portugal, for his skilful handling of the
proceedings of the Council in May. He worked hard behind
the scenes, and we are all indebted to him.
3

required for a significant improvement
ment of UNIFIL.”

30. The Secretary-General deserves a sincere tribute for
the unllagging efforts he has been making since the creation
of UNIFIL. We congratulate him on his report and, indeed,
we entirely support his drive to fulfil the objectives of
UNIFIL.

in the deploy-

There is in this sentence an unmistakable sense of anger
caused by the Israeli attitude. In paragraph 42, the
Secretary-General states:

31. The performance of the’ Commander, the officers and
soldiers of UNIFIL have captured our admiration. They are
persons worthy of the responsibility that has been placed on
their shoulders.

“It goes without saying that a change in the position of
the Israeli authorities is yet another prerequisite for significant progress.”
. /

32. The delegation of Kuwait welcomes the presence of
the new representative of Bolivia. He will no doubt maintain the same level of vigour Bolivia has so far displayed in
the work of the Council.

37. The Council is aware of the negative policy of Israel.
The main obstacle to the full deployment of UNIFIL would
immediately vanish once Israel extended a hand of cooperation to UNIFIL. That is the crux of the matter.

33. My delegation learned with indignation, sadness and
shock of the brutal assassination of David Sibeko, spokesman of justice, spokesman of the anti-apartheid movement,
whom I had known for many years. This dastardly act
shows the illusion colonial offtcials entertain. They think
that by assassinating individuals, they will make the spirit
and determination of peoples to resist oppression fade
away. David Sibeko is yet another in a procession of martyrs sacrificed for human dignity.

38. The Council’s resolutions are challenged and the
diplomatic efforts by some members have not yet SUCceeded. The power of persuasion, about which so much has
been said here, has not worked with Israel and the Council
finds itself a prisoner of the ugly and crude realities of
I
politics.
39. What can the Council do, then? There is no hope for a
sudden change of heart by Israel. Its opposition to UNIFIL’s total deployment will continue and the militia group
in the south will continue to be the tool for carrying out and
implementing such opposition.
:

34. The Council adopted its resolution 425 (1978) in
March 1978: in the aftermath of an Israeli invasion of
Southern Lebanon. When it adopted that resolution, it had
two main goals in mind. The first was the restoration of
Lebanese authority in Southern Lebanon; the second was
the restoration of peace and security in the area. After 15
months, we have come back here, and members of the
Council are indeed entitled to ask what has been restored of
Lebanese authority in the south. Where is the peace and
security resolution 425 (1978) was supposed to ensure?
There is neither peace nor security.

40. It is regrettable that the Lebanese Government is
unable to restore its authority in the south, in its own
country. Nevertheless, the Council should, without let-up,
insist on the implementation of its ‘resolutions.
,.
41. The only glimmer of hope for the full deployment of
UNIFIL in the south, as stipulated in resolution 425 (1978).
lies in insistence on the full implementation of the Council
resolution through the efforts of those who have leverage
with Israel and through the contacts of the SecretaryGeneral and hi representatives in the area.

35. Resolution 425 (1978) calls for the deployment of
United Nations forces down to the internationally recognized boundaries between Lebanon and Israel. Where are
those forces nou/! Why are they not deployed on the
borders? Who prevents them? Which side blocks their
deployment? The reports on the implementation of resolution 425 (1978) have always placed the blame on the negative attitude of the Government of Israel. It has blocked
UNIFIL. It has undermined the discharge of its mandate.
Opposition to UNIFIL’s full deployment and resistance to
the implementation of resolution 425 (1978) are well-known
elements of the policy of the Government of Israel. Major
Had&d would not have been in the south had it not been
for the generous and unlimited support of Israel. The attitude of the Government of Israel to resolution 425 (1978) is,
to put it mildly, one of defence of the Council. Yet Israel
gets away with it, because the Council has found itself
engulfed and entangled in a situation in which options have
become limited. Israel makes no bones about its support for
the militia group in the south, and it unabashedly states that
it has no intention of cooperating with UNIFIL for the full
deployment of its troops in the south.

42. It is tragic that the first casualties of this policy of
blocking UNIFIL are the innocent civilians who have left
their homes and abodes and gone towards the north, looking for safety. The New York Times reported on 3 1 May that
“Tyre was little more than a ghost town, with shops shuttered and streets deserted”.
43. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees appealed for half a million dollars to
feed 40,000 persons displaced by Israeli attacks in Southern
Lebanon. Thirty houses have been destroyed. These Palestinians have experienced displacement many times in their
lives. The original sin was their displacement by Israel in
1948. Even in their dispersal, they are chased and gunned
down.

36. In paragraph 35 of his report, the Secretary-General
states:

44. The reoresentative of Israel stated in the course of the
debate in th; Security Council on 3 1 May that Article 5 1 of
the United Nations Charter gives his Government the right
to strike at the Palestinian concentrations in Lebanon. He
said:

“Continued representations to the Israeli authorities
have as yet failed to achieve the change of position

“my Government is exercising its inherent tight of selfdefence, a right enjoyed by every sovereign State, a right
4

which has found expression also in Article 51 of the
Charter”

tlement is a right and a duty. We have fulfilled and will
continue to fttlfI1 that right and that duty?
’

[214&h meeting, puru. NJ.

That bold misinterpretation of the Charter amounts to
adding insult to injury. Israel, whose record in violating the
Charter is almost unmatchable, has no right to invoke
Article 51 of the Charter. It is the Palestinians, more than
any other people, who should seek protection in the Charter. Those who occupy”the territory of others and claim it as
their own should not expect the lawful owners of the land
sheepishly to surrender their unquestioned rights. Where is
the Palestinian homeland? What is left of it? The policy
pursued by Israel of colonizing the West Bank and Gaza is
well known to everybody in the world. On the basis of a
strange and really undefinable claim brought out by the
theologians and politicians, the West Bank and Gaza have
suddenly, almost overnight, become part and parcel of the
land of Israel. Palestinians, who are owners of the land, exist
in their own country on sufferance, and Israel treats them as
undesirable aliens in their own country.

50. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, issued a.
statement in which he deplored the action by Israel. The
indignation over Israel’s action is world-wide. Yet the repre-.
sentative of Israel has the gall to pontificate on the right to
self-defence. The most fundamental principles of the Charter are the right of peoples to self-determination, and the
non-acquisition of territory by force. The Israeli representative conveniently overlooked them. So long as the territory
of the Palestinians is being colonized, their land exprop
riated, their basic and elementary rights denied, their
resources-including
water-confiscated, they will continue their struggle for the achievement of their goals as
defined in the Charter. It is they, and not the Israelis, who
are upholding the tenets of international law which arc so
disingenuously invoked by the representative of Israel.
5 1. The UNIFIL problem arises from the fact that Israel is
waging a campaign of genocide against the people of Palestine. It does not allow UNIFIL to be deployed on the
borders because it is obsessed with the Palestine Liberation
Organization, whose only objective is the termination of
Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.

45. Programmes for the establishment of Jewish settlements are pursued in frantic earnest. Water, which is the
life-line of the Palestinians in the territory, is being diverted
to supply the illegal Jewish settlements.
46. The world has not ‘yet recovered from the shock triggered by the decision of the Israeli cabinet on 3 June to
author& the establishment of a Jewish settlement adjacent
to Nablus. The fencing off of 200 acres immediately followed. This land was taken from defenceless Palestinians
who have owned it for hundreds of years. The official
spokesman of the United States, on whose political, military
and economic support Israel is entirely dependent, said:

52. Violence by Israel will not leave the Palestinians forlorn and forsaken; on the contrary, it will sharpen and whet
their appetite to fight even more tenaciously.
53. Palestinian withdrawal from the city of Tyre and from
other villages in the south and the closing of the military
offices in the area are constructive steps. They underscore
the spirit of cooperation the PLO has been displaying since
the arrival of UNIFIL. The Israeli answer to these gestures
of goodwill and co-operation is the intensification of Israel’s
genocidal campaign against the Palestinians.

“The point most disturbing about the Israeli Cabinet’s
decision yesterday is that the establishment of new settlements is harmful to the peace process and it is particularly regrettable at this time, with negotiations just
beginning.”

54. Bringing death upon civilians, Lebanese or Palestinian, will not end the resistance of the Palestinian people to
occupation, as the invasion by Israel of Southern Lebanon
has shown. Therefore, the Israeli strategy may wreak havoc
on Southern Lebanon but it will not exterminate the
Palestinians.

According to a Jewish Telegraphic Agency report of 5 June,
the State Department spokesman said that “the United
States would not take any steps to prevent further settlements in the future, other than diplomatic between friends”.

55. In this connexion, I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to a letter from Chairman Yasser
Arafat of the PLO addressed to the Secretary-General. This
letter has been published at my request as an official document. Chairman Arafat wrote the following:
“The war of annihilation which the aggressor Israeli
authorities are waging against our people, our institutions and our camps is a crime punishable under intemational law and is taking place at this stage in this century
in which all mankind, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the principles of civilized nations have condemned such heinous crimes as are being perpetrated by
the Israeli forces against us on land, by sea and by
air.“[See S/13379.]

47. It is thii ambivalent attitude of the United States that
has encouraged Israel to defy the United Nations, its Charter and resolutions, and in many ways has pushed the
-Palestinians to despair.
48. It is inconceivable, in my view and in that of my
delegation, that a permanent member of the Security Council, which has special responsibility for upholding theprovisions of the Charter and ensuring respect for those provisions, provides Israel with all the assistance it needsincluding, incidentally, money-for the establishment of
these settlements, often described by United States officials
as an obstacle to peace.
49. The Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Begin-whose experience in terrorism is, I would say, not very much less
considerable-lost no time in answering hi critics, including those from the United States. At the opening of the
Herut Party’s fourteenth national convention, he said: ‘Set-

56. We read with extreme indignation and anger about
the acts of vandalism by Jewish fanatics against defenceless
Palestinians in Hebron, when a group of gangsters raided
5

the houses of poor Palestinians, beat them up and destroyed
their furniture. All these acts of defiance, be they committed
by the Government of Israel or by Jewish vandals, are the
result of the military occupation by Israel of the West Bank
and Gaza.

meeting], the situation in the area of activities of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), and indeed
other parts of Lebanon, has continued to deteriorate. The
nxsor. is not far to seek. It lies in the incessant aggressive
actions on the part of Israel against that country.

57. It isthe inability of the Security Council to take drastic
measures against Israel in order to put an end to its occupation of Palestinian territory that has given rise to the present
actions of Israel. Had the Council decisively confronted
Israel, that situation would not have reached the present
stage. The Lebanese Government comes to the Council
with legitimate expectations. It expects from the Council the
full implementation of resolutions 425 (1978) and 444
(1979). UNIFIL, with its limitations, cannot by itself ensure
the attainment of such a goal. In the view of my delegation
the Council should apply punitive measures against Israel
so as to force it to comply with its resolutions. Israel banks
mainly on the opposition of the United States to the application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is
because of that opposition that the Council finds itselfin the
present morass. It is high time to take the Israeli bull by the
horns. There is always a limit to patience. Those who expect
Lebanon to settle for ice in wintertime are mistaken. The
situation in the Middle East has proved beyond any doubt
that the kid-glove. treatment given to Israel is counterproductive. The Council, therefore, must throw down the
gauntlet and act decisively.

61. My delegation in the course of the unofftcial consultations among the members of the Council supported the
view of those dountries which considered that the Council
should take more decisive steps to call a halt to Israeli
aggression. In this regard we drew attention to the passage
contained in the memorandum of the Lebanese Govemment dated 30 May 1979, which states:

58. Mr. HULINSK%’ (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): Permit me first of all to congratulate the

“The Lebanese Government believed that the time had
come for the Council to choose between allowing Israel
to continue escalating the so-called ‘cycle of violence’ or
putting an end, forcefully and unhesitatingly, to a course
of action that inevitably leads to a state of affairs wherein
international peace and security will be most seriously
imperilled, in the Middle East. . .“. [S/Z336Z. annex,
para. 2.1

The experience of the latest informal consulations of the
Council and the diplomatic efforts which have been made
on this matter only serve to confirm the view of the Lebanese Government that:
“As there are no visible signs of any Israeli compliance
with the Security Council’s consensus, Lebanon can only
express regret that precious time waslost.*‘[ZXd. para. 3.1

representative of Portugal, Ambassador Futscher Pereira,
who with outstanding diplomatic talent and authority discharged the functions of the President of the Security Council in May. The fact that he is a skilful and experienced
diplomat is something that I have long known; but the fact
that he is a connoisseur of Czech classical music is something which I only found out in the course of his term of
offtce as President.

62. The open acts of armed intrusion by Israel into Lebanese territory, the severe bombing of Lebanese towns and
villages and also Palestinian refugee camps is only one link
in the chain of conspiracy against Lebanon. Lebanese independence, its territorial integrity and sovereignty are threatened. What we are dealing with here is a deliberate plan
both for the dismemberment of the Lebanese State and for
the undermining of the Palestinian resistance movement.

59. Mr; PRESIDENT, permit me also niost cordially to
salute you, a talented diplomat and outstanding diplomatic
representative of the fraternal Union -of Soviet Socialist
Republics in your post as President of the Security Council
for June. Only the other day the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Soviet Union, Mr. Kosygin, concluded a
visit to Prague where he exchanged views with my Govemment on a wide range of questions of co-operation between
Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. Particular attention
was focused on questions of intensifying socialist economic
integration between our two countries, but the parties to the
talks also expressed their views on a number of foreign
policy issues, in particular a question that is closely linked to
the, item on the Council’s agenda today: the question of the
situation in the Middle East. In this regard, both parties, as
was indicated in the communique issued at the end of the
visit, expressed their solidarity with the Arab peoples which
reject the separate deal concluded under the aegis of the
United States between Egypt and Israel and reaffirmed their
unswerving desire to achieve a just peace in the Middle East.

63. The timing of the Israeli aggressive actions against
Lebanon, symbolically enough, has coincided with the
handshaking going on between the parties to the separate
treaty between Cairo and Tel Aviv. But even without this
gratuitous symbolism it is not dillicult to seein the intensification of Israeli armed intervention in Lebanon and in the
continuing refusal of the Israeli Government to comply
with the resolutions of the Security Council a connexion
and a direct relationship with that separate treaty.

60. Since the last meetings of the Security Council and the
adoption of the two statements of the President of the
Council &ted 26 April [214Zst meeting] and 15 May [2144th

64. Within the context of the item under discussion, concluding a separate peace in the Sinai Peninsula amounts to
ensuring that the internal affairs of Lebanon and to create
conditions for striking a blow against the Palestinian resistance movement. Their ultimate goal is obvious: it is to
impose upon the Arab countries, one by one, conditions
which could lead, inter alia, to abandonment of the idea of
creating an independent Palestinian State.
65. The separate peace, signed by its authors in disregard
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
General Assembly and in contradiction of the basic interests of the Arab peoples, .only serves to exacerbate the
situation in that area and seriously complicates and makes

part, I should like to..express my deep satisfaction at the
fraternal reIations existing between Czechoslovakia and the
Soviet Union.

even more remote the possibility of achieving a just Andy
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East con&t. Confirmation of this danger to peace and security is the present
situation in Southern Lebanon.

71. The next speaker is the representative of Israel, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

66. The Czechoslovak delegation shares the concern of
the Secretary-General. over the situation in Southern
Lebanon-concern which he expressed in his report on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), published on. 19 April 1979 [.S/13258]. The latest events in that
area have once again confirmed the timeliness of the
Secretary-General’s remarks contained in paragraphs 26
and 27 of that report with regard to obstacles to the performance by UNIFIL of its mandate. The latest events in
Lebanon have also fully confiied that Israel’s continuing
refusal to comply with resolution’425 (1978) is the primary,
nay the sole, reason for this explosive situation. Israel, in
spite of the decisions of the Security Council, is continuing
its direct military presence in Southern Lebanon and is
openly using the border area as as spring-board for carrying
out its uninterrupted concatenation of aggressive actions
against that country. Furthermore, Israel is openly using
for its purposes elements under the leadership of Major
Haddad which represent’an unprecedented threat to the
United Nations Force in the performance of its task. Thus a
situation is being created which is constantly causing fresh
affliction to Lebanon and may lead “to a renewed and
serious deterioration of the situation in the Middle East as a
whole” [ibid., para. 29J

72. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Sir, at the outset let me join with
previous speakers by paying my respects to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We trust that you will conduct the Council’s
business with skill, propriety ‘and impartiality.
73. I should also like to take this opportunity of reiterating the words of appreciation which I addressed at the
previous meeting to the representative of Portugal for the
exemplary manner in which he carried out his duties as
President of the Council last month.
74. The principal business beforethe Council today is the
renewal of the UNIFIL mandate, which expires on 19 June
1979.

75. Resolution 425 (1978), which established UNIFIL,
took cognizance of the fundamental problems of Lebanon
which extend throughout the length and breadth of that
troubled country. However, there was a built-in contradiction between that recognition and the UNIFIL mandate,
which was limited in scope and confined to the south of
Lebanon. The UNIFIL area of operation was further constricted in practice by the terrorist PLO, which prevented by
force of arms UNIFIL’s entry into the Tyre pocket. The
PLO weakened UNIFIL’s effectiveness still further by infiltrating several hundred of its terrorists into the area under
UNIFIL control and also by challenging it directly, with
growing intensity in recent months, as wasnoted also by the
Secretary-General in his statement to the Council on 31
May [2146th meeting], and again in his report of 8 June

67. At the present time, the Security Council agenda contains two items which are being discussed in tandem: first,
the situation in Southern Lebanon in light of the continuing
aggressive actions of Israel and, secondly, the extension of
the mandate of UNIFIL in Lebanon. In spite of the interdependence of these two items, the Czechoslovak delegation
shares the view of those members of the Council which have
expressed their preference for the adoption of a separate
resolution on each of these two items.

[S/133843.

68. Israel’s continuing aggressive actions are, as we have
stated, a constituent part of the conspiracy against Lebanon,
and the Security Council cannot, in our view, relegate discussion of the complaint of the Government of Lebanon
and of this new situation, as it were, to a secondary level. In
taking into account the conduct of Israel, the Council will
only be able to arrive at a decision on the problems before it
by the immediate adoption of effective measures under the
Charter for the purpose of ensuring compliance with Security Council resolutions on Southern Lebanon.

76. None the less, most of us would agree that UNIFIL
fulfils a useful function and Israel will continue to cooperate with the Force. Israel appreciates the efforts made
by the officers and men of UNIFIL, who are serving in the
most trying of conditions, and hopes that the outstanding
problems will be solved in the near future to the satisfaction
of those directly and legitimately concerned.

77. It is, therefore, a matter for regret that the representative of Kuwait, should have expressed himself this afternoon
in such unconstructive terms, engaging in diversionary tactics by introducing issues totally extraneous to the matters
here under discussion. In so doing, he confiied once again
that he is the undisguised spokesman in the Council of the
rejection& Arab States, unable to let pass any opportunity
to continue the political warfare against peace in the Middle
East. Perhaps the only thing that can be said to the credit of
the Kuwaiti representative is that he is reflecting faithfully
the position held by hi Government ever since it wasone of
the few countries in the world to reject Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). Everything that Kuwait has done and
is doing with relation to Israel, however disguised in the
Security Council and elsewhere, flows from this consistent
position.

69. With regard to the question of the UNIFIL mandate
in Lebanon, taking into account the position of the Govemment of Lebanon, we will not object to its extension. However, for the record, we reaffirm the Czechoslovak position
and reservations with regard to the Force, as set forth by my
delegation at the meetings of the Security Council on the
question on 19 March [2074th meeting], 3 May [2076rh
meeting] and 18 September 1978 [2085zh meeting], as well as
on 19 January 1979 [2ZZ3th meeting].
‘70. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Czechoslovakia for his kind
words about my country and about me personally. For my
7

was supposedly “reaffiiing
it” through United Nations
channels at Beirut. On the night of 4 to 5 June, PLO
terrorists made an unprovoked attack on the village of Bint
Jebel in the Irish sector of the UNIFIL area of operation.
Then, on the morning of 8 June, the very day that the
Secretary-General’s report wasbeing prepared, PLO terrorists attacked Lebanese militiamen near the village of Taibe.
They were beaten off, leaving behind arms and bazooka
rockets. A group belonging to the so-called Popular
Front-a constituent of the PLO-has
boasted of its
responsibility for both those incidents.

78. On previous occasions the representative of Kuwait
has claimed that he is not a partisan of the Arab States, but a
partisan of the Charter. As such, he might have been
expected to be familiar with Article 23, paragraph 1, defining the criteria for eligibility of non-permanent members for
election to the Council. That Article provides that due
regard should be specially paid:
“in the fast instance to the contribution of Members of
the United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to the other purposes of the
Organization”.

84. Moreover, on 8 June, there was an attempt atinfiltration at Bas al-Beide in the western sector of the UNIFIL
area of operation. On 9 June, UNIFIL apprehended a truck
full of PLO terrorists, once again in the western sector of its
area of operation. On 11 June, three PLO terrorists were
caught by soldiers of Fiji and three others by Dutch soldiers.
All six were taken out of the UNIFIL area and conveyed to
the Tyre pocket.

79. Having regard to that provision, the record of Kuwait
and of the group of States it represents scarcely qualifies it
for membership in the Council. Over the past 30 years that
group of Arab States has violated, with regard to Israel,
every purpose and principle of the Charter. In thii respect,
they have ignored, infer a&z Article 2, paragraph 1 of the
Charter-that ,is, the principle of the sovereign equality of
all Members of the Organization; Article2, paragraph3,
which lays down the duty of States to settle their intemational disputes by peaceful means; and Article2, paragraph4, which prohibits the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State.

85. As if this were not enough with regard to the UNIFIL
area of operation, the PLO-has also broken its so-called
commitment not to initiate hostilities across the border, for,
again on 8 June, it shelled civilian targets in northern
Galilee.
86. All this corroborates the notice I gave the Council in
my statement on 31 May, when I mentioned that lately
Israel had received information from reliable sources that a
decision had been taken to step up violence by the terrorist
PLO in Southern Lebanon.

80. More recently, in a letter of 29May from the Chairman of the ArabGroup to the Secretary-General, issued as
document S/13354, those Arab States have in effect issued a
formal declaration of war on the first step towards a comprehensive peace between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
One can safely assume that the presence of Kuwait on the
Council will be put forcefully at the disposal of that rejectionist position and it will prevent, as it has in the past
prevented, the adoption of any resolution unacceptable to
the Arab States concerned.

87. Mention has also been made of a joint communiqu&
issued by the PLO and certain Lebanese groups allied v&h
it, to the effect that “‘all armed forces will be evacuated from
villages and towns” in Southern Lebanon and “the PLO
will remove all of its offices from the city of Tyre”[ibid].

81. As a self-proclaimed partisan of the Charter, the representative of Kuwait is also no doubt aware that under
Article 7, paragraph 3 he is bound to refrain from voting on
any matter connected with the Arab-Israel conflict-a diipute to which hi country is party-unless, of course, it is
proved that Kuwait is no longera party to that conflict And
yet, the representative of Kuwait comes here as a selfproclaimed partisan of the Charter and ail it stands for.

88. The practical implications of that communiquC are
virtually meaningless, and there can be little doubt that the
communiqut will serve as a smoke-screen for continued
PLO violence both within the UNIFIL area of operation
and across the border with Israel.
89. The communiqut is not the first one of its kind and, as
with the PLO so-called renewed commitment which I have
just discussed, it will not be the first to be totally ignored by
the its authors. Even if it is implemented, all that will
happen is that some PLO operatives will be redeployed at a
.distance of a few kilometres from the villages in which they
have taken cover thus far apparently under pressure from
the local inhabitants themselves, who are no longer prepared to put up with the devastation and agony inflicted on
them by the terrorist PLO. Also, as the communiqutmakes
clear, there is no intention of removing the hundreds of
PLO terrorists located inside the area controlled :by UNIFIL or to withdraw the 1,500 or so PLO terrorists and their
weaponry from the Tyre pocket, which reaches to within
eight miles of Israel. In short, the communiqut is nothing
more than a transparent exercise in deception.

82. The crucial question before the Council in the present
context is whether once and for all the use of Lebanese
territory for acts of aggression against Israel will be ended
and to what extent UNIFIL will be instrumental in that. In
that context, attention has been drawn to the “reaflirmation” of the terrorist PLO of its so-called commitment not
to initiate any action from inside the UNIFIL
area of
operation and not to shell Israel Defence Forces or the local
Lebanese forces in the south from Lebanese territory
‘Mess they are attacked first” as the Secretary-General’s
report has it [ibid. para. 38].
83. Members of the Council should not be hoodwinked.
This so+alled commitment is carefully phrased so as not to
apply to civilians, the traditional and almost exclusive target
of PLO barbarity. Moreover, the PLO has never honoured
such a “commitment”,
and indeed was in the process of
violating it in South Lebanon at precisely the same time as it

90. I feel bound to refer at this point to another attempt at
diversion carried out with a view to making political capital
by confusing the issues. I have in mind the misleading
8

references to the Israeli-Lebanese General Armistice Agreement of 1949, contained ‘in the Lebanese memorandum
[S/1336a, an agreement that was drawn to the attention of
members by ,the Lebanese representative in his statement
before the Council on 31 May.

States under general international law to prevent the use of ’
their territory for acts of aggression against another State.
97. Lebanon has for years+md not just since the massive
entry of the PLO into its territory in the early 197Osignored those obligations flowing from both the Armistice
Agreement and general international law. As long as those
fundamental obligations are not respected-and assurances
are not forthcoming that they will be respected-reference
to the Armistice Agreement and the frameworks established under it can scarcely be meaningful.

91. The sudden interest of the Lebanese renresentative in
that armistice agreement and his professed a&%rnent to it
at this late stage rings hollow, to say the least. The Lebanese
representative surely does‘not believe that the Council’s
memory is so short or its members so ill-informed that they
are not aware of the fact that in 1967 the Government of
Lebanon renounced the Armistice Agreement with Israel.

98. The position of Israel vi&vis Lebanon remains
unchanged. Israel supports the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries.

92. As members will recall, on 8 June 1967, the third day
of the Arab-Israel war, the Israel representative on the
Israel-Lebanon Mixed Armistice Commission requested at
Rosh Hanikra a meeting with the Lebanese representative
within the framework of the Commission. The Lebanese
reply was that Lebanon would not agree to such a meeting
“in view of the state of war”. That position was consonant
with that taken by the Foreign Minister of Lebanon in this
very chamber on 30 May 1967 when he expressedunlimited
support for the acts of war being committed against Israel
and announced that
“The Government and people of Lebanon would fulfil
their commitments under the charter of the League of
Arab States and the Arab Treaty of Mutual Defence.*’

99. Moreover, despite Lebanon’s ongoing problems and
their complexity, Israel believes that the time has none the
less come to exert all efforts to move towards a negotiated
peace between Israel and Lebanon. In keeping with this
primary objective of Israel’s foreign policy, Prime Minister
Begin in the Knesset on 7 May 1979 addressed a direct
appeal to the President of Lebanon, inviting him to a meeting with a view to reaching a negotiated peace treaty
between Israel and Lebanon.
100. On 31 May 1979, in this chamber, I drew the attention of the Lebanese representative to that proposal to
make peace. The Government of Israel still awaits the
response of Lebanon to that proposal.

[1344th meeting, para. 19.)

93. Not only did Lebanon declare that it was in a state of
war with Israel but it also took active part in the war by
sending its aircraft to bomb Israeli territory. Thus, by these
declarations and actions, the Government of Lebanon
made it clear that it considered that the Armistice Agreement had come to an end.

101. I reserve the right to participate again in this debate
at a later stage.
102. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, I regret that
the representative of Israel should have left the table. I
should have liked him to continue sitting here and listen,
instead of employing the tactics of hit-and-run. Israel can
employ those tactics in Lebanon but not here in the
Council.

94. There are fundamental facts which cannot be sidestepped or distorted in any circumstances or in any context.
The Israeli-Lebanese General Armistice Agreement of 23
March 1949 was a bilateral instrument between our two
countries, which were the only parties to it. It is totally
inadmissible for the Lebanese representative to try, as he
did in his aforementioned memorandum, to make others
party to it.

103. It is always the habit of Israeli official circles to quote
biblical sources and religious documents. I have brought the
Koran with me-in English-and I should like, by way of
introduction to my remarks, to read out the following
excerpt from it:
(‘He” -meaning God--“will enrich them from his
own abundance. As for those who are scornful and
proud, He will sternly punish them and they shall find
none besides Allah to protect them.”

95. Moreover, the essenceof the Israeli-Lebanese Armistice Agreement was a commitment to putting an end to all
hostilities and acts of aggression between Israel and
Lebanon. This was summed up in article III of the Agreement, which inter alia prohibited terrorists from operating
on or from the territories of both parties. Paragraph 2 of
that article laid down that no “paramilitary forces”, including “non-regular forces”
“shall commit any warlike or hostile act against the
military or paramilitary forces of the other Party, or
against civilians in territory under the control of that
party”.

That is taken from the Penguin Classics translation of the
Koran, on page 384.
104. Now it has been stated that Israel is willing to support
the UNIFIL mandate. First, let me say the followingperhaps it is easier to refer the representative of Israel to the
report of the Secretary-General in which he has said:
“Continued representations to the Israeli authorities
have as yet failed to achieve the change of position
required for a significant improvement in the deployment of UNIFIL.” [S/13384, puru. 35.1

96. That obligation under the Armistice .Agreement was
merely a reiteration of the fundamental obligation of all
’ Ojj’icial Records of the Security
ment No. 4.

Council. Fourth

Year, Special Supple-

9

In paragraph 42 of the same document, which we are now
considering, the Secretary-General, says:
“It goes without saying that a change in the position of
the Israeli authorities is yet another prerequisite for significant progress.‘*

111. Haddad, who is no friend of mine, is a product of this
anachronistic situation. UNIFIL’s powerlessness is also a
result of it. But what is really the crux of the matter is&is
genocidal campaign against the Palestinian people, this
denial of their basic, elementary and primordial human
right to self-determination and to live in peace in their own
territory in the West Bank and Gaza.

105. That is not new. In our debate of December 1978and even before that-1 addressed two questions to the.
representative of Israei as to whether Israel was willing to
co-operate with the United Nations and whether it was
willing to co-operate with UNIFIL, in particular, for the full
deployment of the UNIFIL troops. He did not answer my
questions. The two questions are therefore still valid. It is in
Israel’s hands to achieve the successful attainment of the
UNIFIL objective. He has brushed them aside; that is his
right and prerogative.

112. Mr. Begin now says that the land is theirs and that they
want coexistence. Mr. Dayan has said that he wants coexistence with the Palestinians. That is fair and square if hewanfs
coexistence. But coexistence,noton the West Bankand Gaza
only; there should be coexistence all over the land of Palestine, a land in which all peoples, regardless of their faith,
religion or creed, should live and coexist; not only in the West
Bank and Nablus where they expropriate the landsof those
defenceless, poor Palestinians who have no way of defending
their rights and who are being subjected to humiliations,
insults and, should they open their mouths, deportation and
consignment to the camps of thirst and hunger. That isreally
the crux of the matter.

106. The representative of Israel accused me of interjecting into the Council debate extraneous elements about
Jewish settlements and so on. It is not my nature to depart
from the item on the agenda; it is the nature of representatives of Israel-not only of the present one but also of those
who were here in the United Nations before him-to depart
from instead of concentrating on and confronting the issue
and to bring in extraneous elements. I never do that.

113. The UNIFIL situation is a casualty, a consequence, a
result and a by-product of the whole unacceptable malaise
of the situation in the Middle East. The Secretary-General is
correct in saying that it is part and parcel of the whole
situation.

107. What is at stake here? Of what is UNIFIL’s inability
to bring about the full deployment of its forces on the
internationally recognized borders between Israel and
Lebanon a consequence? Of occupation.

114. The representative of Israel said I am the spokesman
of those who are complicating the peace process. Sometimes it seems to me that we are treated as though we were
children in this Council chamber. Who is really complicating the peace process-those who speak here in line with the
tenets of the Charter, or those who occupy the te.rritory of
Palestine, those who expropriate the lands of poor Paiestinian. farmers, those who claim the land as theirs, although
according to international law, facts and truth the land
belongs to the Palestinians? Sometimes I feel as though we
were engaged in a wild-goose chase over the whole matter;
Where are we heading7 It is a pity that the Council should be
subjected to this futile linguistic exercise.

108. Mr. Begin, as reported today in The New York Times,
has said “we shall pay no attention” to criticism about the
recent decision of the Government of Israel to establish
Jewish settlements close to Nablus in the heart of Palestinian territory. The article continues: “Mr Begin said Israel
has a right to build settlements in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip ‘since this is our land’.” That is the crux of the matter.
UNIFIL isa casualty of this concept of Zionism: that the
West Bank and Gaza is the land of Israel. I do not know
what kind of “land” it is that Mr. Begin can claim it to be
his. I do not like to take part in an acrimonious debate, but
it is my understanding and that of the international community that that is Palestinian territory occupied by force
since 1967.

115. We are not really here for acrimony and polemics,
We are here for the promotion of UNIFIL’s success.We are
here for the promotion of peace. But how can we achieve.
peace when the bases of peace, the structure, the edifice of
peace which is respect for human rights, respect for the
rights of self-determination for the Palestinian people and
respect for the principle of withdrawal from territories occupied by force are being mutilated?

109. Ambassador Blum always gives us what I would call
prosaic and pastoral dissertations on international law. The
first tenet of international law is that it proscribes, prohibits
and is against the occupation of other people’s territory by
force. Is this occupation really in line with international
law7 Is the buildling of Jewish settlements in line with
international law7 What about the Charter which underscores and reaffums that the non-acquisition of territory by
force is one of its sacred tenets? Is that respected by Israel or
its representative who pontificates here on the tenets and
nature of international law?

116. Yet the representative of Israel comes here and
accuses us of complicating the peace process. That is not in
line with what we want; that is in line with the mentality of
his Prime Minister.
117. I am sorry that when today I read 77re New York
Times I wasshocked. I am a student of Shakespeare, and the
first thing that came to my mind was that the statement of
Prime Minister Begin was reminiscent of King Lear in the
last act of the play of that name. It was totally irresponsible
and imperious. It was total lunacy without any regard to
reason or to civil&d behaviour. It was reminiscentof King
Lear in the play’s last act. I am sorry to have to saythis, but
we cannot produce a King Lear in the last half of the

110. I should also like to remind members of the Council
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Bights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Bights. Incidentally, Israel is a party to those two
international covenants. Both those covenants begin with
the same sentence to the effect that all peoples have the right
to selfdetermination. That is the crux of the matter.
10

twentieth century. We do not want to haveanyone like King
Lear in this world. That is the whole problem. It is amazing
that at this juncture when all peoples are drawing daser to
one another and heading for co-operation and in view of
what we say here on the concept of interdependence, all of a
sudden in the second half of the twentieth century a King
Lear emerges. Really, it hurts me to draw this analogy with
King Lear, but this is what came to my mind. That was how
King Lear behaved when he was trying to distribute his
wealth among his three daughters-in
total irrationality
and irresponsibility and in complete disregard of all human
values.
118. I really sympathize with the representative of Israel
because he has to defend the indefensible. Yet we are here
subjected to this endless verbiage, which will not lead US
anywhere. I mcognize that UNIFIL is only an’ exercise in
futility so long as the Government of Israel fails to display
sincerity or to co-operate. We are not interested in engaging
in a wild-goose chase. We are interested in the promotion
and success of UNIFIL.

dissertations, pontification and unwelcome lamentations
about international law and civilized behaviour. This is not
the way to confront the problem. If Israel wants to live in
peace, well, the provisions ofthe Charter are clear. They call
for the non-acquisition of territory by force, and for the
right of people to self-determination. After all, Israel subscribed to the Charter and to the two international covenants I cited earlier. And yet .we are subjected here to this
unwelcome complaint about extraneous elements and so
on. That is all I wanted to say.at this juncture.
122. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerarion from Russiajr): I
should like to inform’ the members of the Council that I
have just received a letter from the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya containing a request that he be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

119. My last point is about this campaign against the
Palestinian people. I am not Palestinian. But if I were a
Palestinian, I would hold aloft the banner of terrorism and
be proud of it. When people feel they are cornered and
consigned to poverty and degradation and to denial and
subjugation, in despair they can only resort to terrorismand, by the way, the Israelis have no right to speak about
terrorism. I do not like to speak bad English, but we know
about the pot calling the kettle black. I shall not go on about
this. It is unfair to call the Palestinians “terrorists”. After all,
Mr. Begin is no saint.

123. I invite the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
124. Mr. KIKHIA ( Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr. President, I should like at the outset to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. My delegation
has had ample opportunity to witness your skill and wisdom, and we are confident that with these abilities you will
successfully guide the affairs of the Council.
125. I also take the opportunity to commend your predecessor in that high post, Mr. Vasco Futscher Pereira of
Portugal, who skilfully and successfully guided the work of
the Council last month.

120. When I see the representativeof the PLO sitting there
modestly and humbly-and
it is he who is a product of the
soil of Palestine, not these spokesmen of the Israeli
delegation-I sympathize with him. The product of the soil
of Palestine cannot return to his own country, while foreigners, aliens can go there. I do not know where they come
from; I have not really researched their origins. I have no
interest in that. I never indulge in personal issues. But we
read in l7re New York Times that seven Americans who
attacked these poor Palestinians the other day were arrested,
and the Defence Minister of Israel, Mr. Weizman, displayed
a sort of kindness to them saying “We apologize” or something to that effect. Seven Americans attacked these poor
Palestinians in their own country and burned their fumiture, and yet we hear of the terrorism of these Palestinians.
In what part of the world are we living? If this is a global
picture of the world, then I suppose that we shall have to bid
civilization good-bye. This is the problem that is confronting us. It is not really one of introducing extraneous elements or of speaking about complicating the peace. The
crux of the matter is the survival of the poor Palestinians.
Where are they to go from their land? They cannot go back,
while they see and read about these American citizens who
fly in and overnight claim citizenship in Palestine and go to
Nablus and take over the territory, the homes and the
abodes of the poor Palestinians, who are thrown out. This is
the situation.

126. The issue before the Council is clear. A sovereign
State and Member of the United Nations has been subjected
to flagrant acts of aggression committed on a daily basis by
the racist Zionist regime. Parts of the land of Lebanon
continue to be occupied by Zionist military forces both
directly and indirectly through their agents. Villages, towns
and refugee camps have been subjected daily to indiscriminate bombardment by aircraft, heavy artillery, ground missiles and warships. The Zionist military forces continue to
obstruct the work of the United Nations forces and the
implementation of the resolutions of the Council.
127. During the last few weeks we have witnessed the
escalation by Israel of its criminal attacks in Lebanon that
are aimed at the civilian population. We are informed by
Zionist statements and press reports that this policy of
aggression will be further escalated in the future. The Tel
Aviv daily, Ha’aretz, reported on 31 May that a new policy
of daily attacks on Lebanon had been adopted and that
those attacks might be escalated in the future into wider and
deeper raids than the Litani invasion that took place in
March 1978.
128. The Zionist military spokesman has been saying after
every raid on Lebanon in recent weeks that:
“The raid was carried out in accordance with the
policy adopted by Israel to strike at any time and any
place in Lebanon it deems it proper.”

121. What is this? Thii is really a Broadway comedy.
Sometimes it reminds me of James Bond stories, but that is
the nature of the problem. And yet we are subje&d
to
11

129. On 18 May, the Zionist forces raided farmers’ buildingsin the ,Adlotm area, north of the Litani river-a raid
which was described by the Israeli press on 21 ,May as:
“another look at the chain of selective strikes at Palestinian targets, and from this aspect it is part of the war of
attrition that the Israeli Defence Forcesbegan against
the Palestinian organizations without any cormexion to
Palestinian acts or reprisal for them”.

That is a clear admission that th.e Chief of Staff gave a clear
order to shell and bombard the civilian populatiqn in the
villages’and towns of SouthernLebanon. As was known to
the world, thousands of those civilians were killed and
wounded. Tens of thousands became refugees. Their houses
and .properties were destroyed. Were these Israeli war
crimes limited to that area and to the invasion? “No,”
admitted General Gur. He said: , ;
“It does not help to be a nice person. When I served as
Commander of the northern zone, I shelled and bombarded them for two and a’ half years.”
Question: “With no distinction?”

130. The Zionist representative cannot convince anyone
here by his statements that these barbaric acts of aggression
are a result of Palestinian acts of resistance or that they are
directed in selfdefence against military targets in Lebanon,
or by attempts to put the blame on others. His statements
are contradicted by the military spokesman of his regime.
They are obviously contradicted by statements of members
of the Begin cabinet. On 16 February 1979 the General and
Minister Ariel Sharon told the Israeli radio, “I have always
maintained that a war of annihilation must be waged at all
times against Yasser Arafat and the PLO”-meaning
against the Palestinian people and the Lebanese people.

Gur: “What distinction? and what did thecivilians of
Irbid (northern Jordan) do to us when I shelled and
bombarded it? The Israel Defence Forces keep two flghter jets in the sky. They shoot, we bombard.‘*
Question: “But the statements of the military spokesmen always spoke of returning fire and hitting terrorist
targets?”
To that question, General Gur had a cynical answer of two
words: “Oh, really . . .“. In replying to another question, the
General went on to say: “for 30 years, we have been lighting
against a population which is living in villages and towns”.

131. In May 1978, Mordechai Gur, the Israeli Chief of
Staff in charge of the invasion of Southern Lebanon in
March 1978, gave.a frank iuterviewto the Israeli press. That
interview was very important and, in fact, very shocking in
its arrogance, to the extent that Gur admitted committing
war crimes against the civilian population in Southern
Lebanon and elsewhere.

133. In the Israeli weekly, HaoZam Hazi of 24 May 1978,
Uri Avneri commented on that interview with General Gur.
He said:
“Now it appears that for 30 years the Israeli Govemments and the Israel Defence Forces authorities have lied
not only to the whole world but also to the Israeli public
on whose behalf they acted.” _’

132. With the Council’s permission I should like to read
some excerpts from that terrifying interview with the former
Israeli Chief of Staff following the invasion on March 1978 of
Lebanon, in which he personally took command. The interview wasgiven by General Gur to the daily AIHamisharon
14 May 1978. Excerpts were reprinted and commented on in
the weekly Haohm Hazion 23 May 1978. Whenaskedbythe
reporters whether he had ordered the army to harm the
civilian population, General Gur answered:

Avneri added:
“It is possible to assume that most of the population in
Southern Lebanon sympathizes with the Palestinian
cause and with the PLO men. It is possible that they
embraced these men as heroes and helped them. But
according to international law this does not justify massive attacks on this population‘and, of course, not punishment like all the others.‘*

“How come this population become all of a sudden so
noble? They knew what the terrorists were doing. They
helped them before and after the operation and received
them as heroes.”
Question: “Your argument is that this population had
to be punished?”
Gur: “Like all others, I did not doubt this for one
moment.”
Question: “In your instructions to the Israel Defence
Forces, you did not ask them to distinguish between the
population and the men we want to harm?”
Gur: “I do not lie to myself. I gave this order to all the
army. When I give an order to the Israel Defence Forces
to enter into a populated area, and when I authorize a
doctrine of fue, I know what I am doing. When I ordered
Yanush (Commander-in-Chief
of the northern zone,
Avigdor Ben Gal) to use planes, artillery and tanks, I
knew what I was doing. When I told Yanush, ‘Move
tanks into Maroun El-I& as quickly as possible and
shell the village from a distance before our men arrive
and engage in a face-to-face battle’, I did know what I
was doing. I was the one who gave that order.”

Avneri went on to say
“In Nuremberg, Germany officers were brought to trial
because they killed civilian hostages in France. It did not
help them to claim that the civiliin population was
hostile to them and supportive of the French underground against the Germans. Those officers were sentenced to death and executed.‘*
134. The Zionist representative cannot deny these facts; I
challenge him to do so. Nor can he justify to the Council
these acts of mass murder and these war crimes admitted to
by a Chief of Staff of the Israeii army who led the largest
invasion so far against Lebanon. Such acts are still going on
to&y, and they will continue tomorrow.
135. If every one who supports the Palestinian cause is
considered by the Zionist military authorities to be a military target who must be punished by being murdered and
by having his house and property bombarded, then we can
12

assume that the entire Arab nation is a military target of the
fascist Zionist army. Anyone or any institution in theworld
that expresses sympathy for the Palestinian cause can
become a military target, according to this Nazi Zionist
principle.
136. Is it a crime to support a people that was expelled
from its homeland, whose homes and lands were usurped,
whose rights have been denied, whose physical existence is
being attacked? Is it a crime punishable by mass murder and
total destruction to give refuge to a people that is waging a
legitimate struggle agains’t the occupiers of its homeland?

language for Israeli occupation. On 23 March 1978. Haolam
Han’ wrote the following about the Haddad force: “This
force was created by Israel. It acts according to Israeli
instructions and it servesthe Israeli interests.*’ It is clear that
when the Zionist authorities handed over this area to the
so-called de facto forces, they in fact kept the area under
their own occupation.
143. Under the cover of this cynical trick, the so-called
autonomy plan, crimes against humanity are being committed by the Zionist fascists against the Palestinian Arabs in
the occupied territories. The plan itself is worst than an
insult to every self-respecting human being. Joseph C.
Harsch said in The Christian Science Monitor on 29 May last
that the plan “would, in effect, give the Arabs less self-rule
than American Indian tribes enjoyed even during the worst
days of white exploitation”.

137. The Palestinians :are in Lebanon and in other Arab
countries not because they chose to be there but because the
Zionist fascists forced them to be there and denied them their
inalienable right to liveas a free people in their own country,
Palestine. They have alegitimate right to struggle in order to
live in peace as a free and independent people in their own
country, and they have every right to be supported by all the
peace-loving and freedom-loving peoples of the world.

144. Civilians of the villages and towns in these occupied
lands are being subjected to the worst kind of occupation,
indeed. to barbaric occupation. Cultivated land is being
confiscated. Houses are being bulldozed. People are being
arrested, killed in the streets, attacked in their homes,
Round-the-clock curfews are enforced in the villages, towns
and refugee camps. Farms and vineyards are destroyed.
Universities and schools are forced to close. According to
the 20 May 1979 issue of l7ze Washington Post, the director
for West Bank operations of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East
described those atrocities in this way: “Now the policy
seems to be to impose long-term collective punishment for
the actions of a few.”

138. There is a clear link in the Zionist mind between the
escalation of Zionist aggression against Lebanon and
against the Palestinian people in and outside Palestine, on
the one hand; and the so-called peace treaty signed some
weeks ago, on the other.
139. Former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin wrote
in the Tel Aviv Ye&or ;4hronaut on 11 May that “‘the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty increased Israel’s freedom of action
in Lebanon”. It was made clear that the Zionist regime is
using the treaty in order ,to put pressure on other Arab
countries to make them surrender to the Zionist r&ime’s
imperialist schemes. That regime is attempting to liquidate
the forces of resistance, with the aim of subjugating the
Palestinian people and the whole Arab nation. The barbaric
attacks on Lebanon, as well as the criminal methods used
against the Palestinian people in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza, are part of an over-all evil policy of subjugating
the area under the Zionists and their imperialist allies and
masters.

145. The policy of colonization and the building of settlements on confiscated Arab lands has been intensified. On 7
June, like thieves under the cover of night, using army
helicopters, the Zionists built a new civilian colony on the
hills overlooking the Arab town of Nablus, which has a
population of over 50,000 Palestinians. By officially approving that colony, which is one in a long list of planned
colonies in heavily populated areas, the Begin Government
has proved that it is in full agreement with vigilantes like
Rabbi Meir Kahane, who, according to the 21 May issue of
me Washington Post, proposed “that all the 700,000 Arabs
in the West Bank be expelled by force”. The Begin Govemment has proved that it is in agreement also with Rabbi
Moshe Levinger, who said, according to the same paper:
“‘Judaea and Samaria” that is, the West Bank “are not
needed for security. God gave it to us.”

140. That policy is conducted under the cover of negotiations on the so-called autonomy plan for the Palestinians in
the occupied territories--and even the American press has
begun to doubt the goals and aims of that plan, in view of
the Zionist actions.
Anthony Lewis of l7re New York Tiies wrote on 4 June:
“The testing-ground of whether the treaty can set a
general pattern for peace is the West Bank, and there
Israeli actions have lately been so unrestrained as to seem
almost provocative. It is as if Israel were trying to show
that the peace treaty gave it carte blanche to settle and
permanently subjugate the West Bank.”

146. That policy is carried out in accordance with the old
racist Zionist claim-a false claim-that
Palestine was “a
land without a people for a people without land”. According to the racist Zionist ideology, the Arab Palestinian
people are a nonexisting people. The aim of the Zionists is
to establish an exclusively racist Jewish State, which continues to liquidate the Palestinian people, Moslems and
Christians.

141. This cynical trick which is called “autonomy plan” in
the West Bank and Gaza is as cynical as the Zionist trick of
“Major Haddad” in Southern Lebanon. Through these
so-called de facto forces, the Zionist regime is carrying out
its Hitlerite methods of occupation, expansion andeviction.

147. The Zionist entity is by its character and ideology a
racist, expansionist entity. Unless that racist and expansionist character is relinquished, peace will not be achieved in
the area.

142. The Zionist press has admitted that the Haddad
occupation of parts of Southern Lebanon is simply other
13

centrations of Lebanese as well as Palestinians, I say
‘cow&dly” because it cannot conceivably ,be heroic for
anyone to fly a plane 10,000 feet above a defenceless civilian
population and drop bombs on them to kill them. That is
not an act of heroism and therefore it should be described as
it really is, an act of cowardly murder against the civilian
Palestinian and Lebanese populations.
..,
157. The PLO has part of its headquarters m.Lebanon.
That is not because the PLO moved into Lebanon and
created refugee camps around it. it is logical that people.in
exile in refugee camps shouldbe able to use menand women
who fight for justice. Wc did not gather the Palestinians
around our offices, we grew ‘out of the Palestinian refugee
camps. There is no shame in starting a revohrtion from
outside, especially if one is expelled from one’s home and
property and finds oneself forced to live in exile. General de
Gaulle did not tight the Nazis from inside France, he conducted his war of liberation against the Nazis from outside
France. Other national liberation movements such as-those
of our brothers in southern Africa have part of theirmilitary
and political forces outside their own countries in neighbouring friendly countries which believe in the justice of
their cause and which are willing to make sacrifices sometimes to allow them to continue their just struggle, a struggle
that is recognized by this august body as well as by other
organs of the United Nations.” ’
..‘.
158. We have heard a lot about the question of peace. The
Zionist representative definitely uses a perverted logic and I
think he is a master of that. The perverted logic lies in the
fact that he is talking about a ‘.peace that will tear the
Palestinian people into pieces and not a peace that will
secure justice for the Palestinians. The Camp David
accords, with the name of which we have beerrbombarded
so often, clearly deny the Palestinian people their right to
self-determination. They legitimize the Israeli foreign occupation of the territories seized in 1967. They do not deal
with the question of the settlements nor with the questionof
Jerusalem. They do not recognize the nationalintegrity of
the Palestinian people.

148. We have again and again noted with regret that this
Zionist aggression and Zionist actions against peace in the
area are encouraged by the unlimited, illogical and unjustitied support the Zionist entity receives from the United
States. The attitude of the United States establishment,
which is in support of the Zionists and against the interests
of the American people in the long run can only harm the
cause of peace in the Middle East.
149. The continued Zionist occupation and the brutal
Zionist attacks with modem United States arms and cluster
bombs against the Lebanese and Palestinian civilian population and against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon constitute a grave threat to international peace
and security in the area and in the world.
150. Those Zionist acts of aggression must be strongly
condemned. Those continued crimes of war must not be
allowed to go on unpunished. The Security Council must
bear the responsibility for taking the necessary measures
immediately to put a stop to those serious acts of aggression
including the application of sanctions as provided by the
Charter.
151. The PRESIDENT (interprerationjkm
Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. I invite-him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement
152. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, since this is the first time that
I have spoken during your presidency allow me to congratulate you on your assumption to the presidency of the Council for this month; We are confident that under your wise
and skilful guidance the business of the Council will be
fruitful and productive.
153. In reference to the situation in Lebanon, the position
of the Palestine Liberation Organization is very clear. As
has been reiterated time and again before the Council and
on every other opportunity that we have had to express
ourselves, we are for the territorial integrity of Lebanon, we
are for the national unity of Lebanon, and we respect the
sovereignty of Lebanon.

159. They divide the Palestinian people into several categories. Those who live in the West Bank are separated from
those who live in the Gaza Strip, and those who were
expelled in 1967 are different from, and in fact have flo
relationship with, those who were expelled from their
homes in 1948. And they have been used, at least in concrete
Israeli policies, to aggravate the situation of the Palestinians, to allow the Israeli racist Government of Menachem
Begin to expropriate more land, confiscate, more property
and conduct more and more aggression against the Palestinian people by imprisoning Palestinians and by closing
institutions of higher education, such as Bir Zeit University,
as a result of which the whole international academic community declared its condemnation of the State of ISI& for
that act of infringement on the academic freedom of the
people of the occupied territories.

154. So far as UNIFIL is concerned, the recent report of
the Secretary-General is as clear in that regard as previous
reports of the Secretary-General have been; the position of
the PLO is one of full co-operation with UNIFIL in order to
allow it to implement its mandate.
155. The PLO and the national Lebanese movement
adopted a declaration a. week ago wherein they made gestures, reflected in concrete actions, to facilitate the work of
UNIFIL and to accommodate the Lebanese Government.
Among the essential points made in that declaration is the
fact that the PLO declared it would withdraw all resistance
forces from the city of Tyre and would withdraw all armed
forces from villages and towns in Southern Lebanon., That
is in addition to other elements of that declaration which,are
directed specifically to alleviating the situation of the people
living in South Lebanon.

160. Furthermore, there are the extremely dangeroustigilante acts conducted by the settlers against the peoplein the
occupied territories. On 2 May, several thousands of Israeli
settlers brandishing machine-guns moved into the occupied
territories, into the villages and towns, harassing, humiliating and beating our people. And when a “civili@” profes-

156. What was the response of the Israeli Zionists to the
declaration? Further brutal and cowardly attacks on con14

sar of medicine, who at least should have had some respect
for human life, found it praper to take&B gun and shoot a
student at Bii Zeit University, the man who committedthat
crime was gaoled for two days only, and he is now free. On
26 May a gang of settlers from Kiiat Arba entered the city
of Hebron, occupying the houses of Palestinians, terrorizing the inhabitants of those houses and beating up women
and children, telling them: “These houses belong to the
Jews. Get out of here.‘!

legal obligation .of the international community to stand
together with the Palestinian people in their legitimate
struggle for the achievement of their legitimate rights.
165. The Gamp David accords were described by an
Israeli, Uri Avneri, not as documents for peace but as !‘a
declaration of war against the Palestinian people, against
their right to self-determination and against theirright to
national independence’*.

;.

166. We the Palestinian people want peace-but
with justice, not peace that will tear us to pieces.

161. The acts of the people who committed those crimes,
which are reminiscent of those of the storm troopers of Nazi
Germany who used to. .terrorize innocent Jews, are very
threatening and very disturbing, not only to us, the Palestinians, but to public opinion in general. However, there has
been not one single statement for those who consider themselves champions of human rights to protest about those
crimes against the innocent Palestinian population. On the
contrary, they seek to find excuses for them. Not only do
they not condemn them,’ but they excuse them, finding
reasons to rational& those acts, whereas those crimes
should be condemned by the international community as a
whole.

peace

167. The representative of Lebanon has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I call on him.
168. Mr. T&N1 (Lebanon): I had asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply earlier because I did not want
my intervention to be an anticlimax after the very moving
,statement made by the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization or the very well researched and documented statement made by the representative of Libya. In
addition, I could never compete with the representative of
Kuwait on Shakespeare or on other topics either. However,
I do not want this meeting to end without challenging two
minor points, while reserving my right at the end of the
debate to reply in detail to the various points that have been
raised.

162. Why does all thistake place? Because we have an
illegal occupation, an occupation that denies people their
basic human rights, including their right to selfdetermination. It is an occupation that is directed at the very
existence ofthe Palestinian people as a nation, because the
con&cation of land and the establishment of settlements
have to be seen in the light of what land means to the
Palestinian. Land to the Palestinian is not only the source of
his livelihood. Land to .the Palestinian is the geographic
base where he, as an individual and as part of a collectivity,
atTiims his existence; where he, together with his people,
should exercise his national existence. And if that land is
taken away from him and ghettos of Palestinians are established in accordance with the plans that are set by the Israeli
Government, it is an attack on the very national existence of
the Palestinian people; it is an attack to pre-empt the possibility of the emergence of a national existence for the Palesti. mans and of their exercising that right.

169. My first very summary point is that the Israeli representative, although he is a professor of international law,
has also practised his art of misquotation of international
treaties. This is the General Armistice Agreement, and it
says very clearly in article VIII, paragraph 2, that:
“This Agreement, having been negotiated-and concluded in pursuance of the resolution of the Security
Council of 16 November 1948 calling for the establishment of an armistice in order to eliminate the threat to the
peace in Palestine and to facilitate the transition from the
present truce to permanent .peace in Palestine, shall
remain in force until a peaceful settlement between the
Parties is achieved.“2

163. As I have said in previous statements and as has been
affirmed and confirmed by my colleagues in the PLO, peace
is our goal, our objective; we struggle for it, we want it-for
we are not a bunch of masochists. We do not enjoy suffering
and we do not enjoy dispersion; we do not enjoy exile either.
We are normal people, like any other people in the world.
We want to live together as Palestinian people; we want to
be allowed the opportunity to build a nation, to reconstruct
our national identity, to create a culture, put it together and
establish normal relations with everyone in the world.

170. In’ my memorandum
to the Security Council
[s/23361], I also dwelt on this and explained the various
parts of that treaty. I shall not try the patience of the
Council, but it states that, even by mutual agreement, the
two parties are not empowered to consider this treaty as
invalid. Witness the various reports of the SecretaryGeneral ever since 1967. I have here the report of 1967, and I
advise the representative of Israel to do a bit more research
with respect to the part which says that the agreements are
still valid in the eyes of the UnitedNations. That is my first
point.

164. In order for this to be achieved, certain conditions
have to be established. Those conditions are: total Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied territories; recognition of the
national rights of the Palestinian people, which include the
right to self-determination and national independence; and
a just solution of the Palestinian refugee problem, in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations pertinent to
the refugee problem. When those conditions are met, peace
can be established very soon thereafter. But if those conditions are not established, I think it is the moral as well as

171. My second point concerns UNIFIL. I have noted
very carefully what the Israeli representative has said about
Israel’s preparedness to co-operate with UNIFIL, but that
commitment I can only verify in the tield. I do not claim, as
he does, to set myself up asjudge and jury and decide what is
right and what is not right. There is a commander of UNIFIL. there are officers of UNIFIL,- there is the Secretary2 Ibid.

15

General, and they and they alone can say whether there is
co-operation and cmnmitment to co-operating with UNIPIL.

178. If certain Arab Governments are either unwilling or
unable to prevent the harbouring, training and fm.ancing of
terrorists who operate from their territories with a viewto
harassing other States, they must surely be prepared to face
the risk of those States’ taking the necessary countermeasures to stop such harassment. That is not only a fundamental premise of international law; it is also a conclusion
dictated by simple logic

172.. A question wasasked 15 months ago by the representative of Kuwait in this very chamber before the Council
adopted the first resolution. It was a question addressed
directly to the representative of Israel: did they or did they
not intend to withdraw from Lebanon? That question,
unfortunately, has always been answered in tbe negative.
173. My concluding, very minor, point concerns Mr.
Begin’s peace offer. I thought I had also answered that by
quoting the President of the Republic of Lebanon. But
today perhaps I should quote from a very distinguished
United States newspaper, Z&e Christian Science Monitor,
which commented on that offer by saying with regard to
retaliation against Lebanon:
“Surely such retaliation and utter disregard of the
United Nations is out of all proportion to the Palestinian
guerrilla threat. It is all the more saddening because it
frustrates the creditable efforts of Lebanese President
Sarkis to reassert his authority over the country. Meanwhile Prime Minister Begin’s offer to Lebanon to negotiate a peace treaty under which Syria, Libya, Saudi
Arabia and Iraq would absorb and resettle. the now
stateless Palestinian refugees can only be viewed cynically by the Palestinians and other Arabs as a diversionary tactic. How could Mr. Sarkis possibly accept such an
offer?”

179. The PRESIDENT (aWr#ktationfiom
Rwian): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement;
180. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): The representative of the Zionist regime referred to what he called the
role played by Libya in some events that occurred in Africa.
I do not want here to speak about our African-problems.
We are dealing with them inside our African organ&ion. I
shall not indulge in any discussion concerning the situation
in Uganda or the internal affairs of that country.
181. I just want to say that the Zionist position regarding
what happened in Uganda is typical of the Zionists’ duplicity in their policies. Idi Amin wasafriend of Israel. He was
trained in the Israeli paratroopers and he received the Israel
wings. At that time, while Idi Amin wasbeing influenced by
Israeli policy and a friend of Israel, he was an angel, a good
man. When Mr. Idi Amin changed his opinions and his
view-and many people are changing their opinions concerning what is happening in the Middle East, because they
have begun to understand the- Zionist crime against the
Palestinian people-the whole Western mass media changed
their view of Idi Amin and started to attack him.

174. The PRESIDENT (interpretutionj?om Rushn): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
175. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I do not propose to debate the
rambling statement of the representative of Kuwait. Prime
Minister Begin, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, certainly does
not require any defence from me against the outbursts of the
representative of Kuwait. Likewise, I shall refrain from
replying to the representativeof Libya, the representative of
a country whose concern for justice, law. and human rights
was so vividly demonstrated recentIy in its participation in
the genocidal activities carried out against the people of
Uganda. It is only natural that, given hi standards of
justice, law and human rights, hehas rushed here to support
the cause of the murder organimtion known as the PLO.
After all, the terrorist PLO was one of the pillars on which
Idi Amin’s brutal regime saw fit to lean.

182. I must point out that Idi Amin was attacked not
because he was bad to his people-every African understands that-since the Israeli racist regime does not, care
about the African people. We know the links between the
Israeli. regime and the apartheid regime in South Africa.
Israel is a supporter of the racist regime. in South Africa. So
the only criterion of goodness or badness.in the eyes of the
Zionist and pro-Zionist forces, and especially the Western
mass media, is one’s stand concerning the Palestinian
problem.
183. So it Is irrelevant to talk about what Idi Amin didordii not do in Uganda. Israel issupportingtheSouth Aftican
regime and the minority racist regime in Zimbabwe andarming and supporting dictators around the world and
corrupt figures in many comers of the world--and I donot
want to mention them one by one. Everyone knows about
it.

l76. Let me briefly refer to the reply of the representative
of Lebanon. Lebanon’sabrogation of the Armistice Agreement of 1949 and its acts of war against Israel in 1967 were
in the nature of a material breach of that agreement which
brought about its termination,

184. Mr. Blum, therefore, cannot deceive the Countil.
because Idi Amin has nowlost. Suppose that he hadnot&
and that he was.still there and a friend of Israel, no one
would attack him, even if he exrerminated three:quarteraof
the Ugandan people, because you do, nor care about the:
Ugandan people and the African people.

177. Let me also briefly remind the representatives of
Kuwait and Lebanon that a State cannot invoke in its
favour benefits deriving from certain provisions of intemational law without being prepared at the same time to abide
by the duties flowing from international law. The Arab
States seek to impose on Israel duties stemming from the
international law of peace while simultaneously claiming
for themselves the privileges of the international law of war.

185. The representative of Israel also referred to what. he
called the help to terrorism given by my country. We know.
16

that there is a continuing campaign against Libya for the
simple reason that we are supporting the freedom fighters
and liberation movements in the world, among them the
liberation movement in South Africa. We and the Israelis
and their friends are on opposite sides. They are supporting
the racist r&imes and we are supporting the peoples of
Africa. We are supporting the Palestinian people not only
because they arc Arabs and our brothers but also because it
is in line with our support of all the freedom fighters around
the world.

Libyan propaganda, and everyone knows about that propaganda and those false allegations.
187. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to inform the
Council that, in accordance with the invitation extended to
the Council by the representative of Lebanon in the course
of his statement earlier in the meeting, and at my request,
the Secretariat has informed me that it has made arrangements for the screening of the f&n on Southern Lebanon at
3.30 p.m. tomorrow, in the auditorium of the Dag Hammarskjold Library.

186. So the representative of the Zionist entity has merely
started again to repeat the Zionist and imperialist anti-

lXe meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adresses-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYPEITL

H3AAHMZI

OPI’AHHSAIlBR

OI;%E~UHEHHhIX

HAWfH

Zi3AaRHX oDR3tiR3attHU
06-beAHHeHHbIX
HawR
A~OX(HO x(ymmb
B KHNXHEJX YamJHHBX H areurcrsax
80 ecex paRonax
YH~EL. Haeonure
cnpaarui
06 us2(amiax
B
earneM arrmxriord
hlarasmre
mm nmmire
no anpecy : OpraaH3anus
06'benHHeHHbIX
Hauwn,
Cexdmn no nponaxe
as&ramrR, Hbw-EiopK
HIIH XCeaeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas ostin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho io United Nations, New York

Price: .$u.s. 2.50

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerlas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

79-70002-April

1982-2.250
