A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/197
26 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 97 (i)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/628/Add.9)]
52/197. Cultural development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/187 of 8 December 1986, in which it proclaimed the period 1988-1997 the
World Decade for Cultural Development, 46/158 of 19 December 1991, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to cooperate with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in establishing an independent World Commission on Culture and Development, and expected
the World Commission to submit its final report to the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and to the United Nations General Assembly no later than
three years after it began its work, and 51/179 of 16 December 1996, concerning the report of the World
Commission,
Noting the fact that public opinion throughout the world as well as Governments and non-governmental
organizations have become much more sensitive to the need for better integration of the cultural dimension
into the entire development process,
Recognizing that this awareness of the central importance of culture is, nevertheless, insufficiently
present in development policy and practice,
Acknowledging with satisfaction the active participation of Member States, United Nations bodies,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals in the implementation of projects of
national, regional and interregional scope, aiming at the promotion of the objectives of the Decade, and in
the work of the World Commission and its follow-up,
Taking note of the first meeting of Ministers of Culture of non-aligned countries, held at Medellín,
Colombia, on 4 and 5 September 1997,1

1

See A/52/432.

98-76969

/...

A/RES/52/197
Page 2

1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the progress of the World Decade for Cultural
Development during the period 1994-1997;2
2. Invites all Member States, intergovernmental bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations:
(a) To ensure that the lessons and experiences gained and the momentum generated through the World
Decade and the World Commission on Culture and Development are reflected in all their development
strategies, as appropriate;
(b) To submit their comments to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
on the report of the World Commission on Culture and Development, entitled Our Creative Diversity;3
(c) To intensify their efforts to integrate cultural factors into their development programmes and
projects, so as to ensure sustainable development that fully respects cultural diversity, taking into account
their cultural values and identity;
3. Stresses the importance of the question of interaction between culture and development, and
encourages the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to accord priority to this
theme in its work;
4. Encourages the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to pursue its
ongoing task of promoting throughout the United Nations system a greater awareness of the crucial
relationship between culture and development, taking into account the diversity of cultures;
5. Welcomes the convening in Stockholm in 1998 of an intergovernmental conference on cultural
policies for development, organized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in the elaboration of the international development strategy for the
next United Nations development decade, to include recommendations for the integration of the cultural
dimension in development activities;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to include the outcome of the Stockholm conference in his
report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

2

A/52/382.

3

Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 1996.
