16

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

programmes and to co-ordinate efforts with all similar
pr~grammes initiated by the Organization of African
Uruty;
11. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizations within the United Nations system to ensure that
adequate facilities continue to be made available for the
provision of technical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity as required;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard
to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and in this connexion draws once again the attention of the international
community to the need to contribute to the Assistance
Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid
established by the Organization of African Unity;
13. Calls upon the organizations within the United
Nations system to come promptly to the aid of African
States affected by natural or other disasters by mobilizing special economic assistance programmes;
14. Further calls upon all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular the
specialized agencies, to increase their aid to refugees
in Africa;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, to arrange for a meeting to be
held in Africa, before the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, between representatives of the Organization of African Unity and the organizations within the
United Nations system to study means of effective implementation of programmes of mutual concern, including
assistance to liberation movements;
16. Calls upon United Nations bodies, in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
Special Committee against Apartheid and the United
Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate
closely the Organization of African Unity with all their
work concerning Africa;
17. Reiterates its invitation to the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system to continue and expand their
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity
and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the
development of co-operation between the Organization
of African Unity and the organizations concerned within
the United Nations system.
61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979

34/22.

The situation in Kampuchea

The General Assembly,
Noting with great concern that the armed conflict in
Kampuchea has escalated and is seriously threatening
the peace and stability of South-East Asia,

Deeply regretting the armed intervention by outside
forces in the internal affairs of Kampuchea,
Gravely alarmed that the present conflict may spill
over to neighbouring countries and increase the danger
of further involvement by outside Powers,
Deeply distressed by the widespread hardship and
deprivation and the large-scale famine being suffered by
the people of Kampuchea,
Seriously disturbed that these developments have resulted in a continuing large exodus of people from
Kampuchea to neighbouring countries, thereby causing
them severe problems,
Noting with deep appreciation the roles played by the
United Nations and other national and international
humanitarian organizations in rendering relief assistance
to the civilian population of Kampuchea, and the initiative of the Secretary-General in convening the Pledging
Conference for Emergency Humanitarian Relief to the
People of Kampuchea, held on 5 November 1979, as
well as the pledges made by the various countries at that
Conference, 11
Convinced that a political solution which will ensure
the sovereignty and independence of Kampuchea is essential for bringing about durable peace and stability in
the region,
Reaffirming the right of all peoples to determine their
own future free from outside interference,
Emphasizing that all States shall refrain, in their international relations, from the threat or use of force against
the sovereignty, territorial integrity or independence of
any State, and strictly adhere to the principles of peaceful settlement of disputes and non-interference m the
internal affairs of other States,
1. Strongly appeals to all States and national and
international humanitarian organizations to render, on
an urgent and non-discriminatory basis, humanitarian
relief to the civilian population of Kampuchea, including
those who have sought refuge in neighbouring countries;
2. Calls upon all States to take urgent measures to
resettle from those countries the displaced Kampucheans;
3. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to co-ordinate relief assistance and to ensure its
distribution to those for whom it is intended;
4. Urges all parties to the conflict to co-operate in
every possible way to facilitate the humanitarian relief
efforts;
5. Calls upon all parties to the conflict to observe
fully the fundamental principles of human rights;
6. Further calls upon all parties to the conflict to
cease all hostilities forthwith;
7. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
forces from Kampuchea and calls upon all States to refrain from all acts or threats of aggression and all forms
of interference in the internal affairs of States in SouthEast Asia;
8. Urges all parties to the conflict to settle their disputes by peaceful means in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations;
9. Appeals to all States to refrain from any interference in the internal affairs of Kampuchea in order to
enable its people to decide their own future and destiny
free from outside interference, subversion or coercion,
and to respect scrupulously the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Kampuchea;
10. Resolves that the people of Kampuchea should
be enabled to choose democratically their own govern11

See SG/CONF.1/SR.1 and 2.

D, Resolutlo• adopted without nfereace to a Main Committee

ment, without outside interference, subversion or coercion;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
situation closely and to exercise his good offices in order
to contribute to a peaceful solution of the problem;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to explore
the possibility of holding an international conference on
Kampuchea as one of the means for implementing the
present resolution;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the
earliest appropriate opportunity;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "The situation in
Kampuchea".
67th plenary meeting
14 November 1979

34/30.

Question of Cyprus18

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November
1974 and its subsequent resolutions on the question,
Mindful of the principle of the inadmissibility of acquisition of territories by force,
Recalling the idea of holding an international conference on Cyprus,
Greatly concerned at the prolongation of the Cyprus
crisis, which poses a serious threat to international peace
and security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Welcoming the ten-point agreement of 19 May
1979,19
Expressing deep concern at the lack of progress in
the intercommunal talks,
Deploring the continued presence of foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel on the territory
of the Republic of Cyprus and the fact that part of its
territory is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring also all unilateral actions that change the
demographic structure of Cyprus,
Mindful of the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
1. Reiterates its full support for the sovereignty,· independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for
the cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Expresses its support for the ten-point agreement
of 19 May 1979, concluded under the auspices of the
Secretary-General;
3. Affirms the right of the Republic of Cyprus and
its people to full and effective sovereignty and control
over the entire territory of Cyprus and its natural and
other resources and c. Ils upon all States to support and
help the Government of Cyprus to exercise the abovementioned rights;
4. Demands. the immediate and effective implementation of resoluti-: 1 3212 (XXIX), unanimously adopted
1 • See also sect. I, foot-note S, and sect. X.B.3, decision
34/408.
1t A/34/620 and Corr.I, annex V.

17

by the General Assembly and endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974, and of the subsequent resolutions of the Assembly
and the Council on Cyprus, which provide the valid basis
for the solution of the problem of Cyprus;
5. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
armed forces and foreign military presence from the
Republic of Cyprus;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between the
representatives of the two communities;
7. Calls for respect of the human rights of all Cypriots and the instituting of urgent measures for the
voluntary return of the refugees to their homes in
safety;
8. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful,
result-oriented and constructive manner of the negotiations under the auspices of the Secretary-General between the representatives of the two communities, to be
conducted freely on an equal footing on the basis of the
agreement of 19 May 1979, with a view to reaching,
as early as possible, a mutually acceptable agreement
based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
9. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
any unilateral action which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem of
Cyprus by peaceful means and to co-operate fully with
the Secretary-General in the performance of his task
under the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council as well as with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
10. Welcomes the proposal for the total demilitarization of Cyprus;
11. Reiterates its recommendation that the Security
Council should examine the question of the implementation, within a specified time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider and adopt thereafter, if necessary, all
appropriate and practical measures under the Charter of
the United Nations for ensuring the speedy and effective
implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
on Cyprus;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly by 31 March 1980 on the progress
achieved in the negotiations between the two communities on the basis of the agreement of 19 May 1979;
13. Authorizes the President of the thirty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, in the event of the
Secretary-General reporting lack of progress in the
above-mentioned negotiations, to appoint an ad hoe
committee composed of no more than seven Member
States;
14. Requests the ad hoe committee to maintain
contact with the Secretary-General in his task of facilitating the successful conclusion of the negotiations between the two communities;
15. Further requests the ad hoe committee, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to recommend
steps for and promote the implementation of all the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on Cyprus;
16. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fifth
session and requests the Secretary-General to follow up
the implementation of the present resolution and to report on all its aspects to the General Assembly at that
session.
74th plenary meeting
20 November 1979
