A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/171
15 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)]
54/171. Situation of human rights in Cambodia
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights1 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,2
Recalling the Agreement on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict, signed in
Paris on 23 October 1991,3 including part III thereof, relating to human rights,
Recalling also its resolution 53/145 of 9 December 1998, Commission on Human Rights resolution
1999/76 of 28 April 19994 and previous relevant resolutions,

1
2

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

A/46/608-S/23177, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-sixth Year, Supplement for
October, November and December 1991, document S/23177.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
00 27887

/...

A/RES/54/171
Page 2

Recognizing that the tragic history of Cambodia requires special measures to assure the protection of
the human rights of all people in Cambodia and the non-return to the policies and practices of the past, as
stipulated in the Agreement signed in Paris on 23 October 1991,
Desiring that the international community continue to respond positively to assist efforts to investigate
the tragic history of Cambodia, including responsibility for past international crimes, such as acts of genocide
and crimes against humanity,
Bearing in mind the letter dated 15 March 1999 from the Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security Council5 and the report of the Group of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General in response to the request by the Cambodian authorities for assistance
in responding to past serious violations of Cambodian and international law,6
Recognizing the legitimate concern of the Government and people of Cambodia in the pursuit of
internationally accepted principles of justice and of national reconciliation,
Recognizing also that accountability of individual perpetrators of grave human rights violations is one
of the central elements of any effective remedy for victims of human rights violations and a key factor in
ensuring a fair and equitable justice system and, ultimately, reconciliation and stability within a State,
Welcoming the continuing role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
promotion and protection of human rights in Cambodia,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative for human rights in Cambodia,
in collaboration with the office in Cambodia of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
to assist the Government of Cambodia in ensuring the protection of the human rights of all people in
Cambodia and to ensure adequate resources for the continued functioning of the operational presence in
Cambodia of the Office of the High Commissioner and to enable the Special Representative to continue to
fulfil his tasks expeditiously;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General ,7 and notes in particular the
concerns of the Special Representative about the problem of impunity, the need to promote and protect the
independence of the judiciary and to establish the rule of law, and the need for the reform of police and the
military;
3. Welcomes the agreement by the Government of Cambodia to extend the memorandum of
understanding for the office at Phnom Penh of the High Commissioner until March 2002, enabling the office
to continue its operations and to maintain its technical cooperation programmes, and encourages the
Government to continue to cooperate with the office;

5

A/53/850-S/1999/231; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year, Supplement for
January, February and March 1999, document S/1999/231.
6
Ibid., annex.
7

A/54/353.
/...

A/RES/54/171
Page 3

4. Urges the Government of Cambodia to continue to take the necessary measures to develop an
independent, impartial and effective judicial system, including through the early adoption of the draft statute
on magistrates, a penal code and a code on criminal procedures, and the reform of the administration of
justice, and appeals to the international community to assist the Government to this end;
5. Commends the efforts by the Government of Cambodia with regard to the review and the stated
commitment to the downsizing of the police and the military, urges the Government to take further measures
to carry out effective reform aimed towards professional and impartial police and military forces, and invites
the international community to assist the Government to this end;
6. Also commends the vital and valuable role played by non-governmental organizations in Cambodia,
inter alia, in the development of civil society, and encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue to
work with non-governmental organizations in efforts to strengthen and uphold human rights in Cambodia;
7. Notes with interest the activities undertaken by the governmental Cambodian Human Rights
Committee, the National Assembly Commission on Human Rights and Reception of Complaints and the
Senate Commission on Human Rights and Reception of Complaints, and welcomes preliminary efforts to
establish an independent national human rights commission which should be based on international
standards, such as the Paris principles,8 and requests the Office of the High Commissioner to provide advice
and technical assistance in these efforts;
8. Expresses grave concern about numerous instances of violations of human rights, including
extrajudicial executions, torture, illegal arrests and detention, as detailed in the reports of the Special
Representative, and notes some progress made by the Government of Cambodia in addressing these issues;
9. Expresses serious concern about the situation of impunity in Cambodia, commends the
commitment and efforts of the Government of Cambodia to tackle this question, such as amending article 51
of the 1994 Law on Civil Servants, and calls upon the Government to take further measures, as a matter of
priority, to investigate urgently and prosecute, in accordance with due process of law and international
human rights standards, all those who have perpetrated violations of human rights;
10. Reaffirms that the most serious human rights violations in Cambodia in recent history have been
committed by the Khmer Rouge, welcomes the final collapse of the Khmer Rouge, which has paved the way
for the investigation and prosecution of its leaders, and takes note with interest of the steps taken by the
Government of Cambodia to bring to justice the Khmer Rouge leaders most responsible for the most serious
violations of human rights;
11. Appeals strongly to the Government of Cambodia to ensure that those most responsible for the most
serious violations of human rights are brought to account in accordance with international standards of
justice, fairness and due process of law, welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat and actors of the international
community in assisting the Government to this end, and encourages the Government to continue to cooperate
with the United Nations with a view to reaching an agreement;

8

See resolution 48/134, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/171
Page 4

12. Reaffirms that ensuring the security of persons and rights of association, assembly and expression
remain matters of critical priority;
13. Also reaffirms the importance of the upcoming communal elections being conducted in a free and
fair manner, and urges the Government of Cambodia to prepare for the communal elections accordingly;
14. Welcomes the adoption of a five-year action plan by the Government of Cambodia, in particular
by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Veterans, as well as other measures taken by the Government to
improve the status of women, and urges the Government to continue to take appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women, including in the political and public life of the country, to combat
violence against women in all its forms, and to take all steps to meet its obligations as a party to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,9 including seeking technical
assistance;
15. Commends the recent initiatives of and the progress made by the Government of Cambodia towards
ensuring adequate health conditions, calls upon the Government to continue to take further measures to
achieve this goal, with emphasis on ensuring adequate health conditions for women and children and
minority groups and on the problem of the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome, and encourages the international community to continue to support the Government to this end;
16. Also commends the continued efforts of the Government of Cambodia, together with nongovernmental organizations and local authorities, to improve the quality of and access to education, and calls
for further measures to be taken in order to ensure the right of Cambodian children to education, especially
at the primary level, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child,10 and requests the
international community to provide assistance for the achievement of this goal;
17. Welcomes the Five-Year National Plan against Child Sexual Exploitation in Cambodia, and
encourages the Government of Cambodia to ensure the necessary law enforcement and other measures in
support of the Plan in order to tackle the problem of child prostitution and trafficking in Cambodia;
18. Notes with serious concern the problem of child labour, calls upon the Government of Cambodia
to ensure adequate health and safety conditions for children and to outlaw, in particular, the worst forms of
child labour, and invites the International Labour Organization to continue to extend the necessary assistance
in this regard;
19. Also notes with serious concern the prison conditions in Cambodia, notes with interest the recent
adoption of the Proclamation on Administration of Prisons and Prison Procedures, commends the continued
international assistance to improve the material conditions of detention, and calls upon the Government of
Cambodia to take the further measures necessary to improve prison conditions, especially with regard to
providing the minimum standard of food and health care;
20. Condemns the use of racist rhetoric and acts of violence against ethnic minorities, urges an end to
racial violence and vilification, and urges the Government of Cambodia to take all steps to meet its

9

Resolution 34/180, annex.

10

Resolution 44/25, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/171
Page 5

obligations as a party to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,11 including through seeking technical assistance;
21. Welcomes, in particular, the recent actions taken by the Government of Cambodia to combat illicit
logging which has seriously threatened the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by many
Cambodians, including indigenous people, expresses the hope that these efforts by the Government will
continue, and notes with interest the current revision of the law on land;
22. Also welcomes the submission of the initial reports of Cambodia under the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, asks the Government of Cambodia to follow
up the recommendations made by the Human Rights Committee regarding the report submitted under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,12 calls upon the Government to meet its reporting
obligations under all other international human rights instruments, and requests the office in Cambodia of
the High Commissioner to continue to provide the necessary assistance in this regard;
23. Expresses grave concern at the devastating consequences and destabilizing effects of the use of
anti-personnel landmines on Cambodian society, welcomes the ratification by Cambodia of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction13 in July 1999, encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue its support and efforts for
the removal of those mines and for victim assistance and mine awareness programmes, and commends donor
countries for their contributions and assistance to mine action;
24. Expresses concern about the high number of small arms in society and commends the efforts by
the Government of Cambodia to control the spread of weapons;
25. Notes with appreciation the use by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Trust Fund for a
Human Rights Education Programme in Cambodia to finance the programme of activities of the office in
Cambodia of the High Commissioner, as defined in resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission
on Human Rights, and invites Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
foundations and individuals to consider contributing to the Trust Fund;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
role and achievements of the Office of the High Commissioner in assisting the Government and the people
of Cambodia in the promotion and protection of human rights and on the recommendations made by the
Special Representative on matters within his mandate;
27. Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human rights in Cambodia at its fifty-fifth
session under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.

11

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

12

See CCPR/C/79/Add.108.

13

See CD/1478.
/...

A/RES/54/171
Page 6

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
