V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Requests the Executive Director of the United
N ations Children's Fund to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session, on
progress in preparing for the International Y ear of the
Child, includíng its financing and the level of contributions pledged.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/170.

United Nations Fund for Population
Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2211 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 in response to which a trust fund, subsequently named the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, was established in 1967 by the SecretaryGeneral,
Recalling further its resolution 3019 (XXVII) of 18
December 1972 in which it, inter alia, decided to place
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
under the authority of the General Assembly and
established the respective roles relating to the Fund of
the Economic and Social Council and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities has become a most effective and viable entity in the United Nations system
in the population field, owing in particular to its increased resources and its assistance to the developing
countries,
l. Welcomes the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
entitled "Priorities in the future allocation of the resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities" ;86
2. Takes note of the views expressed on this matter at the twenty-second session of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme87 and at the sixty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council;
3. Endorses the following general principles to be
applied in making future allocations of resources:
(a) To promete population activities proposed in
international strategies, particularly the World Population Plan of Action; 88
( b) To meet the needs of developing countries
which have the most urgent need for assistance in the
area of population activities in view of their population problems;
(e) To respect the sovereign right of each nation
to formulate, promote and implement its own population policies;
(d) To promete the self-reliance of recipient countries;

75

(e) To give special attention to meeting the needs
of disadvantaged population groups;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities to apply the
criteria for establishing priorities and the other recommendations set forth in bis report, taking into account
the decisions made by the Goveming Council in this
regard, in clase co-operation with the specialized
agencies and the regional commissions concemed, as
appropriate;
5. Invites Governments to continue and to increase
their contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities in view of the rapidly increasing
needs of developing countries for population assistance;
6. Recommends that the Executive Director of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, for
purposes of continuity of the programme, should normally be appointed for a four-year term;
7. Urges continuing full collaboration and cooperation on operational matters between the Executive
Director of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as between the Executive Director and the executive heads of other organs
within the United N ations system in the field of
population.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/ 171.

Operational activities for development

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twenty-first89 and twenty-second9 º sessions, as well as the statement of the Administrator of
the Programme91 and the views expressed during the
debate on operational activities at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
Reiterating the principie reflected in the consensos
on the functions and operations of the United Nations
development system as embodied in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Stressing the continued need for a co-ordinated and
integrated approach to technical co-operation activities
carricd out by the United Nations system according to
the priorities of the recipient Governments, as well as
General Assembly resolution 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on new dimensions in technical cooperation,
Stressing f urther that the implementation of multilateral technical co-operation is a common endeavour
of the organizations and programmes of the United
N ations system,
1. Notes with appreciation that, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI), the

86 DP/186 and Corr.l.
8 7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), chap.
XVI.
88 Report of the World Population Conference, 1974 (Unitcd
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.XJIL3), chap. l.

89 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5779).
90 Ihid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ).
n Oflicial Records of the General Asscmbly, Thirty-first
Session, Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 2-13.
