A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/67
6 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 63
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/48/668)]
48/67.

The role of science and technology in the
context of international security,
disarmament and other related fields

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/44 of 9 December 1992,
Taking note of the report of the Disarmament Commission on its 1993
substantive session, 1/ in particular on the work of Working Group III on
agenda item 6, entitled "The role of science and technology in the context of
international security, disarmament and other related fields", 2/
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General of 28 September
1993 on scientific and technological developments and their impact on
international security, 3/
Recognizing that science and technology per se are deemed to be neutral,
that scientific and technological developments can have both civilian and
military applications and that progress in science and technology for civilian
applications needs to be maintained and encouraged,
Noting that qualitative improvements in science and technology with
military applications have implications for international security and that
States, in this regard, should assess carefully the impact of the use of
science and technology on international security,
Recognizing also that progress in the application of science and
technology contributes substantially to the implementation of arms control and
disarmament agreements, inter alia, in the fields of weapons disposal,
military conversion and verification,
__________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42).
2/

Ibid., para. 31.

3/

A/48/360.

/...

A/RES/48/67
Page 2

Recalling that norms and guidelines for the transfer of high technology
with military applications should take into account legitimate requirements
for the maintenance of international peace and security, while ensuring that
they do not deny access to high-technology products, services and know-how for
peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing that commitment to, and the fulfilment of, comprehensive and
balanced objectives of non-proliferation in all its aspects pertaining to the
acquisition or transfer of high technology relevant to weapons of mass
destruction are essential for the maintenance of international security and
international cooperation and for the promotion of transfers of such
technology for peaceful purposes,
Noting the interest of the international community in cooperation in the
fields of disarmament-related science and technology and the transfer of high
technology with military applications,
Mindful that international cooperation should be encouraged with respect
to the production of disarmament-related technical equipment with the purpose,
inter alia, of reducing the costs of implementing arms limitation and
disarmament agreements,
1.
Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to conclude its work on the
agenda item entitled "The role of science and technology in the context of
international security, disarmament and other related fields" in 1994 and to
submit as soon as possible specific recommendations on this matter to the
General Assembly;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to pursue constructively in
response to General Assembly resolution 46/36 L of 9 December 1991 its work on
the agenda item entitled "Transparency in armaments", which includes
consideration of the elaboration of practical means to increase openness and
transparency related to the transfer of high technology with military
applications;
3.
Invites Member States to undertake additional efforts to apply
science and technology for disarmament-related purposes and to make
disarmament-related technologies available to interested States;
4.
Also invites Member States to widen multilateral dialogue, bearing
in mind the proposal for seeking universally acceptable norms or guidelines
that would regulate international transfers of high technology with military
applications;
5.
Encourages the United Nations to contribute, within existing
mandates, to promoting the application of science and technology for peaceful
purposes;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "The role of science and technology in the context
of international security, disarmament and other related fields".
81st plenary meeting
16 December 1993
