A /68/PV.91

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

91st plenary meeting

Friday, 6 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meetinag was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/68/L.48)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 118 jointly with
agenda item 14 and agenda item 123 at its 54th plenary
meeting, on 20 November 2013. Members will also
recall that, under agenda item 118, the Assembly
adopted resolution 68/271 at its 85th plenary meeting,
on 13 May 2014.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.48, entitled “United Nations Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela Prize”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.48?
Draft resolution A/68/L.48 was adopted (resolution
68/275).
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I offer my warmest
congratulations to all members of the Assembly on the
adoption of historic resolution 68/275, which establishes
the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize.
The international community still mourns the death of
the great global leader, our Madiba.
I saw the outpouring of international emotion at the
State memorial service in Johannesburg last December.
The President of the General Assembly, together with

many other leaders, was also there. South Africans
were joined by leaders and people from around the
world to pay solemn tribute to Nelson Mandela’s
humanity, integrity and remarkable strength, as well
as the example that he left to us all of the power of an
individual to transcend hatred and to achieve justice.
He suffered enormous deprivation and pain for the
cause of democracy and equality. At the end of his long
journey, he died tranquilly and triumphantly, leaving
behind a shining legacy of true peace.
As Nelson Mandela well knew, the struggle still
continues. There is still terrible racism in our world.
There is deplorable inequality. People suffer hatred,
communities are divided and factions and nations are
at war. Our best tribute to Nelson Mandela is found
not in words or ceremonies but in actions that take
up the torch he passed to us. The United Nations was
honoured to stand f by Nelson Mandela and the people
of South Africa until the apartheid regime ended. The
General Assembly has a proud record of acting against
apartheid and for Nelson Mandela. From the early days
of sanctions to the more recent declaration of 18 July as
Nelson Mandela International Day, the Assembly has
placed itself on the right side of history, with the people
who need us most. Today, the Assembly took another
step forward in carrying on Nelson Mandela’s lifelong
work through this meaningful prize.
When Nelson Mandela himself accepted the Nobel
Prize, he said he was a representative of the countless
human beings who “recognized that an injury to one is
an injury to all and therefore acted together in defence
of justice and a common human decency”. Nelson

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-42292 (E)

*1442292*

A/68/PV.91

Mandela embodied that altruistic spirit of solidarity.
The United Nations will forever be inspired by his
example.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): On behalf of
President Jacob Zuma of the Republic of South Africa
and the Government and people of South Africa, I
would like to thank and commend the Assembly for
the initiative of establishing the United Nations Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela Prize. I would be remiss if I did not
thank you, Mr. President, for your vote of confidence in
appointing me to facilitate the consultation on the draft
resolution on the Mandela Prize to be adopted today
by consensus (A/68/L.48). In the same vein, I should
also thank the Member States for their outstanding
cooperation, solidarity and support during the
facilitation. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General and his Office for gracing
this occasion.
By adopting the resolution on the Mandela Prize,
the General Assembly has expressed its appreciation for
Mandela’s leading role in and his support for Africa’s
struggle for liberation and unity. In his outstanding
contribution to the creation of a non-racial, non-sexist,
democratic South Africa, to the struggle for democracy
internationally and to the promotion of a culture of
peace throughout the world, Mandela has left a legacy
that will benefit and inspire generations to come. He
has set an example for the rest of the world and created
history on his journey through life.
Mandela’s greatness does not lie in any infallibility
but in the memory that we too are made in the image
of God, and can therefore create a world that is rather
better than the one we have found. As a world leader
who refused to accept injustice, Nelson Mandela had
courage that helped to change our entire world. Despite
his long years in captivity, Mr. Mandela left prison with
a heart closed to any calls for settling scores. Instead,
he was filled with a longing for truth and reconciliation,
and for an understanding between all peoples. For the
greater part of his life he was a beacon of this struggle.
In his later years, he became a symbol of hope. In death,
he stands confirmed as the embodiment of humanity’s
triumph. Our dignity and hope found expression in his

2/28

06/06/2014

life and our freedom and democracy are his cherished
legacy.
In conclusion, the South African delegation is
pleased to join the consensus on the draft resolution on
the Mandela Prize.
The President: I would like to personally thank
the Permanent Representative of South Africa for the
patience and ability he demonstrated in conducting the
informal consultations on my behalf.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): Along
with other speakers today, the European Union and its
member States would like to commend your initiative,
Mr. President, in establishing the United Nations
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize, as taken forward in
resolution 68/257.
As the Secretary-General stressed, the resolution
is an important step in carrying forward President
Mandela’s lifelong work. Nelson Mandela has been an
example of what to strive for and how to strive for it. He
taught us all a major lesson in reconciliation, political
transition and social transformation. For millions of
people inside and outside South Africa, his life is a major
source of inspiration. A United Nations prize bearing
his name will be a powerful instrument for rewarding
achievement and for inspiring and motivating all those
who dedicate their lives to the service of humankind,
promoting the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. As the resolution rightly emphasizes, it also
honours and pays homage to Mandela’s extraordinary
legacy. We therefore warmly welcome its adoption.
We also want to thank the Ambassador of South
Africa, Mr. Kingsley Mamabolo, for facilitating the
consultations on the resolution. Mandela’s life, and the
prize through which we aim to honour it, will continue
to remind us of South Africa’s inspiring journey, which
holds lessons for all of us. Alongside South Africa’s
political struggle, other battles have been waged to
improve the lives of those who have been denied
equality, social justice and economic opportunity.
The European Union and its member States continue
to stand with South Africa in those endeavours,
consolidating our close relationship, which is strongly
based on shared values.
To conclude, we believe there is no better way
to honour the memory of Nelson Mandela than by

14-42292

06/06/2014

reaffirming our collective commitment to upholding
the values of true and deep democracy, as well as
human dignity, for which he fought so tirelessly. This
prize will be both a recognition and expression of those
values.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 10
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/825)
The President: I should now like to make an
introductory statement.
I am pleased to welcome representatives to our
annual review of the progress made in addressing the
AIDS epidemic. At the outset, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
entitled “Towards ending the AIDS epidemic: meeting
the 2015 targets and planning for the post-2015 era”
(A/68/825). The report outlines progress achieved in
the 10 target areas that were unanimously set by our
leaders in the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.
The report sends a very clear message. The
global solidarity and joint efforts of the international
community are yielding significant gains against the
epidemic, and bringing about a historic opportunity
to lay the foundation for ending the scourge of AIDS.
However, AIDS will remain a global challenge beyond
2015, and a sustained commitment and efforts will be
required if we are indeed to defeat this scourge.
We cannot underestimate the global progress that
has been made in addressing the AIDS challenge. It
has been truly remarkable. Thanks to the advances of
antiretroviral treatment, HIV diagnosis is no longer
the death sentence it used to be in the early days of
the epidemic. More than 10 million people in low- and
middle-income countries are receiving that life-saving
treatment. New HIV infections and AIDS-related
deaths continue to decline globally. Progress has been
particularly noteworthy in reducing the number of
children born with HIV and in keeping their mothers
alive.
But despite those significant gains, the epidemic is
far from over. The number of HIV infections is still
unacceptably high, at 2.3 million in 2012. More than

A/68/PV.91

half of those in need of antiretroviral treatment do
not have access to it — with a glaring gap in access
to paediatric treatment. The epidemic continues to
impose a high toll on women and girls, young people
and marginalized populations at higher risk of HIV
infection. Furthermore, new challenges are emerging,
such as the need to address the intersection of HIV and
non-communicable diseases, particularly in light of the
aging-related health challenges of the growing number
of older adults living with HIV.
To address those daunting challenges, we must now
accelerate action to reach those who are most vulnerable
and underserved. We can make great strides to provide
effective HIV response by promoting gender equality,
preventing gender-based violence and by addressing
stigma and discrimination, both in law and in practice.
We must also ensure that the necessary resources
are available and spent in the most efficient way,
maximizing the synergies between the HIV response
and the broader health and development priorities, such
as education, nutrition, health and community system
strengthening and social protection. Those measures
are essential not only for achieving the commitments
and targets set for 2015, but also for advancing towards
the ambitious goal of ending the AIDS epidemic.
When I took office as President of the General
Assembly, I chose “The post-2015 development
agenda: setting the stage” as the theme for the sixtyeighth session. As Member States proceed in their
deliberations, I hope they will consider the importance
of ending the AIDS epidemic as a priority. In addition
to the immediate and obvious benefits to the people and
societies afflicted, the successes of HIV response can
also offer useful lessons for addressing other health and
development issues.
The ongoing deliberations on the post-2015 agenda
and the proposed high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
both offer timely opportunities to delve further into
those issues. Foremost, we need to take comprehensive
stock of the progress and challenges in implementing
the current goals and targets, set new ones and ensure
strong accountability mechanisms to deliver results.
With so much investment and effort having been made
by all stakeholders, and with so many lives still on the
line, it is a moral imperative to seize the opportunity
of getting the job done. With continued political
commitment, investment and innovation, we can make
great strides toward ending AIDS and take a giant

14-422923/28

A/68/PV.91

step towards creating a healthier and more prosperous
human family, living on a sustainable planet.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Three years ago, Heads
of State agreed on a set of ambitious targets to halt
and reverse the spread of HIV and AIDS by the end of
2015. With just over 500 days to go, the international
community has made great progress. Between 2011
and 2012 alone, the number of people accessing HIV
treatment globally increased nearly 20 per cent. We
are on track to providing antiretroviral therapy to
15 million people by 2015 and to eliminating motherto-child transmission in just a few years.
The world is making solid headway in meeting
some of the targets and commitments from the 2011
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex), such as expanding treatment access,
eliminating HIV infections among children and keeping
their mothers alive, and mobilizing resources. More
countries are making specific efforts to take action.
Domestic spending on HIV now accounts for more than
half of global HIV resources.
At the same time, the Global Fund to fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria has been strengthened. The
recent replenishment of more than $12 billion over
three years is a concrete demonstration of global
solidarity. I thank Michel Sidibé and UNAIDS for their
leadership — along with the efforts of all those across
the United Nations system and beyond — to mobilize
the global response. We have the tools, the science and
the knowledge to end AIDS once and for all. But we
cannot let confidence turn to complacency.
Progress remains uneven. Two out of three children
who need treatment do not get it. Death rates among
adolescents are increasing. Epidemics in Eastern
Europe, Central Asia, the Middle East and North Africa
are getting worse. And we are far behind on targets,
such as reducing sexual transmission by 50 per cent
and halving HIV transmission among people who inject
drugs. Stigma, discrimination and the criminalization
of people who are the most vulnerable to HIV are also
getting worse in parts of the world. Several countries
are not on track to meet any of the targets. We have
the ability to harness the incredible power of HIV
treatment as prevention. But this requires countries to
accelerate access to early HIV testing and get people on
treatment early and consistently. Less than 40 per cent

4/28

06/06/2014

of the 28.6 million people eligible for HIV treatment
are receiving it. Many countries still suffer from
inadequate supply of lifesaving drugs.
We cannot fail the people who need our help the
most.
Those include young people, who are disregarded
and underserved by health systems; women and girls,
who face unchecked violence and abuse; and key
populations, such as sex workers, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons, and intravenous drug
users, who continue to face criminalization. That not
only violates human rights, but drives people away
from essential services. Human rights and access to
health care are for all, not just for some.
The goal of ending AIDS remains a major challenge.
I encourage Member States to continue the vital debate
on ensuring how that important objective is best
reflected in the post-2015 development agenda. As that
work proceeds, the progress and important lessons from
the global AIDS response can provide useful guidance.
It has a record of breaking through political gridlock,
integrating health care and mobilizing key actors from
the public and private sector, civil society and the
philanthropic community to help spur innovation and
deliver results.
As we look ahead, we must do more to drive change.
I welcome the UNAIDS Programme Coordinating
Board recommendation that the General Assembly
consider holding a high-level meeting in 2016 to review
progress, identify remaining challenges and make
concrete proposals for the next steps on our path to end
AIDS. With the ongoing commitment of Member States
along with the work of UNAIDS and the entire United
Nations system, we have the capacity to deliver a great
gift to the world — ending AIDS through the shared
vision of no new HIV infections, no discrimination and
no AIDS-related deaths.
Let us make good on that promise. Millions of
lives depend on it. I thank the General Assembly for its
commitment and resolve.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM acknowledges that there has been
notable success in the implementation of the
14-42292

06/06/2014

Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS (resolution
S-26/2, annex) and the Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex). That is evident
in various ways, including through the 49 per cent
reduction in the incidence of HIV in our regions, the
decline by 52 per cent of AIDS-related deaths, from
24,000 deaths in 2001 to 11,000 deaths in 2012, the
increase in antiretroviral coverage from 5 per cent to
67 per cent of the eligible population in 2001, and the
virtual elimination of mother-to-child transmission
in some of our member States. Additionally, there
are strengthened national programmes with improved
capacity for implementing prevention, treatment and
care interventions. Investments have also been made
to improve health systems and scale up services for
ongoing care and support for increasing numbers of
people who are living longer with HIV in our subregion.
Despite those achievements, however, there remains
much to be done to achieve the goals and targets to
which we as a region have committed and ultimately
to address the challenge of getting to zero — with
zero discrimination, zero new infections and zero
AIDS-related deaths. As we set our sights on an AIDSfree CARICOM region, we do so in a drastically
changing global environment and regional space. We
are challenged by increasingly stringent eligibility
requirements that limit access to resources, particularly
for CARICOM States that have been classified by the
World Bank as middle-income countries. CARICOM
countries also face the growing challenge of expanding
treatment, care and support services to meet the
needs of increasing numbers of people who are living
with HIV. Stigma and discrimination continue to be
obstacles to testing, disclosure and access to prevention
and treatment services.
The increasing concentration of the HIV epidemic
among vulnerable groups of persons at higher risk
also warrants renewed and more effective action to
remove the obstacles that prevent universal access
to a wide range of comprehensive and high quality
health-care services. In our region, we intend to focus
efforts on ensuring that the human rights of all of our
citizens are respected in order to eradicate stigma and
discrimination and ultimately end the HIV epidemic.
In response to the compelling epidemiological
evidence that shows that certain populations continue
to be vulnerable to HIV, the CARICOM subregion,
through the Pan-Caribbean Partnership against HIV/
AIDS (PANCAP) and in collaboration with the Joint

A/68/PV.91

United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, mounted
a programme of activities, which is continuing under
the theme, Justice for All. The aim of the programme
is to promote activities consistent with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, to which all countries
ought to be committed and which denounces
discrimination.
CARICOM also continues to support and advocate
for retaining HIV and AIDS as key issues in the post2015 development agenda and for raising awareness of
the importance of a more holistic and comprehensive
approach to health. In addition to addressing the social
determinants of health and of HIV in particular, the
nexus between HIV and non-communicable diseases is
also a growing concern in our region. CARICOM has
articulated the importance of an open, transparent and
inclusive process to shape the post-2015 development
agenda, which must include health-related issues that
must be adequately addressed.
To achieve new goals and targets in relation to
reducing and eventually eliminating HIV, CARICOM
submits that Governments must efficiently and
effectively allocate adequate resources to meeting
targets, developing plans for sustainability aligned
with national strategic plans, performing cost analyses
of different scenarios of action and addressing barriers
to universal access to HIV treatment and care with the
aim of finally eliminating that global menace.
In conclusion, CARICOM applauds the initiatives
being undertaken by the United Nations, PANCAP
in our region, and other partners in the fight against
HIV/AIDS. CARICOM is and remains completely
committed to working with all partners to achieve
our objectives as the international community moves
forward in addressing that decades-old pandemic.
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 15 States members of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC):
Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, Swaziland, South
Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe. SADC aligns with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the African Group.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/68/825) on this important
subject and take note of the recommendations contained
therein.

14-422925/28

A/68/PV.91

HIV is one of the greatest health challenges and
among the major challenges facing the SADC region.
In combination with tuberculosis, the HIV epidemic
is reversing economic and social gains achieved
over many years and posing a significant challenge
to national efforts to strengthen health systems and
improve service delivery. From our experience,
the effects of the combined HIV and tuberculosis
epidemics have been further compounded by poverty,
gender inequality, weak health-care and community
systems, and insufficient access to treatment. The
stigma associated with the disease at the personal,
community and institutional levels further compounds
the challenge of issuing an effective and comprehensive
response to HIV and AIDS in our communities.
The HIV epidemic continues to be a major
challenge to regional efforts to achieve Millennium
Development Goal 1, as it exacerbates poverty and has
a negative impact on economic development. In many
instances, economic productivity at both the household
and national levels has been stalled by the ravages of
the epidemic. Families have lost valuable labour and
economic support, further rendering them unable to
break the cycle of household poverty.
That sober scenario notwithstanding, SADC
countries have made great strides in the fight
against HIV. Under the SADC HIV/AIDS Strategic
Framework, States members have continued to
implement multi-pronged interventions, which include
condom promotion and distribution, behaviour change
campaigns, expanded HIV testing and counseling
services, and male circumcision. The SADC region
has also made great strides towards scaling up access
to treatment and prevention of mother-to-child
transmission.
Although our region has suffered immensely as
a result of the epidemic, SADC is convinced that the
lessons we have learned have put us in a good position
to make valuable contributions to global efforts to
address the epidemic. As such, SADC member States
remain ready to work constructively with all partners
with a view to ensuring that future generations do not
suffer from the diseases that have afflicted us.
The pain and suffering we have witnessed and
continue to witness daily as a result of the epidemic have
served to enforce our commitment to the elimination
of HIV and AIDS. As a result of that commitment,
two months after the fact we continue to be dismayed
that the resolution on women, the girl child and HIV/
6/28

06/06/2014

AIDS was needlessly subjected to a recorded vote at the
fifty-eighth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women. We remain convinced that there was no
justification for the resolution to have been hijacked
from the floor for secondary causes.
Expert after expert from our capitals has reiterated
that prevention measures — including promoting
condom use, changing risky sexual behaviour and
delaying the sexual debut of young girls — have been
efficacious in reducing the spread of HIV infection.
The report of the Secretary-General before us speaks to
those facts. It is our hope that henceforth, as members
of the international community, we will continue to
strive to consolidate our common objective of ending
the epidemic, rather than seeking to use United Nations
forums to cultivate divisions at every opportunity.
In our region, women and girls continue to bear the
brunt of the HIV epidemic. In addition to their physical
vulnerabilities to infection, inequalities between men
and women continue to exacerbate their particularly
challenged position. In many settings, women continue
to fall victim to gender-based violence, which exposes
them to an increased risk of HIV infection.
While the gender dimension of HIV/AIDS has
gained increased attention over the past few decades,
more attention is still needed on the plight of HIV
orphans who are left to head households following
the death of their parents. More attention needs to
be devoted to assisting those orphans and vulnerable
children, most of whom also survive in child-headed
household environments. That scenario contributes
to high levels of school drop-out and to their failure
to progress to high school, college and other tertiary
learning institutions to complete their education and
provide for their families. Strong social protection
policies and practices therefore need to be put in place
to ensure that vulnerable children are empowered to
finish school and realize their potential.
Lack of tertiary education exacerbates gender
imbalances and leads to increased poverty, especially
for girls and women. It exposes them to extreme
vulnerability by leading them to seek alternative and
riskier coping mechanisms, such as sex for favours and
alcohol and substance abuse. It is for that reason that
SADC members are convinced that more needs to be
done in the area of poverty reduction, gender equality,
and the prevention and management of HIV and AIDS.

14-42292

06/06/2014

Finally, the SADC region fully supports the
African Union road map for shared responsibility and
global solidarity for AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
response in Africa. The road map stresses the need to
promote and facilitate investing in local manufacturing
hubs in Africa as one of the four priority actions to
ensure access to medicines in the region. As a number
of African companies are working tirelessly to obtain
the World Health Organization’s pre-qualifications, we
urge the international community to support the loca
manufacturing of medicines in every way in order to
reduce the vulnerability of the continent.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Although HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
remain a global health challenge, with a substantial
mortality burden in Africa, the African Union and
its member States have taken significant measures to
address the pandemic at various levels, including the
adoption of the road map on shared responsibility and
global solidarity for AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.
The progress of the road map, which was adopted by
African Heads of State and Government in 2012, is
being assessed by the Action Committee of Heads of
State and Government of AIDS Watch Africa. The road
map calls on African Union members to strengthen
ownership, accountability and partnership to accelerate
progress to achieve clear deliverables under the three
pillars of financing, access to medicines and enhanced
governance in order to help countries build long-term
and sustainable solutions.
Moreover, the African Union special summit in July
2013 in Abuja, Nigeria, made a strong commitment to
the Abuja Action Plan towards the elimination of HIV
and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in Africa by 2030,
which called for accelerating antiretroviral treatment,
eliminating the mother-to-child transmission of HIV,
and strengthening preventive measures in order to
reduce new HIV infection. Furthermore, the decision
to allocate 15 per cent of the national budget of African
States to the health sector is a clear demonstration of
the strong political will in Africa.
The African Group takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, entitled “Towards ending the AIDS
epidemic: meeting the 2015 targets and planning for the
post-2015 era” (A/68/825), and the recommendations
contained therein. The Group believes that the report
could contribute to discussions towards the formulation

A/68/PV.91

of the post-2015 United Nations development agenda. In
addition, while the Group welcomes the convening of a
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016, the African
Group underscores the importance of adhering to the
intergovernmental principle in defining the modalities
and organizational arrangements for the meeting at the
seventieth session of the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General’s report shows that the
global HIV response has reached an important stage.
New HIV infections and AIDs-related deaths continue
to decline in sub-Saharan Africa. Despite continuing
economic challenges and competing priorities, the total
resources available for HIV programmes in low- and
middle-income countries continue to grow. The Group
also applauds and recognizes the joint efforts undertaken
in 2013 by the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, the World Health Organization (WHO), the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
and the United States President’s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief to launch the Treatment 2015 initiative,
which provides a road map for accelerating treatment
scale-up, including in the three years beyond 2015. It
urges States to focus attention on neglected aspects
of the treatment agenda, including the urgent need to
invest in strategies to increase demand for testing and
treatment services. Treatment 2015 further calls for all
countries to establish new treatment targets to reflect
the 2013 WHO guidelines and to routinely monitor
outcomes across the treatment cascades.
The African Group is, however, alarmed that the
AIDS response is failing where young people are
concerned. Children are only half as likely as adults to
obtain antiretroviral therapy when needed. Given that
AIDS-related deaths are declining overall, HIV-related
mortality among adolescents has increased by 50 per
cent since 2005. The African Group is convinced that the
youth population represents a great asset. It recognizes
that the viability of this resource depends on our
capacity to take on this challenge. The Group reiterates
that it is of the utmost importance to protect women,
children and youth from the particular conditions that
may impact on their well-being and livelihood. We are
equally concerned that in sub-Saharan African, HIV
infection rates remain substantially higher among girls
than among boys of a similar age. The number of donorfunded male condoms in low- and middle-income
countries dropped from 3.4 billion in 2011 to 2.4 billion
in 2012, while the number of donor-provided female
condoms fell from 43.4 million to 31.8 million.

14-422927/28

A/68/PV.91

Considering the mid-term reviews in 2013
of national progress behavioural HIV prevention
programmes, the African Group reaffirms and
reiterates that prevention, diagnosis, treatment, strong
surveillance systems and universal access to service
must be at the core of our efforts. In that regard, the
issue of supply-chain management and local production
of medicine and other preventive mechanisms must be
given the critical attention they deserve.
The African Group underscores that universal
access to HIV/AIDS treatment remains paramount
to global response strategies and constitutes a
fundamental human right. The Group reiterates the
importance of respect for regional culture and religious
value systems and peculiarities in considering human
rights issues. The African Group is disturbed by the
continuous use of certain concepts and terms in the
Secretary-General’s report. We wish to stress the need
to maintain joint ownership of the international human
rights agenda and to consider human rights issues in
an objective and non-confrontational manner. It is
the African Group’s view that we should refrain from
relying on notions that fall outside the internationally
agreed human rights framework, taking into account
that such attempts constitute an expression of disregard
for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the
stigmatization and discrimination of people living
with HIV/AIDS still prevail. The Group is particularly
concerned that such attitudes continue to undermine
an effective AIDS response to the extent that people
living with HIV continue to face challenges in some
countries, where they are denied health or dental care
and employment. The African Group recognizes that all
human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated, and that the international community
must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal
manner on the same footing and with the same emphasis.
We remain steadfast in the view that, while the
significance of national and regional pecularities
and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of
States — regardless of their political, economic and
cultural systems — to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms. The Group therefore
strongly urges for people living with HIV/AIDS to be
treated fairly and equally, and protected from stigma,
discriminatory practices and related intolerance.

8/28

06/06/2014

Inasmuch as there has been progress in reducing
new HIV infections among people injecting drugs, the
Group believes that more emphasis should be placed
on efforts aimed at counselling and other means of
encouraging people to refrain from using drugs in
Africa. Drug use and abuse remain a critical legal
matter.
In conclusion, the African Group reaffirms its
commitment to fighting the HIV/AIDS scourge, and
believes that international cooperation and strategic
partnership are crucial in that fight. The Group
similarly welcomes medical research developments
and technological initiatives on the treatment and
cure of HIV/AIDS that are of good quality, accessible
and affordable to all. We strongly believe that the
HIV treatment for 15 million people, a target set by
the Secretary-General, will be achievable only if
the significant gains made in HIV prevention and
antiretroviral treatment are sustained, and if treatment
to prevent mother-to-child transmission is strengthened.
The Group therefore calls upon its partners to support
the business plan for the implementation of the
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plan for Africa, which
was developed in collaboration with a broad range
of partners and subsequently adopted by the special
session of the fifth Conference of the African Ministers
of Health, in May 2012.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
First, we would like to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (A/68/825) on progress
towards achieving the targets of the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex), adopted
in 2011. We appreciate the review of the progress to
date in reducing new HIV infections and AIDS-related
deaths, increasing the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission, and the major scientific advances in and
large scale-up of access to antiretroviral treatment.
The report underlines that although several of the
key targets and goals for 2015 are within reach, AIDS
will remain an urgent global health and development
challenge. Several significant remaining challenges
are mentioned, such as the need for countries to invest
strategically in evidence-based HIV prevention in an
integrated and comprehensive way, which includes

14-42292

06/06/2014

addressing, among others, links between sexual and
reproductive health rights and sexuality education; the
importance of scaling up services for key populations
and supporting human-rights-based initiatives that
will strengthen access to such services; the continued
discrimination against and stigmatization of those key
populations and women and girls who are particularly
vulnerable or most at risk for contracting HIV; the rise
in new infections in certain regions and populations;
the importance of eliminating HIV-related restrictions
on and punitive approaches to those key populations,
including people who inject drugs; and the need for
better data. The European Union fully agrees with
the challenges mentioned and the steps to be taken,
especially regarding key populations.
At the country level, tailor-made responses are
required to address the HIV epidemic. The report spells
out clearly that it is time to integrate HIV prevention
and treatment into regular health systems, ensuring
that health care services are accessible to hard-toreach and marginalized groups. It may therefore be
unhelpful to recommend establishing national trust
funds and mandatory earmarks in budgets only to fund
HIV. We welcome the increased efforts of low- and
middle-income countries to reduce their dependence
on international funding. However, much remains to
be done, and we encourage all countries to continue
on this path. In that regard, we would like to remind
Governments to significantly and speedily scale up
their efforts to accelerate the transition to universal
access to affordable and quality health-care services.
We acknowledge the work and leadership of Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
as the Organization’s focal point in the fight against the
HIV epidemic. Collaboration between all relevant actors,
including people living with HIV, civil society — both
as a service provider and a watchdog — and the Global
Fund, especially at the country level, remains of crucial
importance. While the Global Fund was not conceived as
a long-term financing instrument, we acknowledge that
for the foreseeable future it remains crucially important
in the fight against HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and
malaria, and we therefore encourage a continued close
working relationship between it and UNAIDS.
The European Union and its member States look
forward to the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016
or soon thereafter, as part of a broader strategic effort
to reaffirm and renew our political commitments and
to ensure accountability in efforts to achieve universal

A/68/PV.91

access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support
in the post-2015 era.
Mr. Tin (Myanmar): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the 10 States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country, Myanmar.
At the outset, ASEAN wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on
the important issue of HIV/AIDS (A/68/825). ASEAN
also strongly supports the call by the ministers of the
Non-Aligned Movement at its seventeenth Ministerial
Conference, held recently in Algiers, for a scaling-up
of their efforts to achieve the goals of universal access
to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment,
care and support and of halting and reversing the spread
of this pandemic by 2015.
The HIV/AIDS epidemic remains an issue of
critical concern to all peoples all over the world, since
to varying degrees it affects every region, including
that of ASEAN. It has the potential to be a formidable
challenge to and constraint on member States’
economic and social development efforts, and curbing
it requires a concerted response. ASEAN therefore
shares other major regional groups’ concerns about the
the pandemic’s prevalence. Reducing the HIV/AIDS
death toll is one of the ASEAN countries’ major joint
responsibilities.
The leaders of ASEAN have shown their readiness
to forge a global partnership by making ASEAN’s own
political commitments to responding to HIV/AIDS in
the wake of the General Assembly’s adoption in 2001
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
(resolution S-26/2, annex) and the subsequent Political
Declarations of 2006 (resolution 60/262, annex) and
2011 (resolution 65/277, annex). The first ASEAN
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS was made
in 2001 at its seventh Summit in Brunei Darussalam,
and ASEAN’s leaders again adopted a declaration
of commitment to zero new HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths during the
nineteenth ASEAN Summit in Bali, Indonesia, in 2011.
In preparation for the Asia-Pacific Intergovernmental
Meeting on HIV/AIDS scheduled for 28-30 January 2015
in Bangkok, ASEAN is also taking steps to evaluate the
outcomes of national reviews of its members’ policy and
legal barriers to universal access to HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support.

14-422929/28

A/68/PV.91

ASEAN put in place a mechanism to address HIV
and AIDS by establishing the ASEAN Task Force on
AIDS in 1993. Since then, the Task Force has provided
a focus for a coordinated regional response to HIV. It
has already completed three work programmes, and has
been implementing a fourth for 2011-2015. One of the
Task Force’s achievements was the development in 2011
of a first regional report on HIV, which documented
the status of the HIV pandemic in ASEAN member
countries as well as the Association’s efforts to address
the issue. The report indicated that the main drivers
of the epidemic in ASEAN were unprotected sex with
multiple partners and needle-sharing in injecting
drug use. About 75 per cent of all HIV infections in
ASEAN countries are reported from among the key
affected populations of sex workers, men who have
sex with men, transgender individuals and those who
inject drugs. Other vulnerable populations include
the intimate partners of the latter groups and at-risk
young people, institutionalized persons, the military
and mobile populations. The Task Force’s initiatives
include supporting ASEAN member States in reaching
key affected populations by hosting and funding
regional-level meetings and consultations, which have
included consultations on at-risk youth and on greater
involvement and empowerment of people living with
HIV.
Many ASEAN countries have already reached
their targets in treatment coverage. Nevertheless, most
Member States remain dependent on international
assistance. For that reason, the ASEAN Task Force
supports the fast-tracking of accreditation for licensing
in ASEAN member States to produce affordable
generic antiretroviral drugs for HIV. An important
remaining challenge is developing an enabling a policy
environment for HIV programme response. Conflicting
laws and policies still exist, particularly for HIV
prevention among people who inject drugs, sex workers
and homosexual people. In order to get the private
sector involved, ASEAN has established the ASEAN
Business Coalition on HIV/AIDS and the ASEAN Red
Ribbon for Outstanding Workplace Awards for ASEAN
senior labour officials as a platform for promoting
the greater participation of the private sector in HIV
prevention and control and non-discrimination in the
workplace.
We are now intensifying our efforts towards
building the ASEAN community by 2015. One of the
key pillars in that community-building is the ASEAN
sociocultural blueprint, which identifies HIV/AIDS as
10/28

06/06/2014

one of the listed priorities. To achieve the goal of a world
with zero new HIV infections, zero discrimination and
zero AIDS-related deaths, ASEAN needs to forge closer
ties with multilateral, bilateral and other international
organizations. At present, we are actively engaged with
the United Nations family, including the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the United
Nations Development Programme, as well as other
donor agencies. Those dialogues and partnerships need
to be pursued more strategically, with energy, vigour
and passion. Although some ASEAN countries have
already reached their universal access targets, we in
ASEAN still require further collaboration and financial
and technical support. Our vision is an ASEAN
community that is people-centred, socially responsible,
inclusive and harmonious, with enduring solidarity and
unity. We aim to forge a common identity and build a
community of caring societies, where the well-being,
livelihood and welfare of all peoples are enhanced.
Recognizing the importance of health care for
the people, ASEAN leaders, at their recent summit
in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, emphasized the need
for the effective implementation of the Bandar Seri
Begawan Declaration on Non-Communicable Diseases
and welcomed ongoing activities in addressing the
epidemic. Through the effective implementation of the
ongoing ASEAN Work Programme for HIV/AIDS, and
with enhanced international assistance, we believe that
ASEAN will be able to scale up its efforts to achieve the
goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention
programmes, treatment, care and support.
Ms. Auguste (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate. I am pleased and
honoured to participate in this event of great importance
to the future of our planet. It is a genuine privilege to
come to the General Assembly Hall to make the Haitian
nation’s contribution to the construction of a new world
through the eight Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) — a world of peace, without extreme poverty
and without HIV/AIDS. Allow me to commend and
thank the Secretary-General for his high-quality report
(A/68/825) and for his statement.
My delegation endorses the statement made by the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago on behalf of the
Caribbean Community.
Nearly 15 years ago, the world joined forces as
never before to address the many evils that afflict
developing countries and together to define the ways
14-42292

06/06/2014

and means to reduce the suffering and injustices that
afflict approximately 1.2 billion people around the
world living below the threshold of extreme poverty
and to eliminate the scourge of HIV, which further
compounds their misery. We are less than two years
before the date fixed by the United Nations for the
achievement of the MDGs to ensure the advent of a
more humane, happier world.
It is with satisfaction and optimism that we look to
the future. During the past 14 years, various indicators
linked to extreme poverty and HIV have declined
globally. At the regional level, since the Pan-Caribbean
Partnership against HIV/AIDS was established in 2001,
we have recorded a decrease in the incidence of HIV
and deaths linked to AIDS by 49 per cent and 59 per
cent, respectively. In 2001, 24,000 people died of AIDS.
In 2012, only 11,000 died and the use of antiretroviral
treatment had risen by 67 per cent. In 2001, such
coverage was only 5 per cent.
For some countries, several of the Millennium
Development Goals will not be achieved, but the trends
are positive and the process is off to a good start. The
results attained so far suggest that extreme poverty will
be overcome, because the world has come to see that
with goodwill and by devoting the resources necessary,
we can defeat this scourge and assure all inhabitants
of the planet a world of greater well-being and justice.
However, those goals must not be interpreted as an
opportunity to rest on our laurels. The most important
work remains to be done, and wе have a long and
arduous road ahead. We need to define together the
ways and means to reduce the suffering and injustices
of people around the world who live below the threshold
of extreme poverty and to eliminate the scourge of HIV/
AIDS that compounds their misery.
That will not be easy, especially as regards HIV.
The progress we are talking about is not across the
board, and many countries still lag behind. More than
ever, we must redouble our passion and solidarity.
Victory over extreme poverty and HIV/AIDS can be
achieved only through collective action guided by a
sense of fraternity. As the deadline approaches, Haiti
wishes to reaffirm the commitment it undertook nearly
15 years ago to joining the global effort to create a more
just world in which the dignity of all citizens, no matter
where they live, will at last be upheld.
We are proud of the progress made in recent years,
especially during the three years that our Government
has had the privilege of being in power. Despite all the

A/68/PV.91

difficulties that we have had to overcome following
various natural disasters and other social and political
handicaps, we have stayed the course. Our experience,
which we are happy to share with the Assembly, have
confirmed that our strategy to prioritize the fight
against extreme poverty is the right one. As a result
of victories over extreme poverty, we can now instil
confidence in the future among the suffering majority
and motivate them to achieve their own well-being and
that of the nation.
For some countries, victory over HIV appears
particularly difficult because it requires the eradication
of extreme poverty, since poverty and HIV are linked.
It is no coincidence that the poorest countries and
communities are those where the rate of HIV infection
is the highest. It is no coincidence, either, that AIDS,
malaria and tuberculosis are called the infectious
diseases of poverty, because they disproportionately
affect poor and marginalized populations and are major
drivers of extreme poverty and social exclusion.
The link between AIDS and development is
indisputable. We must be more aggressive. We must
break down barriers, inequality and exclusion and
address all causes that perpetuate poverty, since the
economic vulnerability that it creates promotes a number
of risk behaviours. Such vulnerability must therefore be
addressed by using all available means. That is what
we have done under the Martelly Administration and
Lamothe Government with our social programmes to
identify all aspects of extreme poverty, overcoming
them with appropriate solutions.
That is why any strategy reviewing the actions to
take and the means to use after 2015 in order to achieve
that better world for which we struggle must prioritize
the fight against extreme poverty, since we must
promote any solution that addresses such vulnerability,
as we have done with our social assistance programmes
and cash transfers in Haiti. Although it was initially
criticized, that approach allowed us to improve the
outcomes for some key indicators of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Three years before the deadline, eliminating
underweight among children under 5 years old has been
achieved thanks to our determined social policy. Seom
88 per cent of Haitian children now go to school. Our
great successes can in particular be seen in the drastic
drop in infant and child mortality and in the HIV and
AIDS prevalence, which we have managed to stabilize
at 2.2 per cent since 2006. It should also be underscored

14-4229211/28

A/68/PV.91

that such welcome developments could not have been
achieved without the solidarity and assistance of the
international community and the dedication of the
relevant United Nations bodies.
The world will not ever be sufficiently united to
deal with all the disasters that afflict it. We need that
solidarity more than ever, since the challenges that we
must overcome are huge. Six million of our brothers
still live in poverty. We have the highest unemployment
rate in the hemisphere. While undeniable progress has
been made, our health-care system still has serious
shortcomings. Considerable efforts should be made to
restore our environment, which is the most damaged
in the region, in particular since climate change has a
serious impact on that deterioration.
However, we are not worried. We have already
charted the path that will enable us to achieve all our
goals and the post-2015 period is no longer a cause of
concern for us. The seeds that we sowed through the
implementation of our social programmes, our projects
and, in particular, our action plan to reduce poverty have
begun to yield results, showing all Haitian citizens the
possibility of that lawful, happy and prosperous society
of which they have long dreamed. That will give rise to
the momentum to overcome all impediments and make
it possible to deal with all the challenges, in particular
HIV. We now know that it is essential to choose the right
path and to move forward time and again in order to
succeed. Clearly, we will probably not achieve several
goals on time, but it is key to succeed and we will do so.
At the strategic level, we know that we must do our
utmost to achieve the set goals by the 2015 deadline or,
at least, get as close as we can in order to encourage all
international actors to step up their efforts to continue
the fight against poverty and AIDS beyond 2015. In that
regard, we must urgently find the funds to strengthen
prevention campaigns for young people between 15 and
24 years old and women, who are the most affected by
the scourge of AIDS. Women account for approximately
57 per cent of the cases recorded between 2010 and 2015.
Pharmaceutical companies must also join the global
effort and agree to slightly lower their profit so that the
price of antiretroviral treatment is more affordable and
poor people have access to those medicines.
I would like to tell all sister nations — in particular
those that, like us, face difficulties and are overwhelmed
by thousands of problems — that the worst is behind us,
since we know that if we stay united and mobilized,
as we have over the past 14 years, we will achieve our
12/28

06/06/2014

goals, even if not all of them by the set date. The key
is to move forward. Victory lies ahead. In order to stay
the course, we propose the following actions.
We must speed up decentralization processes so
that citizens in the most remote parts of the world can
benefit from the same services as those in the major
countries. We must emphasize prevention programmes,
since people tend to give up once progress has been
made in the fight against HIV. They tend to think that
the disease has become less dangerous. That is not at all
true. We must remind them of that by means of massive
and aggressive campaigns, aimed in particular at young
people and women. We should subsidize, wherever
possible, antiretroviral drugs for those who are not able
to pay for them. We must make people aware that the
problem of HIV, just like hunger or extreme poverty, in
short comes down to one problem: that of development.
Development is a common effort. The involvement of
every citizen is both a moral and a patriotic duty.
It is especially necessary for each member of the
international community, every citizen of every country,
to consider their responsibility in what is a true shame
for humanity. It is inconceivable that millions of people
live in the most extreme poverty and die of hunger,
malaria and other diseases, while humanity has all that
is needed to eradicate such scourges. For all these years,
we members of the international community have been
too indulgent towards ourselves. We have accepted
too many failures that were avoidable. That is the crux
of the issue. Above all, we must continue the strong
will to put an end to the phenomenon, which should
never have existed, and maintain a healthy indignation
for the horrors that for too long we were happy to
merely watch. In that way we will remain mobilized
and continue on the path that we, as members of the
international community, have set for ourselves until
the total elimination of poverty and HIV and AIDS.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
However, we are not concerned about Haiti. Our
results may seem rather modest to the casual observer.
That is only because we are in the middle of a democratic
learning process that is not very easy and our policy is not
always well understood. The Martelly Administration
and Lamothe Government have, however, adopted the
preferential option for the poor as the social vision
that guides our governance. We are in the process of
writing that page of history. The uninformed observer
clearly lacks the perspective to appreciate the fairness
14-42292

06/06/2014

and scope of such an option, which we are not afraid
to call life-saving not only for poor people but for all
society. We must therefore understand the essence of
the option, study it, perfect it and promote it among
ourselves so that it can reappear and regain the prestige
that it enjoyed following 1 January 1804.
Mrs. Bartoli (France) (spoke in French): We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/68/825), which,
as 2015 approaches, underscores all the efforts made to
date throughout the world to combat HIV and AIDS and
the progress still to be made in the hope of achieving
the fundamental goal of a world without AIDS.
France has been strongly committed to combatting
AIDS since the virus was identified 31 years ago.
Today, we are the second-largest contributor to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
and the largest to the International Drug Purchase
Facility, the key organization we played a major role
in creating. We therefore welcome the progress that
has been made, welcome the mobilization of the
international community as a whole in its efforts
to combat the pandemic, and reaffirm today the
international commitment of France, which allocates
more than €300 million — almost $500 million — to
combatting AIDS. That massive investment is geared
primarily to providing innovative financing for health,
such as the solidarity tax on airplane tickets and the
tax on financial transactions. Scientific advances, such
as the latest recommendations of the World Health
Organization (WHO) concerning the early treatment of
patients, allow us to foresee a decline in the epidemic
that was seen as inconceivable just a few years ago.
The key moment of 2015 for global health will
provide us both an opportunity to assess the ground we
have covered and to reflect on the ways we propose to
shape the fight against AIDS in the post-2015 world. In
that context, France underscores three subjects that are
dear to our heart.
First, we need to continue to implement policies to
combat AIDS that are founded on respect for human
rights. The Secretary-General’s report exposes the
persistent stigmatization, repression and criminalization
of vulnerable people — in particular injectable drug
users, a population that has unfortunately experienced a
spike in the disease in some regions of the world — when
they seek access to health care.
Secondly, greater attention should be paid to
prevention and treatment for young people, particularly

A/68/PV.91

adolescents. The WHO publication on adolescent health
published in March notes that HIV/AIDS is the second
cause of adolescent death. That is proof, were it needed,
that the fight against HIV/AIDS cannot be allowed a
moment’s pause.
Lastly, the end of the AIDS epidemic can be foreseen
only if we devote greater attention to strengthening
health systems and to ensuring non-discrimination,
with the goal of achieving universal health care. A
world without AIDS can become a reality only if the
fight against HIV/AIDs is fully integrated into robust
national health systems that allow us to address
interrelated challenges in the fundamental areas of
co-infection, sexual and reproductive health, maternal
and child health, and risk reduction among the most
vulnerable groups.
France therefore calls for maintaining the political
and financial mobilization to combat HIV/AIDS and
strengthening efforts within national health systems in
order to meet the goal set by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV and AIDS: zero new infections,
zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to
acknowledge from the very beginning the leadership
of Michel Sidibé and all his dedicated colleagues at
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), who are very instrumental to all our efforts.
I had the great honour to work with my colleague
Ambassador Charles Ntwaagae of Botswana as co-chair
of the negotiations of the 2011 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex). We are
now 12 months from the deadline we ourselves all set
for the ambitious targets for a world free of AIDS,
but the challenges facing us are still very stark. The
recommendations in the Secretary General’s report
(A/68/825) reflect the action we need to take to deliver
on the promise and commitment of the Declaration.
The report speaks about the need to use lessons and
evidence of what works to scale up all our efforts and
build on our successes.
With that in mind, I am frankly alarmed to see that
the distribution of condoms declined by over a billion
between 2011 and 2012, and that the number of AIDSrelated deaths for adolescents actually increased. That
is a damning indication that we are not doing what we
know works. We need to ensure that HIV and AIDS
programmes are targeted to and appropriate for young
people. Australia is particularly committed to expanding

14-4229213/28

A/68/PV.91

access to comprehensive sexuality education, including
for adolescents. Fifty adolescent girls contract HIV each
hour. That means that 150 will contract HIV during our
meeting this morning. It is unforgivably irresponsible
not to provide access to HIV prevention programmes
for young people.
The report speaks of the need to focus on geographic
settings and populations where HIV prevalence and
incidence are highest. That has particular resonance
for Australia and our Indo-Pacific region. Decades
ago, Australia put key populations at the centre of our
response. We initiated needle and syringe exchanges
and community-based outreach programmes for sex
workers and gay men, and we tackled discrimination
against people with HIV, with their help. Those
interventions helped reduce and avoid new infections
well before the new advances in treatment.
Research shows that the pattern of the epidemic’s
spread in Asia is driven by commercial sex, injecting
drug use and sex between men. In Australia’s closest
neighbour, Papua New Guinea, HIV infection rates in
transgender people and sex workers are many times
higher than in the general population. The high rates
of infection in those key populations denote high levels
of risk and demand targeted interventions.Australia
is working with our partners in the region to support
their efforts to reduce and avoid new infections. For
example, our partnerships with Indonesia and Papua
New Guinea support national responses and target atrisk populations. Targeting services to those most at
risk also makes sense economically. The Commission
on AIDS in Asia has found that interventions for key
populations are low in cost and high in impact.
Perhaps most importantly, the Secretary General’s
report speaks of the need to protect the human rights of
key populations, particularly lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender people. Punitive laws that criminalize those
people and/or restrict their freedoms of association
and expression violate the most fundamental human
rights that underpin the Charter of the United Nations
itself and that we all obligated to uphold. The evidence
shows that such laws limit access to services and put
lives at risk. We need policies of inclusion that reduce
stigma and discrimination against people with HIV and
against socially marginalized and vulnerable groups,
sex workers, transgender people, people who use drugs
and men who have sex with men. Australia is strongly
committed to reaching out to and supporting vulnerable
populations and to defending their human rights.

14/28

06/06/2014

This year, Australia has the honour of chairing
the UNAIDS Programme Coordinating Board in
Geneva and will host the twentieth International AIDS
Conference in Melbourne next month. We relish this
leadership role and are committed to making the
international conference a compelling, inspiring and
informative event for all. Finally, we look forward to
the high-level meeting on HIV and AIDS anticipated
for 2016, which is a necessary meeting.
To conclude, we know what we need to do to end
HIV and AIDS. Our Political Declaration in 2011 set out
a straight trajectory to achieve this, and our momentum
has picked up. But we need to do so much more. Above
all, we must do what we already know works.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (A/68/825) on progress
towards achieving the commitments set out in the 2011
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex). The report highlights the important
progress we have made globally in tackling HIV. New
HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths continue to
decline, and the provision of antiretrovirals means
individuals can extend and improve their quality of life.
However, as the report clearly outlines, we can in no
way afford to be complacent. We know that progress
has been uneven, both across the world and within
populations.
In particular, the report outlines the significantly
increased risk of HIV within populations such as
transgender people, people who inject drugs, prisoners,
sex workers and men who have sex with men. As the
report outlines, health status is powerfully affected
by inequality, marginalization and discrimination. We
therefore welcome the recommendation for equitable
and non-discriminatory access to HIV treatment,
including gathering data in a manner that fully respects
human rights, in order to close gaps. The United
Kingdom also strongly supports the recommendation
to replace punitive laws and law enforcement with
protective laws as an important element in reducing
stigma and halting the rise in HIV infections.
The report also highlights how women and girls are
disproportionately affected by HIV. The prevalence of
gender-based violence continues to increase the risk of
HIV infection. In a conflict or crisis, girls and women
are more vulnerable to rape and transactional sex. The
highest maternal mortality and worst reproductive health
are in countries experiencing crisis. Contraception,
14-42292

06/06/2014

prevention and treatment of HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections and safe abortion are life-saving
services, yet they are often ignored in humanitarian
responses. To help address that, the United Kingdom
is supporting the development of a new programme on
sexual and reproductive health in crisis and emergency
response and recovery, which includes services to
reduce the transmission of HIV.
The United Kingdom is a committed partner in the
global HIV response. We have increased our annual
contribution to the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) by 50 per cent. At the end
of last year, we pledged £l billion, or nearly $2 billion,
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, and we continue to call on other donors over
the 2014-2016 period to reach the $15-billion target for
the Global Fund. For the global response to be lasting,
we must not only integrate HIV within other sectors,
but also leverage sustainable financing and increase
domestic funding and investments.
We recognize that a strong health system is
an important way to improve the reach, efficiency
and resilience of services. We therefore support the
recommendation of the report for a further integration
of HIV within the wider health system. By integrating
HIV services within tuberculosis services, sexual
and reproductive health services and the wider health
system, people living with and affected by HIV,
including children and people with disabilities, are
treated holistically.
In closing, we agree that community engagement
and quality information and education is a vital part of
the HIV response and of finishing the job on existing
commitments, including Millennium Development
Goal 6. It is only through addressing stigma, increasing
information and understanding, committing domestic
and international resources and supporting a high level
of integration of HIV services within the health system
that we can truly achieve zero new infections in our
lifetime.
Mr. Golitsyn (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (A/68/825), entitled
“Towards ending the AIDS epidemic: meeting the
2015 targets and planning for the post-2015 era”. We
recognize the remarkable work of the Secretariat,
national delegations and civil society, which made this
document as strong as it could be.

A/68/PV.91

We share the view that the international community,
in the past 30 years of addressing the problem, has
achieved notable progress in the global AIDS response.
However, the AIDS epidemic is far from over.
Therefore, Ukraine notes with satisfaction that, despite
economic challenges, the total resources available for
HIV programmes in low- and middle-income countries
continue to grow. It is crucial to sustain the current
level of cooperation with all partners, including both
international and domestic donor organizations; the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS; the
World Health Organization; the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; the United Nations
Development Programme; and the United Nations
Population Fund.
It has been three years since the adoption of the
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex), and this plenary meeting provides
us an opportunity to review our achievements. We
would like to emphasize that the implementation of
preventive measures, including the introduction of
substitution therapy among the affected population
represented by injecting drug users, has had a decisive
impact on addressing HIV in Ukraine. According to
an epidemiological survey, from 2006 to 2013 there
was a gradual decrease of newly reported HIV cases
in Ukraine among injecting drug users, and in 2012,
for the first time, HIV infections decreased by 1.6 per
cent compared to previous years. The country is also
observing a strong positive trend in the decrease in
the proportion of new HIV infections among young
people, which has dropped by a factor of 1.8. Ukraine
has achieved a significant decrease in mother-to-child
HIV transmission, which has decreased sevenfold over
the past decade.
Those results were made possible thanks to close
cooperation between non-governmental and public
organizations. The introduction of an integrated
approach to dealing with the different groups made our
HIV response more effective. That approach includes,
in addition to purely medical interventions, components
of social support, harm reduction programmes and
substitution therapy.
Ukraine takes every opportunity to minimize HIVrelated risks and tackle AIDS-related deaths. Therefore,
the Ukrainian Government is seeking to decentralize
the antiretroviral treatment process, offering medical
assistance at the secondary level and providing, as a

14-4229215/28

A/68/PV.91

first support package, HIV prevention services and
support to people living with the infection.
Ukraine and several other countries are studying
various options to mobilize sustainable financing, such
as national HIV trust funds. However, almost 41 per
cent of our HIV treatment is covered by international
assistance mechanisms such as the Global Fund.
In order to address new realities and shore up the
efforts of the Government, international actors and
non-governmental organizations, Ukraine has adopted
a nationwide targeted social programme for combating
HIV/AIDS for 2014-2018. The relevant legislation is
being constantly updated in order to correspond to
international medical and technical standards.
Given this opportunity to address the Assembly,
we would like to raise awareness regarding recent
developments. We know that the recent unjustified
events in Crimea will directly affect the HIV/AIDS
situation on the peninsula. The Ministry of Health of
Ukraine and related non-governmental organizations
are seriously concerned about the de facto total ban
on harm-reduction packages and the abolishing of
the opiate substitution treatment provided by Ukraine
in Crimea. In that regard, we are ready to announce
that the Ukraine’s State service on social diseases has
established an expert task group to address this issue,
which undermines the human rights of Ukrainian
citizens and may have humanitarian consequences with
lethal effects. As of today, 18 regions of Ukraine are
able to provide 416 additional courses of substitution
therapy for patients from the autonomous Republic of
Crimea.
To conclude, my country believes that further
discussion of HIV-related issues at the General
Assembly will contribute to national and global
progress towards achieving the relevant Millennium
Development Goals and strengthen our common efforts
on formulating HIV-related targets within the United
Nations post-2015 agenda.
Mr. Takahashi (Japan): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/68/825). My delegation would also like to
thank the President of the General Assembly for giving
us an opportunity to have a discussion on this agenda
item with other Member States.
There are less than 600 days left to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. Since the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex)

16/28

06/06/2014

was adopted three years ago, steady progress has been
made globally on several of its core goals, which include
reducing sexually transmitted HIV, eliminating HIV
infections among newborns and infants and reducing
maternal deaths. However, the goal of universal access
to treatment for HIV/AIDS by 2010 has not been
achieved, and there remain other challenges, such as the
continued growth of the epidemic in several countries,
including 16 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, and the
continued lack of access to treatment for many children.
Discussions on the future sustainable development
goals and the Post-2015 Development Agenda are
ongoing at present, and there is no doubt that the fight
against HIV/AIDS will remain a struggle that we must
continue to contend with even after 2015. In his report,
the Secretary-General described the many important
synergies between the responses to HIV/AIDS on
the one hand and global efforts to eliminate extreme
poverty, ensure universal health coverage and reduce
inequalities on the other. My delegation agrees entirely
on that point.
In order to accelerate and enhance our efforts
towards HIV/AIDS prevention, diagnosis, treatment
and health management, it is necessary to implement
comprehensive measures focusing not just on HIV/AIDS
itself but on the entire health system. Under Japan’s
national health programme, we have established an
effective health and medical system by locating healthcare facilities nationwide and cultivating medical
specialists such as doctors, nurses and pharmacists. We
have implemented universal medical care insurance in
order to enable everyone to access sufficient services,
and we have strengthened our measures dealing with
HIV/AIDS in addition to our basic health and medical
systems. Through the aforementioned efforts, all
people in Japan living with HIV have access to the
necessary health-care services as part of universal
health coverage.
Next, my delegation would like to speak briefly
about the issue of equity in the fight against HIV/
AIDS. The lack of equitable access to life-saving HIV
treatment, especially for women and children, needs to
be dealt with. The concept of human security provides a
comprehensive approach that strengthens the protection
and empowerment of people and communities in need.
In that regard, Japan expects United Nations entities
and Member States to draw on that approach on the
ground to fight HIV/AIDS.

14-42292

06/06/2014

Prejudice and discrimination against people
living with HIV continue to exist, and that stigma has
been an obstacle in the path of our fight against HIV/
AIDS. It is necessary for us to make every effort to
eliminate prejudice and discrimination against those
living with HIV through a people-centred approach to
human security. To that end, my country contributed
$1.86 billion by the end of 2013 to the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria for supporting
the HIV/AIDS response. Moreover, at the fourth
voluntary replenishment conference of the Global Fund,
held in December 2013, Japan announced that it would
contribute an additional $800 million to the Fund in the
coming years, starting in 2014.
Furthermore, at the fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V), which
was held in Japan in 2013, the prevention and treatment
of HIV/AIDS were highlighted as an important sectorspecific agenda in Japan’s assistance policy, and we are
moving it forward in order to steadily implement the
Yokohama Action Plan 2013-2017, which elaborates on
the follow-up to the outcome of TICAD V.
Japan believes that through realizing universal
health coverage and human security we can achieve
societies and communities where all people have full
access to prevention, diagnosis, treatment and healthcare services for HIV/AIDS, where new HIV infections
cease and where we can live with the people living with
HIV without prejudice or discrimination.
Finally, I would like to inform the Assembly that an
event on universal health coverage, co-organized by the
Governments of Japan, France and Thailand together
with the World Health Organization and the World Bank
Group, will be held at the Permanent Mission of Japan
to the United Nations, beginning at 8.15 a.m. on 11 June.
We hope that as many Member States as possible will
participate in that event and will learn that universal
health coverage is achievable in all countries. We also
hope that we can discuss the importance of promoting
universal health coverage, particularly within the
discussions on both the sustainable development goals
and the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation is firmly
committed to the purposes and principles of the
2011 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex), which we see as a key framework for

A/68/PV.91

expanding international cooperation to combat the
immunodeficiency virus.
Russia is one of the countries that, over the past few
decades, has undertaken significant efforts to counteract
HIV infections, and that has helped to effectively
curb the development of the epidemic and its spread.
Russian national legislation guarantees all citizens
access to wide-ranging prevention programmes and
free and voluntary testing, and HIV-infected persons
have access to free high-quality medical assistance
and social protection. Today, the annual coverage rate
for voluntary HIV testing, primarily for risk groups,
stands at 18 per cent of our population. That is one
of the highest rates in the world. Over 30 per cent of
people under observation receive antiretroviral therapy.
That indicator is set to increase in the near future. The
vertical transmission of HIV has almost stopped, and
we are ready to share our successful experience of this
work with all interested countries.
We are committed to implementing the World
Health Organization strategy of treatment as
prevention. We consider it important to coordinate the
efforts of the entire international community to reduce
the cost of anti-retroviral drugs. HIV prevalence in the
Russian population is slightly over 0.4 per cent, which
contradicts the forecasts of international experts about
a widespread epidemic. Of course, much still remains to
be done. Russia consistently and actively contributes to
combatting the spread of HIV/AIDs and other infectious
diseases throughout the world. In that task, we seek
to combine participation in international mechanisms
with the provision of bilateral assistance. In particular,
Russia’s contribution to replenishing resources to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
totals over $300 million. In 2013, through the United
Nations Joint Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
Russian-funded programmes to provide assistance
to a number of Eastern European and Central Asian
countries in the fight against the disease began to be
implemented. In May, jointly with UNAIDS, Moscow
held the fourth Conference on HIV/AIDS in Eastern
Europe and Central Asia, the outcome of which was
a plan of action laying out commitments for partner
countries, donor countries, international organizations
and civil society bodies in order to achieve the
main goals of the United Nations strategy to combat
HIV/AIDS: zero new cases of HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.

14-4229217/28

A/68/PV.91

Our experience of cooperation within the
Commonwealth of Independent States shows that
cooperation at the regional and subregional levels,
where the spread of infectious disease has similar
characteristics, plays an important role in combatting
the epidemic. In that context, Russia is expanding
its technical, financial and organizational assistance
to countries of the region in their efforts in that
area. Combatting the spread of infectious diseases,
including HIV infection, will remain a focus of Russian
international development assistance, as enshrined in
the concept of State policy for international development
assistance, approved by Russian Federation President
Putin on 20 April.
It is well known that one of the main reasons for the
spread of HIV, including in Russia, is the use of injected
drugs. In that context, determining the best strategy
for working with that patient group remains a pressing
issue. We are convinced that a genuinely scientific
approach to the prevention and treatment of drug
addiction is incompatible with any kind of legalization
of narcotics. Medication and social assistance provided
for drug addiction must strictly comply with the three
basic United Nations anti-narcotic conventions. In that
regard, we continue to pay particular attention to the
issue of rehabilitating drug addicts. Patients are offered
a range of globally available medicines.
Given the fact that concerns have been raised in this
Hall today about the situation in Crimea with regard to
persons who have received replacement therapy, I wish
to report that all citizens of the Russian Federation
are legally guaranteed full access to comprehensive
services and social assistance for HIV and that we fully
protect the rights of those infected. Of course, that
also applies to residents of Crimea. We are effectively
implementing national legislation on a series of
measures to combat HIV/AIDS, including treatment
for drug addiction throughout the country’s territory.
To provide medical assistance to drug addicts in the
Crimea, we believe it necessary to take the particular
features of the treatment they have already received into
account, and we are guided primarily by their interests
and health. Their treatment must continue to use
state-of-the-art technology and within the framework
of Russian-approved standards for medical assistance.
Finally, drug users residing in the Crimea may,
upon their request, receive treatment with methadone
and buprenorphine throughout that territory. Nobody
is restricting their rights to those medications. At the

18/28

06/06/2014

same time, a tiny number of people — only 39 — are
is currently availing themselves of that opportunity. In
fact, with respect to medical assistance in the Crimea
and other subjects of the Russian Federation, including
Moscow and Saint-Petersburg, 450 people who had
earlier received methadone therapy are currently
receiving addiction assistance. There has been a
significant increase in the Crimea with respect to the
provision of drugs for the rehabilitation of patients who
earlier had used replacement therapy. An individual
road map provides for their treatment and their return
to society.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would like to commend
the report presented by the Secretary-General, entitled
“Towards ending the AIDS epidemic: meeting the
2015 targets and planning for the post-2015 era”
(A/68/825). As the Secretary-General stresses in his
report, the advances observed in the past 30 years are
impressive. The number of new HIV infections and
AIDS-related deaths globally continues to decline, with
unprecedented reductions in the number of children
newly infected with HIV. Much has already been
accomplished and deserves to be acknowledged due to
the ongoing multilateral effort.
Notwithstanding the tangible progress made,
however, the international community needs to remain
vigilant and not lose focus because of the positive
results achieved so far. Progress may sometimes invite
indulgence and represent an obstacle to the progress to
be made ahead. So it is high time to redouble our efforts.
In that connection, my delegation fully subscribes to the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for strengthened
joint actions on the part of countries, civil society,
international donors, the United Nations system and
other key partners as we approach the deadline for
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and the
review of the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV and
ADS (resolution 65/277, annex).
Brazil strongly supports the convening of a highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS as an adequate answer to
the need to step up our efforts to meet one of the greatest
challenges in global health care. Renewing our political
commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS is the best way
to celebrate the progress already made. The political
momentum to be provided by a high-level meeting in
2016 will be, in our view, an adequate response to the call
by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), at its thirty-third Programme Coordinating
Board meeting last December, for broader strategic

14-42292

06/06/2014

effort to reaffirm and renew political commitments, and
to ensure accountability with regard to the achievement
of universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care
and support in the post-2015 era.
We are convinced that a high-level meeting in 2016
will raise awareness and draw international attention
to the full spectrum of issues related to HIV-AIDS at
a crucial juncture, subsequent to the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda. Political mobilization
at the highest level will be necessary to carry out the
work we started three decades ago and to continue to
preserve the lives of millions living with HIV, halt new
infections and inspire us to work towards ending new
HIV infections.
Brazil believes that the task of eliminating
HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths can be
achieved in any region. Unfortunately, pockets of the
epidemic — such as the spread of HIV/AIDS in conflict
and post-conflict situations, among others — are still
not being properly addressed. Moreover, I cannot
overstress the disturbing implications arising from the
adoption of national laws against homosexuality. Not
only does it encourage prejudice and violence against
minorities, but it also prevents lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex people from accessing
proper prevention methods or treatment. Laws against
homosexuality will result in an increase, not in a
reduction, of the contagion.
Governments of high-prevalence epidemic countries
need to adequately focus on the needs of populations
that are at higher risk of infection. Discrimination
and limited access to health services will make these
affected populations disproportionately vulnerable to
the infection. We must make use of all internationally
recognized best practices in order to eliminate the HIV/
AIDS epidemic, including through special attention
to marginalized groups and ensuring that they have
access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support.
We put in place the necessary tools to eliminate the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, but the final push is important to
guarantee that prevention, treatment, care and support
are available to all.
Mindful of the importance of including marginalized,
vulnerable and disadvantaged populations, we Member
States agreed at the fifty-eighth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women to ensure universal
access to comprehensive prevention, affordable
treatment, care and support services for HIV/AIDS

A/68/PV.91

and sexually transmitted infections, free of stigma
and discrimination and with a gender perspective,
and to provide comprehensive information, voluntary
counselling and testing to young women and adolescent
girls living with and affected by HIV and AIDS.
The positive results of the Brazilian policy to fight
HIV/AIDS is based on that type of universal approach
with no discrimination of any kind. Our achievements
in the battle also demonstrates that the fight against
HIV/AIDS includes the struggle to overcome financial
challenges and limitations. The imperatives of public
health must prevail over commercial interests;
ensuring the affordability of drugs, at fair prices and
in accordance with the economic situation of different
countries, constitutes one of the key pillars of that
policy.
The full implementation of the flexibility allowed
by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), as agreed upon
in the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health and the World Health Organization
Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health,
Innovation and Intellectual Property, is a powerful
and effective instrument to accomplish the targets
of universal access, especially with respect to the
most vulnerable groups. Brazil reaffirms its support
to horizontal cooperation that enables developing
countries, particularly low-income countries, to benefit
from TRIPS flexibility.
I am proud to share some characteristics of our
strategy to deal with HIV/AIDS challenges. The
Brazilian national health system guarantees access
to medication and all necessary diagnostic tests for
all people resident in Brazil. Everyone’s privacy is
guaranteed by the Constitution. No one — not even
health professionals — may reveal that another person
has HIV/AIDS without prior authorization. Companies
may no longer oblige people to test for HIV when
they start a new job. No employer may dismiss an
employee just because he has HIV. Dismissal owing
to discrimination can lead to legal proceedings so that
employees get their jobs back. In addition, if dismissal
involves humiliation of any kind, the employee in
question can claim compensation for damages.
Anyone who has AIDS, becomes unable to work
and whose per capita income is less than one-fourth of
the minimum wage has a right to a continuous social
security benefit paid by the federal Government.

14-4229219/28

A/68/PV.91

06/06/2014

People with chronic diseases, including AIDS, are
exempt from paying income tax on retirement pensions
and validity allowances for accidents at work and
pensions. In the event of suffering discrimination, the
Brazilian Government recommends that the citizen
file a complaint at a police station or seek support
from a citizens’ legal advice bureau or other legal aid
organization.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of Trinidad
and Tobago on behalf of the Caribbean Community. I
will focus on key aspects of Barbados’s progress in
implementing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS (resolution S-26/2, annex) and the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277,
annex).

The fight against HIV/AIDS in Brazil includes
special attention to young people. Young Brazilians
benefit from national programmes, such as health
and prevention in schools, a partnership between the
ministries of education and health and United Nations
agencies and funds, such as UNESCO, UNICEF and
the United Nations Population Fund. The programme
has enabled the expansion of the discussion on sexual
and reproductive health and involved the whole school
community — students, parents and teachers. Today in
Brazil, approximately 10,000 public schools distribute
condoms in a programme associated with educational
activities. The goal of the Brazilian Government is to
ensure universal access to information and prevention
materials to ensure that the young make informed
decisions.

The comprehensive Barbados HIV programme is
evidence-based, gender-sensitive and human rightsbased, and addresses prevention, treatment, care
and support. The national HIV treatment plan was
expanded in 2001, and there has been a significant
expansion of prevention and care services, with
decentralized testing and referral to high-quality care
services. The introduction of antiretroviral treatment
in 2002, free at the point of delivery, was a critical
turning point. Between 2001 and 2010, there was a
significant reduction in newly diagnosed cases of HIV
infections and a dramatic decline in mortality rates
among persons living with HIV, from 10 per cent to
2 per cent. An estimated 86 per cent of persons who
need antiretroviral therapy are receiving it. Voluntary
counselling and testing are available within family
planning and HIV-prevention services.

I cannot conclude without recognizing the key role
played by UNAIDS under the leadership of Michel
Sidibé, its Executive Director, in assisting Member
States in fighting the HIV/AIDS epidemic. I am glad
to note that Mr. Sidibé will be travelling to Brazil next
week for an awareness-raising campaign associated with
the Fédération Internationale de Football Association
World Cup.
Finally, I would like to affirm Brazil’s readiness
to continue supporting the efforts of the international
community by executing cooperation projects and
donating to entities, such as the International Drug
Purchase Facility, of which Brazil is a proud co-founder
and an active member. We believe that the recent
budgetary challenges faced by entities dedicated to the
fight against HIV/AIDS need to be overcome, and I
call upon developed countries, among others, to keep
their commitment to maintaining and expanding their
pledges and international cooperation with a view to
the fulfilment of our collective engagement to saving
human lives.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): Barbados thanks the
Secretary-General for the report prepared for review at
this meeting (A/68/825).

20/28

Efforts to prevent HIV continue on other fronts.
The unmet need for contraceptives has been reduced.
Increased access to prevention, treatment and care
services for vulnerable populations has been achieved
through the national HIV/AIDS progrmme. Behaviour
change, which is critical to HIV prevention, is one of
our priorities. The key messages being transmitted
at this time are unequivocal and advocate the use of
condoms, reduced numbers of partners, stopping HIVrelated stigma and discrimination, and taking advantage
of available services. The prevalence of HIV in the
general population was estimated at 1.2 per cent at the
end of 2010. AIDS mortality rates have been reduced,
as I mentioned, to under 2 per cent. The rate of motherto-child transmission had fallen to 0.8 per cent by 2012,
and Barbados has had no reported cases of mother-tochild transmission in the past seven years.
Empowering women and reducing gender inequality
increases the capacity of women and girls to protect
themselves from HIV. As is pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General, prevailing gender norms can
diminish women’s ability to negotiate condom use. It
also disadvantages men and boys by encouraging and
sanctioning risky behaviour. Barbados continues to

14-42292

06/06/2014

develop a national gender policy. Other programming
focuses, inter alia, on building skills for negotiating
condom use and condom use education. The Partnership
for Peace programme aims to reduce domestic violence
of which women and girls are the main victims. Work
continues on encouraging healthy behaviour in men.
Stigma and discrimination undermine human
dignity. The work on changing attitudes and behaviour
is ongoing. In keeping with our commitment under the
2011 Political Declaration, Barbados has strengthened
its national actions to address those issues. Programming
includes ongoing stigma and discrimination campaigns
and workshops, targeting outreach persons and healthcare providers. Two dramatic productions centred on
transgendered persons and female sex workers have been
staged, aimed at generating a national conversation.
I now wish to highlight the critical role of
partnership in an effective HIV response. Civil society
plays an enormous role, and a small civil society grant
system financially supports the work of civil society
organizations, particularly those that focus on key
populations, behaviour change and communication.
As a member of the Caribbean Community, Barbados
is a member of the Pan-Caribbean Partnership
against HIV/AIDS and is supported by a number of
development partners. Support for the national HIV
programme is also provided by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, UN-Women, the United
States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief,
the Caribbean Public Health Agency, the Centers for
Disease Control, the World Bank and others. Barbados
therefore welcomes such assistance, while recognizing
that the harmonization of country-level programmes
with national strategic plans and sensitivity to the
cultural context are the most efficient means for
achieving targets.
Barbados wishes to highlight the significant
challenges posed by the classification of small
developing States, such as ours, as middle- or highincome countries. That classification severely curtails
our access to concessionary financing to assist efforts to
fund and implement national HIV programmes. While
we will continue to make our best efforts to mobilize
resources domestically, continuous international
cooperation is urgently needed. HIV/AIDs will remain
a priority on the international agenda, including in the
post-2015 development framework. Barbados looks
forward to the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS to be
held at the United Nations in 2015.

A/68/PV.91

Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): My delegation aligns
itself with the statements made this morning by the
representative of Malawi on behalf of the States
members of the Southern African Development
Community, and by the representative of South Africa
on behalf of the Group of African States. We also take
note of the report of the Secretary-General (A/68/825)
submitted under agenda item 10.
In Zimbabwe, HIV continues to cause untold
suffering to many. The health system, which has
borne the brunt of the epidemic, continues to reel
under capacity constraints, adversely affecting the
overall health services delivered. The epidemic has
also lowered life expectancy and contributed to the
reversal of the development gains witnessed since
1980. As we approach the 2015 target for implementing
our commitment in the Political Declarations, we
note that, in all its dimensions, the epidemic has
had a disproportionate impact on women and girls.
Inequalities between women and men impair the ability
of women to negotiate for sex in relationships. At the
same time, poverty compels women and girls to resort
to risky coping behaviours, such as prostitution and
exchanging sex for favours.
It is therefore critical to recognize the positive
impact that the empowerment of women through
education, life skills, employment opportunities and
support for entrepreneurial activities could have on
reducing their risk of HIV infection. As we extend
national initiatives that target that group, we are
increasingly paying attention to the plight of older
women who are left to care for orphaned grandchildren
as well as that of children heading households.
Zimbabwe’s HIV/AIDS response has been
carried out in difficult circumstances as a result of
the sanctions levelled against my country. Despite
those circumstances, the Government has maintained
a strong political will that has resulted in significant
progress in reducing the spread of HIV. That has
been achieved through a multipronged approach
aimed at promoting abstinence, condom use, delayed
onset for sexual activities among girls and boys, and
in encouraging a general change in risky behaviours.
We have also made great strides towards expanding
access to treatment for all, including pregnant women.
Our effort has been buttressed by dedicated domestic
resource mobilization and support from international
partners and mechanisms. In that regard, we appreciate

14-4229221/28

A/68/PV.91

the support received through the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
We are gratified to note that the gains we have
achieved have been echoed at the global level. It is a
significant mark of progress that, whereas an HIV
diagnosis was once considered a death sentence,
nowadays improved access to treatment has given
millions of people the ability to live a normal life.
However, we must ensure that the change in perception
does not result in complacence. HIV/AIDS remains a
scourge that must be eliminated.
Strong international cooperation and support have
had a significant impact on the achievements made to
reduce the spread of HIV. It therefore follows that if we
are to transform the dream of ending AIDS into reality,
we must further strengthen global cooperation in that
area. We also need to be decisive about increasing
financing for the HIV response to ensure that we do
not witness a reversal of the progress we have made
to date. We stress the importance of supporting the
strengthening of national health systems and local
manufacturing of medicine to increase capacity to cope
with the demands of the epidemic. As we accelerate
implementation of our commitment on HIV, we need
to sustain a multipronged approach to prevention that
takes into account different regional customs and
standards. There is no one size fits all.

06/06/2014

At the outset, let me thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and enlightening report
(A/68/825) on an issue to which my delegation attaches
great importance. We welcome his recommendations
in the report. We would also like to express our
profound appreciation for the role played by the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS in assisting
countries to fight the scourge of HIV and AIDS at the
national level.
My delegation is encouraged by the significant
progress made globally, in particular in Africa, in
the fight against HIV and AIDS. It proves that the
strategies and tactics that have been employed since the
outbreak of the pandemic three decades ago are starting
to yield postive results. However, that does not give us
room to relax. In fact, it should inspire us to undertake
more rigorous efforts to fight the epidemic. That is
particularly true for our region.
Consequently, we also share the SecretaryGeneral’s sentiments that the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) have played a critical role in the fight
against HIV and AIDS. However, some MDGs,
such as the targets for HIV and AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis, are not likely to be achieved by 2015. We
should therefore make a concerted effort to ensure that
the issues that are lagging are certainly placed on the
post-2015 development agenda.

Remaining cognizant of the foregoing, each of us
has the responsibility to ensure that we do not stall in
our hard-won progress by poisoning the discourse on
HIV with excessive politicization of issues. The global
AIDS response must not be overshadowed by secondary
causes, as had occurred during the Commission on the
Status of Women when the draft resolution on Women,
the girl child and HIV and AIDS was considered; we
must remain united in our common goals of ending the
epidemic and saving lives.

Key to the fight against the disease is the availability
of resources. It is therefore important for commitments
made previously to be honoured. Furthermore, we
recognize that no country can win the fight on its
own. South Africa therefore believes that enhanced
international cooperation among States is important if
we are to achieve our aim of zero new infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths. We also
need to share knowledge about what is and what is not
working for our different regions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Zimbabwe’s Government to working
with all stakeholders at the national, regional and
international levels towards our coomon goal of
eliminating the epidemic.

For South Africa, gender equality and the
elimination of gender-based violence and abuse remain
a priority in the fight against HIV and AIDS. To that
end, the South African Government adopted legislation
in March — namely, the Women’s Empowerment
and Gender Equality Bill — to promote women’s
empowerment and gender equality. Furthermore,
male involvement has been identified as an important
link in eliminating gender-based violence and abuse.
Additional approaches that have greatly contributed
to the fight against HIV anmd AIDS in South Africa

Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): We spoke earlier
this morning on behalf of Africa as Chair of the Group
of African States. I shall now speak in my national
capacity.

22/28

14-42292

06/06/2014

was the campaigning to encourage circumcision
among men, as correctly noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. In May last year, voluntary medical
male circumcision in institutions of higher learning,
including universities and colleges, was implemented.
The aim of the campaign is to create awareness among
students of the benefits of medical male circumcision,
together with HIV counselling and testing, counselling
on safe sexual practices, including the correct and
consistent use of condoms, and a reduction in multiple
concurrent sexual partners.
Consequently, we are witnessing the benefit of male
circumcision, as well as the supporting initiatives that I
have just mentioned, in reducing new HIV infections. We
have also seen great progress in increasing the number
of health-care facilities that provide antiretroviral
drugs from 490 in 2010 to 3,540 currently. The number
of nurses trained and certified to initiate antiretroviral
treatment in the absence of a doctor has also increased
from 250 nurses in 2010 to 23,000 in 2013 through the
nurse-initiated management of the antiretroviral therapy
programme. The programme has made it possible to
increase the number of people receiving treatment from
923,000 in 2010 to 1.9 million in 2013, thereby doubling
the number of people receiving treatment.
The cooperation and collaboration of civil society
organizations have also yielded some important gains
for our country. We will continue that approach.
Furthermore, our Government continues to work with
traditional leaders in the fight against HIV, AIDS and
tuberculosis as part of our National Strategic Plan
on HIV, Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) and
Tuberculosis (TB). That partnership culminated in the
signing of the plan to revitalize the HIV counselling
and testing campaign in rural areas under traditional
leaders. The National Plan on HIV, STIs and TB is
based on the following pillars: zero new HIV or TB
infections, zero new mother-to-child transmissions,
zero preventable deaths from HIV and TB and zero
discrimination associated with HIV, STIs and TB.
While we have made progress in the fight against
HIV and AIDS, we are still far from where we should
be. We continue to work hard to ensure that mother-tochild transmissions drop to below 2 per cent by 2030 and
that new infections are reduced by more than four times
among women aged between 15 and 24 years of age
in the period up to 2030. South Africa is also working
with others in order to increase the life expectancy of
men and women up to 70 years of age by 2030 through

A/68/PV.91

the progressive improvement of evidence-based,
preventive and therapeutic interventions for HIV and
AIDS. We will continue to strive to make antiretroviral
drugs available to all, including all those who are HIVpositive, and to promote consistent and correct condom
use, as well as the universal availability of pre-exposure
prophylaxis and antiretroviral treatment.
Finally, we look forward to the convening of the
high-level meeting on HIV and AIDS in 2016, as it is
crucial to maintain the political momentum and to take
stock after the post-2015 development agenda has been
launched.
Mrs. Mørch Smith (Norway): In the summer of
1981, here in New York City people started dying.
Doctors did not understand why. The families and
friends of the deceased did not understand why people
who had been healthy just a few months earlier suddenly
had an immune system that more or less collapsed.
The first article about that mysterious new disease
in the United States was in the New York Times on
3 July, almost exactly 33 years ago. Its title was “Rare
cancer seen in 41 homosexuals”. Since the deaths
were concentrated largely in the gay community and
it was difficult to understand why that was happening,
initially the disease was even called “gay cancer”.
Today, we know that that was not the beginning
of the HIV/AIDS epidemic globally but the start of
the deadly epidemic here in the United States. It was
also the start of a stigma that people living with HIV
and AIDS have had to confront in the years since then.
Today, we of course know that HIV and AIDS are not
diseases that affect only people with a certain sexual
orientation. They affect everyone, and the epidemic
is now on every continent, affecting women, men and
children, young and old.
However, in the years since 1981, there has also
been progress We know now a lot more about the virus
itself and how to prevent it from spreading even farther.
Considerable progress has been made in the response
to the AIDS epidemic globally, but equally significant
gaps remain. Without addressing those gaps, we will
not be able to get the HIV epidemic under control. We
therefore must take care of our unfinished business
now and continue to make HIV/AIDS our business after
2015.
Norway would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his excellent report (A/68/825) and a thorough

14-4229223/28

A/68/PV.91

analysis of the current situation and challenges related
to HIV globally. We are pleased to know the significant
global reduction in new infections. The sharp reduction
in mother-to-child transmissions proves that our joint
efforts yield results. The increasing number of HIVinfected people who receive care and treatment leads to
the increased health and well-being of themselves, their
partners and their families. But in order to bring the
epidemic under complete control, we also must tackle
the shortfalls of our response.
First, we note with concern that even if financing
is improving, we are short of the funding required.
A shared responsibility for financing is important to
ensuring that the international community is able to
sustain and increase investments up until and after
2015. Available funds need to be spent more efficiently.
We all need to fulfil our commitments to financing.
Secondly, the rate of new infections is still too high.
To control the epidemic, primary prevention efforts
must be re-emphasized.
Thirdly, it is unacceptable that infected children are
half as likely as adults to have access to antiretroviral
therapy. Child-friendly medication is on the market and
needs to be available to all who need it.
Fourthly, young people in general, and young
women in particular, are more likely to be infected
by HIV and are more likely to die from AIDS. Youths
need information — including comprehensive sexuality
education, and access to services — and to be able to
participate in decision-making that concerns them.
Fifthly, we need to focus on the groups we know
are disproportionately affected — the so-called key
populations. We will not be able to stop the HIV
epidemic until we stop new infections among men who
have sex with men, injecting drug users, sex workers
and other marginalized groups. The evidence is clear;
criminalization is the wrong approach. Ensuring
the rights of key populations to non-discrimination
in health care and in other aspects of life is the right
approach.
Good leadership and governance are key.
HIV thrives in situations of poverty and inequity,
violence, gender inequality, human rights violations
and discrimination. In the context of strong political
leadership, the next phase of the global AIDS response
after 2015 needs to be evidence based. That is the only
way we can focus scarce resources where they will
have the most impact and eventually enable a world
24/28

06/06/2014

free of AIDS. At the high-level meetings in 2001, 2006
and 2011, we made joint commitments and developed
accountability structures to measure the results of our
common efforts. We therefore endorse the suggestion
of convening a high-level meeting in 2016 in order to
review progress as well as to see what measures that
need to be made further on.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I would like to thank the
President for organizing today’s plenary meeting to
review the progress made in response to the AIDS
pandemic.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of South Africa on behalf
of the Group of African States. We take note of and
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/68/825).
The timing of today’s plenary meeting is of major
importance as the international community accelerates
the achievement of the goals of the 2011 Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277,
annex), the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and the formulation of the post-2015 development
agenda and its ambitious targets, especially those
related to HIV prevention policies, to treatment and
for combating discrimination against those living with
HIV/AIDS. We must use our time wisely and redouble
our efforts to promote access to HIV prevention,
treatment and care to all those who need it. It is clear
that HIV/AIDS will remain a major global challenge
beyond 2015.
While the Secretary-General’s report indicates
that new HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths, and
especially the number of children newly infected with
HIV, continue to decline globally, such progress has not
been achieved everywhere. In sub-Saharan Africa, the
campaign to combat AIDS is still affected by a serious
shortfall in resources, resulting in a continuing rise in
the number of those infected. Furthermore, only 56 per
cent of those infected have access to HIV treatment in
sub-Saharan Africa.
My delegation is concerned that funding devoted
to HIV and AIDS response is still not proportionate
to the magnitude of the pandemic, which continues
to negatively impact the response. Stigma and
discrimination attached to HIV/AIDS also continue
to undermine the fight. To address some of those
challenges, we call for greater collaborative initiatives,
including coherent United Nations inter-agency
collaboration that promotes a more integrated response

14-42292

06/06/2014

to HIV/AIDS. Such initiatives must be more closely
linked to the broader development agenda with in-built
goals to eliminate gender inequalities, stigma and
discrimination and to ensure universal health coverage.
In that regard, we would like to underscore the role
of innovative partnerships, political leadership, the
enactment of appropriate legislation, and international
trade regulations to ensure that prices for medicines
and commodities are affordable to and accessible by
even the poor.
Article 21, subsection 3, of our Constitution creates
a duty for all State organs and public offices to address
the needs of vulnerable groups in our society. That
includes the provision of safety-net programmes. The
HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act promotes
supportive care and protective and preventive measures
against HIV and AIDS. In addition to traditional
funding to combat HIV and AIDS, the Government
of Kenya began operationalizing sustainable domestic
funding options, which include earmarking 1 per cent
of ordinary Government revenues to a national HIV
trust fundamental that provides services to those in
need.
The Government has launched the first national
action plan to facilitate the mobilization of stakeholders
in the design and implementation of actions and targets.
The action plan, which has been disseminated in all
47 counties of Kenya, guides stakeholders in how to
mainstream gender into the national response to HIV/
AIDS. In 2011, Kenya was among the countries that
endorsed the global plan towards the elimination of new
HIV infections among children by 2015 and keeping
their mothers alive.
Although HIV/AIDS remains a great challenge to
Kenya, it is noteworthy that the HIV prevalence rate
in Kenya has significantly declined over the years,
from a high of about 14 per cent in the 1990s to the
stabilized current rate of 6 per cent among adults. There
are marked gender, age and geographical disparities,
with HIV prevalence largely among women at 6.9 per
cent compared to that of men at 4.3 per cent. Sexual
transmission remains the highest mode of transmission
of HIV, which accounts for 85 per cent of all new
infections. Unfortunately, every year 10,000 children
still die from HIV and AIDS-related complications.
In line with the recent global focus on
evidence-informed HIV prevention programming,
Kenya’s national HIV strategic plan, whose clarion
call is “delivering on universal access to services”,

A/68/PV.91

facilitates the delivery of integrated services at all
levels. It has also reduced by 50 per cent the number of
new infections and reduced by 25 per cent AIDS-related
mortality, markedly decreased HIV-related morbidity
due to the availability of antiretroviral treatment, and
reduced the socioeconomic impact of HIV/AIDS at the
household and community levels.
The Government’s collaborative efforts with
national and external partners have also led to the
formulation of a strategy for the comprehensive
prevention of mother-to-child transmission, which
targets expectant mothers and their spouses and
provides voluntary counseling and testing, as well as
antiretroviral treatment for mother and child. As a
consequence of the campaign, new infections in children
have fallen from an estimated 100 HIV infections per
day, to 36.
Another significant effort is the launch of the Beyond
Zero Campaign by Kenya’s First Lady, Her Excellency
Margaret Kenyatta. The campaign aims to promote HIV
control and to strengthen maternal and neonatal health
services to secure Kenya’s future towards an HIV-free
generation. Recently and as part of the Beyond Zero
Campaign, the First Lady ran two marathons — one in
Nairobi and the other in London — to raise awareness
and funds for the purchase of mobile clinics for all of
the 47 counties of Kenya. The campaign is in line with
Kenya’s country development priorities, as outlined
in our Kenya Vision 2030, the Kenya National AIDS
Strategic Plan, and the Kenya Health Sector Strategic
Plan 2012-2017.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our call
on the international community to scale up resource
mobilization, ensure adequate resource allocation and
secure political commitment and leadership in the fight
against HIV/AIDS, especially in sub-Saharan Africa
and the most affected areas of the world. The end of the
AIDS epidemic is within reach. The irrefutable linkages
among HIV and AIDS and human rights, sustainable
development, gender equality, equity and exclusion
should sharpen our focus and redouble inspired action
in the fight against the most devastating scourge of our
times.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We take note of the report of
the Secretary-General, entitled “Towards ending the
AIDS epidemic: meeting the 2015 targets and planning
for the post-2015 era” (A /68/825), which outlines the
challenges facing the international community on that
front.

14-4229225/28

A/68/PV.91

The National AIDS Control Programme in India
has led to an overall reduction in adult HIV prevalence,
HIV incidence and AIDS-related mortality over the
past decade. India was estimated to have around
2.09 million persons living with HIV in 2011, down
from 2.32 million in 2006. Adult HIV prevalence
decreased from 0.41 per cent in 2001, to 0.35 per cent in
2006, and to 0.27 per cent in 2011. India also witnessed
an overall reduction of 57 per cent in estimated annual
new HIV infections between 2000 and 2011, reflecting
the impact of scaled-up prevention interventions. Wider
access to antiretroviral treatment led to a 29 per cent
reduction in estimated annual AIDS-related deaths
between 2007 and 2011.
The Government has undertaken targeted
interventions for high-risk groups and bridge
populations, such as female sex workers, men who
have sex with men, transgender persons, injecting
drug users, truckers and migrants. The other important
features of our national AIDS programme include
strategizing comprehensive information, education and
communication packages for specific segments and
scaling up the service delivery component. We have
also involved the corporate sector, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders as partners
towards that end.
Notwithstanding the encouraging gains made
in some of the priority areas identified in the 2011
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex), the overall scenario remains bleak. The
report of the Secretary-General notes that an estimated
35 million people are living with HIV worldwide. It
further notes that more than half of the people eligible
for antiretroviral therapy still do not have access to
antiretroviral drugs. The report notes that the HIV
epidemic continues to disproportionately affect
sub-Saharan Africa, which accounts for an estimated
71 per cent of all people living with HIV globally,
70 per cent of new HIV infections and 75 per cent of
AIDS-related deaths.
On the other hand, in much of the developed world
of today, HIV/AIDS is no longer a life-threatening
disease. As scaled-up antiretroviral therapy extends
lives and improves quality of life, older adults are
accounting for an increased share of people living with
HIV. It is estimated that fewer than 6 per cent of persons
receiving treatment have access to second-generation
antiretroviral drugs. Clearly, the challenge we face
today is not the unavailability of medical treatment, but

26/28

06/06/2014

rather accessibility to medical treatment, primarily due
to its lack of affordability in many developing countries.
Such a North-South divide is simply unacceptable.
While the report of the Secretary-General makes
a few important recommendations for addressing
the challenges we face — including through the
development of new ambitious targets, closing gaps in
access to services, replacement of punitive approaches
with protective ones, and so on— it is disappointing
to note that it fails to address two critical issues,
namely, the need to expand international funding and
accessibility to antiretroviral treatment.
Another important shortcoming of the HIV/AIDS
response is that it has created a vertical programme to
address the crisis more effectively. That would have
worked well in conjunction with well-functioning
health systems. Many developing countries, however,
are grappling with issues of capacity and quality in
their health-care systems. Therefore it is important that
HIV/AIDS-related programmes are integrated with the
overall strengthening of health systems.
One of the major obstacles to accessing treatment
is the high cost of antiretroviral drugs. In addition, as
the HIV/AIDS experience has shown, diagnostic tools
are also important for effective prevention. The Indian
pharmaceutical industry has been plugging that critical
gap by producing high-quality, affordable drugs for
use in India and in other developing countries. India
is committed to using all flexibilities under the World
Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) to
ensure the availability of affordable and high-quality
medicine to all people living with HIV.
It is regrettable to note that the TRIPS flexibilities,
which are critical in the provision of public health
services to millions across the developing world, are
being questioned. Narrow considerations of commerce
and profitability should not be allowed to deny the most
basic and most fundamental human right — the right
to life. India stands ready to play a role in that context.
While Governments should undoubtedly augment
their national efforts, it is equally evident that in
many developing countries Governments will not be
able to meet these challenges alone. The need for an
integrated approach that includes effective prevention
strategies, access to low-cost, affordable treatment
for all, and declared international support cannot be

14-42292

06/06/2014

overemphasized if we are to effectively contain HIV/
AIDS.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his current report (A/68/825)
and for his continued devoted attention to the issues
of women’s and children’s health, the elimination of
violence against women, and the prevention of motherto-child transmission of HIV. We also particularly
appreciate the continuing commitment of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS under the
leadership of Michel Sidibé.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Permanent Representatives of the
Republic of South Africa and Malawi on behalf of
the Group of African States and the Southern African
Development Community, respectively.
HIV and AIDS continue to be one of the greatest
challenges of our time and one that poses significant
challenges to our societies’ socioeconomic development
and well-being. As the Secretary-General clearly states
in his report, the AIDS epidemic is far from over. In
that regard, today’s meeting is not only timely but also
relevant in the context of the 2015 deadline for meeting
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the
ongoing discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda. It will therefore make a crucial contribution to
renewing the international community’s commitment
to responding to HIV and AIDS and to charting the way
forward.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report,
the global HIV and AIDS response has come a long
way. Much has been achieved, but much more remains
to be done. Botswana welcomes the progress made
by many countries in areas that include scaled-up
access to HIV treatment, expanded access to services
for preventing mother-to-child transmission and
declines in new infections, as well as programmes
and interventions that promote HIV testing, consistent
and regular condom use and many other efforts. They
have borne notable fruit in many ways, and because of
them we believe that the vision of getting to zero new
infections, zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related
deaths for an AIDS-free generation is achievable.
In that regard, however, we remain concerned
about the enormous toll the epidemic continues to
take on young people. The world’s failure to address
the needs of children living with HIV and the gaps in
current efforts to reduce sexual transmission of HIV

A/68/PV.91

are of great concern to my delegation. They are a clear
indication that AIDS is far from being over. The world
should therefore not be lulled into complacency by
some of these seemingly impressive results.
In the quest to turn the AIDS epidemic around,
we will need concerted efforts on the part of the
international community to achieve the targets set out in
the Political Declarations on HIV and AIDS (resolution
65/277, annex) that are the subject of our meeting
today. To that end, Botswana shares the view that the
international community must redouble its efforts to
build on the gains made and step up its work to address
barriers that continue to hinder effective responses to
the epidemic. We therefore recognize the importance of
political will and commitment in addressing complex
issues relating to national laws and policies, access
to services for all, and the elimination of stigma and
discrimination.
Furthermore, the importance of adequate, secure
and predictable funding for a sustained global HIV and
AIDS response, beyond closing the resource gap, cannot
be overemphasized. As the Secretary-General’s report
makes clear, while countries are encouraged to mobilize
much-needed resources to fund their HIV response,
many of them, particularly developing countries with
a limited capacity to increase domestic resources,
will remain dependent on international assistance to
fund their response. We must therefore maintain the
international commitment to assisting countries if we
are to sustain the progress that has been made in the
more than 30 years of combating the epidemic. In that
connection, we welcome the pledge made way back in
December 2013 by international donors of $12 billion
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.
It is evident that HIV and AIDS will remain a
global challenge well beyond 2015. In that regard,
we believe that the ongoing discussions on the post2015 development agenda provide an opportunity for
ensuring that HIV and AIDS remain a top priority. In
that context, I would like to emphasize the importance
of completing the unfinished business of the MDGs and
giving sustained attention to the AIDS response post2015. In our view, the post-2015 agenda should build
on the MDGs, whose Goal number 6 focuses on the
response to AIDS. The new framework should therefore
clearly reflect the role of an effective AIDS response in
broader health and development efforts.

14-4229227/28

A/68/PV.91

My delegation also fully supports the convening
of a high-level meeting in 2016 so we can sustain the
momentum that we have gained in implementing HIV
and AIDS programmes. I would like to conclude by
reaffirming how important Botswanta considers the
fight against HIV and AIDS and the achievement of
the right of all to enjoyment of the highest attainable

28/28

06/06/2014

standard of physical and mental health. We remain
committed to the implementation of the Political
Declarations on HIV and AIDS, and central to our
efforts is our commitment to ensuring respect for
human rights and access to prevention, treatment, care
and support services for our people.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

14-42292
