S/PRST/2006/47

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 November 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5572nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 November 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“On 30 October 2006, the Security Council heard Mr. Elie Doté, Prime
Minister of the Central African Republic, as well as General Lamine Cissé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It reiterated its full support
for the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) and for the United Nations staff in the Central African
Republic.
“The Security Council welcomes the Government’s efforts to revive
dialogue through meetings with political stakeholders and representatives of
civil society. It calls upon the Secretary-General to encourage, through
BONUCA, the holding on a regular basis of such meetings, which are vital to
restoring trust among Central Africans and promoting lasting reconciliation.
“The Security Council also welcomes the courageous efforts of the
Government to implement the reforms advocated by the bilateral partners and
international financial institutions aimed at improving the management of the
national treasury, ensuring transparency in economic activities and good
governance. In that regard, it calls upon the Central African Government to
continue the reforms and dialogue with its international partners with a view to
restoring economic growth and reducing poverty in the country.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned about the deterioration of the
security situation in the Central African Republic, especially in the wake of the
attacks on the towns of Birao, Ouanda-Djalle and Sam Ouandja. It expresses
serious concern that instability along the border areas of Chad, Sudan and the
Central African Republic represents a threat to security and stability in the
Central African Republic and its neighbours, while noting that Central African
defence and security forces are still unable to repel the armed groups in the
northern and north-eastern parts of the country.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the territorial
integrity of the Central African Republic. It calls for the adoption of a
subregional approach to stabilize the borders of the Central African Republic.
It urges the Central African authorities to expedite their efforts to restructure

06-62775 (E) 221106

*0662775*

S/PRST/2006/47

the armed forces and enhance their operational capabilities, and encourages the
Multinational Force of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (FOMUC) to continue supporting the Central African armed
forces beyond 30 June 2007. It notes that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has dispatched a fact-finding mission to Chad and the Central
African Republic to assess how the United Nations might help those countries
address the current instability. The Security Council looks forward to the
findings and recommendations of the mission.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to reinforce
cooperation between the United Nations and member States of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) with a view to
facilitating and strengthening initiatives aimed at addressing trans-border
insecurity in the subregion and bringing to an end the violations by armed
groups of the territorial integrity of the Central African Republic. It also
requests the Secretary-General to provide to it a report on the situation in the
Central African Republic by 31 December 2006.
“The Security Council decides to renew the mandate of BONUCA for a
period of one year, until 31 December 2007, and invites the Secretary-General
to submit to it the new modalities of the mission of BONUCA for the new
period no later than 30 November 2006.”

2

06-62775
