United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7161st meeting

Monday, 28 April 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sarki/Mr. Wali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Nigeria)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dalo
Mr. Nankervis
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Ms. Uwizera
Mr. Baki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform: challenges and opportunities
Report of the Secretary-General on Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security sector reform (S/2013/480)
Letter dated 1 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/238)

14-31349 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1431349*

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, Georgia, Greece Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): We thank the Nigerian
presidency for organizing an open debate on this
important issue, and welcome the first-ever stand-alone
draft resolution on security sector reform (SSR).
One of the most important questions on postconflict peacebuilding relates to the ways and means
to ensure the viability of peace. Security sector
reform lies at the core of this debate. A mismanaged
and dysfunctional security sector can significantly
challenge sustainable development, stability and
peace. On the other hand, a comprehensive, coherent
and coordinated approach to security sector reform
will help form functional, effective and economically
viable States. As such, approaching security sector
reform as part of a comprehensive and inclusive
peacebuilding strategy and coupling our efforts with
the broader framework of strengthening the rule of law
is of utmost importance. Also, support to the security
sector, especially in terms of resources, training and
institutional capacity-building, should continue after
the termination of peacekeeping operations, if needed.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund in security sector reform is crucial in assisting
national authorities to define and implement a credible
security reform strategy. Every society has its own
particular structures, needs and experiences with
conflict. The experience of the past 20 years has shown
that one-size-fits-all approaches do not produce viable
results. It should be the primary responsibility of
the host country to define the shape and direction of
security sector reform.

2/19

28/04/2014

On the other hand, the norms and principles that have
been developed by the United Nations and elaborated
in the Secretary-General’s reports and United Nations
documents provide a general framework that should be
taken into account in security sector reform. Rule of law
and human rights standards are of particular importance
in that regard. While governments have the central role
to play, SSR activities must be extended to include the
broader population and ensure the needs of all citizens
in an inclusive manner. In addition, collaboration
with all relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations, domestic stakeholders and
civil society is essential to preventing duplication and
to making optimal use of scarce resources.
Needless to say, it is necessary to sufficiently
address the root causes of conflicts, the solutions of
which lie at the very heart of communities and groups
in terms of their aspirations and legitimate wishes.
Political reconciliation among the parties to a conflict
through mediation, negotiation and facilitation as
the main instruments is among the primary methods
to be employed in the peacebuilding endeavour.
Mainstreaming gender issues and ensuring women’s
participation in security sector reform, as well as the
more general peace processes and conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, recovery and mediation
efforts is of utmost importance.
Turkey prioritizes security sector reform activities
as part of its global engagement for peace. Turkish
peacekeepers continue to serve in various United
Nations, NATO and European Union missions across
the globe, including in Afghanistan, Africa, the
Balkans and the Middle-East, where they contribute to
the training of security personnel as well as capacityand institution-building of military and security forces.
In the same vein, Turkey has robust security
cooperation, particularly with Afghanistan, Somalia
and other countries in Africa, the Middle East and
Central Asia on a wide range of issues, from providing
technical assistance and strengthening civilian and law
enforcement institutions to providing training courses
to law enforcement officials. Bilateral agreements have
been signed with a large number of countries including
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Somalia, Mongolia, Libya, Côte D’Ivoire and
many countries in South-Eastern Europe, Central Asia
and Africa, on various aspects of support to security
reform.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Training is prioritized by Turkey. Between 1997
and 2013, more than 20,000 foreign law enforcement
officials from 54 countries — mainly in Africa, the
Middle East and Central Asia — benefitted from
various professional and vocational training courses
held by the Turkish National Police. The Police
Vocational Training Centre in Sivas, which has trained
more than 1,500 Afghan National Police cadets since
2011, is only one example. Likewise, hundreds of police
officer candidates from various countries have attended
graduate or undergraduate studies at the Turkish Police
Academy. The Turkish International Academy Against
Drugs and Organized Crime, established in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
has been playing an important role in boosting regional
efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized crime
through its training and capacity-building programmes
for countries in need.
Solutions in the field of security sector reform
can be viable only if they are applied within a
comprehensive
framework
of
peacebuilding,
comprising several elements in the humanitarian,
development, democratization and governance fields.
Turkey employs this comprehensive, multidimensional
and synchronized approach in places such as Somalia,
South-Eastern Europe and Afghanistan, enriching its
efforts in the security area to include humanitarian
aid, local development, the construction of basic
infrastructure, education, health and support to peace
processes.
Let me conclude by thanking the Nigerian
presidency, Member States and all relevant United
Nations bodies that engage in conducting and enhancing
the important practice of security sector reform.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I wish to pay tribute
to the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important debate on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), which is of significant
importance to all countries, especially those emerging
from conflict. Today’s debate in the Security Council
is adequately justified, as 24 out of 47 resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in 2013 made explicit
reference to SSR, and 14 peacekeeping and special
political missions are currently mandated to provide
SSR support to host Governments.

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Today’s debate is an integral part of a broader
ongoing discussion about the interlinkages between
peace and security, on the one hand, and the
prosperity of people on the other, as well as about
the complementarities between conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities and their
respective impacts at different stages of conflict
resolution while supporting building the institutional
capacities of States emerging from conflicts.
Security sector reform is imperative in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In
that context, Egypt emphasizes that national ownership
is not only a prerequisite for SSR but also the backbone
of any viable SSR programme. The challenge is not
to conceptualize national ownership but rather to
operationalize it in such a manner that fully guarantees
that SSR remains a demand-driven process. The
relevance of SSR to the actual needs of each country
in post-conflict situations is solely dependent on
the ability of that country to be fully engaged in the
design, implementation and monitoring of all SSR
activities. National ownership and international support
considerations should not be seen as competing with
each other.
Egypt believes that security sector reform is not a
goal to be pursued in isolation from addressing other
societal challenges to peace and security in countries
emerging from conflicts, such as youth unemployment,
organized crime, poverty eradication and the lack of
adequate education and health services. However, there
are no easy answers or responses to the complexity of
all those challenges. No one size fits all. We need to
avoid expanding SSR to encompass every challenge
in one single process, in order to attain the desirable
results and deliverables.
Moreover, Egypt underlines that international
support to security sector reform must be anchored in
broader national institution-building efforts that aim
to address the social and economic causes of conflicts
and the complex security environments to be found in
countries emerging from conflicts.
While acknowledging the Security Council’s
mandate in the domain of peace and security, we need
to bear in mind its limited membership. Hence, Egypt
believes that the development of a United Nations
strategy for SSR must take place in the General
Assembly, in order to ensure that its formulation,
including its scope, mandate and constraints, is carried

14-313493/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

out through an inclusive intergovernmental process
that guarantees the full participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations in such an important
debate, taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any concerned country to
determine its national priorities in that regard.
In conclusion, we also believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission is in a better position to coordinate the
activities of the different organs and agencies of the
United Nations in that regard, particularly in light of
the experience that the Commission has gained through
its engagement with the countries on its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Nigeria for its continued leadership on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), a commitment that is all
the more important because most Council-mandated
SSR activities take place on the African continent.
Nigeria’s perspective—indeed, the experience of all
African States—must therefore be prominent in any
SSR setting.
New Zealand welcomes today’s proposed adoption
of the first-ever stand-alone draft resolution on SSR. The
draft resolution underlines the considerable progress
we have made since the Council’s first open debate
on the issue in 2007 (see S/PV.5632). It is progress
that has required acknowledgment of the nature and
significance of the SSR challenge; it is progress that
has required development of a more comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated normative framework; and
it is progress that has required practical operational
tools for the United Nations effective work in that
area. The engagement of local actors, the importance
of close cooperation with regional organizations, the
need for the involvement of all stakeholders, including
women, and the key, underpinning need for a rule of
law environment are all rightly stressed in today’s draft
resolution.
SSR is a long-term process — hence the progerss
that the draft resolution records — one that requires
both concerted commitment from national authorities
and sustained engagement by international partners.
The Security Council has a critical role to play in laying
the foundations for those efforts; but other bilateral and
United Nations partners also play very important roles.
It is therefore vital that the Council is able to coordinate
more effectively with those actors. SSR extends beyond

4/19

28/04/2014

peacekeeping, and it must be considered across the
entire peacebuilding continuum.
SSR challenges occur in a wide variety of settings,
from fragile and conflict-affected States with ineffective
security sectors, through to States emerging from
conflict and seeking United Nations support for the
next phase of their development. However, considerable
scope still remains for the Council to coordinate more
effectively with, and to learn from, regional and United
Nations country team partners in order to ensure that
assistance is tailored to specific national needs and
realities, and that gains can be sustained beyond the life
of a given mission. The Peacebuilding Commission,
with its country-specific configurations, has particular
competence in that regard, so the Council needs to find
new and better ways of working in close partnership
with the Commission.
SSR is often a complex, politically charged process
that entails significant risk; however, in some situations,
it can represent the single most important investment
that international partners can make in a country’s
future. New Zealand is an active contributor to SSR,
particularly in the justice sector, both bilaterally and
through United Nations missions. That experience has
taught us valuable lessons about managing the difficult
transition from providing SSR programmes through
peacekeeping missions to longer-term assistance
through bilateral support, as was the case with our
policing assistance to Timor-Leste after the withdrawal
of the United Nations mission in 2012.
For us, that Timor-Leste experience also
underscored the importance of national ownership as
a prerequisite for successful SSR. Indeed, the United
Nations discussions on SSR rightly acknowledge that
the success of SSR processes depends on the sustained
political will of the country concerned. New Zealand
therefore agrees with Egypt that a core objective must
be to assist national political leadership of SSR, and
bringing international technical assistance to the
national, regional and subregional level, where local
actors can apply it to their unique local situation. New
Zealand therefore joins Turkey and Egypt in urging that
the Council avoid a one-size-fits-all approach. Instead,
it should focus on enabling national authorities to
undertake their own, inclusive SSR processes.
Recent history demonstrates that no one has a
monopoly of wisdom on managing SSR processes.
Particularly, we have learned that what works at one
time, in one place, will not always work at a later time.
14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

If SSR fails and there is a return to violence, then
the loss of investment by the host country and by the
wider international community can be huge. We must
all therefore approach the SSR challenge openly and
inclusively, while constantly reviewing whether the
process is working and adapting our efforts accordingly.
With that commitment, and working with those
who have practical, on-the-ground regional experience,
we can certainly make the progress on security sector
reform that is recorded in today’s draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on “Security sector reform:
challenges and opportunities”, and for preparing the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex) that forms the basis
of today’s debate. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing.
Malaysia would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation takes note of the Secretary General’s
report (S/2013/480) on strengthening the United
Nations comprehensive support to security sector
reform. The report highlights the ongoing work and
recommendations on how to strengthen the work of the
United Nations in supporting security sector reform
(SSR).
My delegation also wishes to commend the
efforts and important progress made by the United
Nations in security SSR over the years, particularly
in implementing the recommendations contained in
the report of January 2008 entitled “Securing peace
and development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform” (S/2008/39). Indeed,
we have seen much progress and improvement in the
area of SSR. That notwithstanding, the rapid changes
in, and complexity of, today’s conflicts necessitate
continuous review and enhancement of United Nations
SSR support.
My delegation would like to reaffirm that SSR must
be premised on — and not overlook — the fundamental
principle of national ownership. Only through a process
of dialogue, reconciliation and consultation will SSR
succeed. That is important as the views, sentiments
and sensitivities of the people should not be replaced

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

by an approach that negates the legitimacy of local
stakeholders.
In that regard, Malaysia concurs with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report that national ownership of SSR processes must
be inclusive so as to increase the confidence in, and
legitimacy of, security institutions. It is essential that
SSR be led by the legitimate authorities of the respective
Member States, in consultation with all the relevant
stakeholders, including all levels of Government,
security sector institutions, civil society and non-State
actors. Apart from lending credibility to the SSR
process, the involvement of national stakeholders in
negotiations on SSR will also play a pivotal role in
ensuring that related SSR provisions are better tailored
to respond to specific national circumstances and
challenges.
While the importance of national ownership reigns
above all, Malaysia is well aware that SSR will require
financial resources. We have seen such SSR initiatives
under the Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard,
the training of personnel, the development of skills,
the formulation of legal frameworks and the building
of national security infrastructure require substantial
funding. Sufficient funding must therefore be made
available to ensure successful SSR efforts.
Externally funded SSR processes often risk
undermining sustainability and neglecting national
ownership. The Security Council could do its part in that
regard by engaging national authorities in formulating
appropriately tailored Security Council mandates that
are better suited to national circumstances.
Experience has shown that sufficient funding alone
may be half of the solution. Capacity and expertise are
also important aspects contributing to SSR. Countries
that are emerging from conflict can learn from others’
successful experiences. Partnerships through SouthSouth cooperation in such areas as identifying civilian
experts will be beneficial in developing system-wide
SSR. We feel that Member States should seriously
consider developing links to identify civilian capacities
that support SSR and institution-building.
Considering the amount of work and resources
that has been, and will continue to be, channelled to
SSR processes, the Security Council should also place
appropriate emphasis on monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. While it is easier to measure quantitative
output, more often than not qualitative impact

14-313495/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

contributes more significantly to addressing inherent
social issues and the long-term development of SSR
processes. In that regard, Malaysia supports the call
for the United Nations to enhance its monitoring and
evaluation capacities. Again, monitoring and evaluation
priorities and mechanisms must be drawn up according
to the different circumstances and complexities faced
by the countries undergoing reform.
Turning to the prioritization of SSR, Malaysia is
of the view that planning should be undertaken early
on, when peacekeeping missions are formulated.
Experience has shown that countries in transition
require continuing engagement even after the initial
stabilization stage. In that connection, my delegation
calls for better coordination among the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Force
Commanders and the respective United Nations
agencies when developing comprehensive approaches
on SSR.
To conclude, my delegation welcomes and
supports the Security Council draft resolution on SSR
initiated by Nigeria. The draft resolution is indeed
timely, considering the increasing significance and
immense contribution of SSR in the work of the United
Nations in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. Malaysia is certain that the draft resolution
will reaffirm the United Nations’ commitment to a
comprehensive approach in support of SSR processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me thank
Nigeria for convening the Council’s open debate on
security sector reform and for the very comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/238, annex). This is the second
open debate, out of three in total, during this presidency
and Estonia, as a supporter of the enhanced openness
and transparency of the Council, would like to
congratulate the Nigerian presidency for this effort. It
is important that all of the States that are not members
of the Council are given an opportunity to contribute
to the discussions on issues related to the world’s peace
and security.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and the Council for the draft resolution
on security sector reform that is to be adopted later on.
Estonia also aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union (EU).

6/19

28/04/2014

As it is the first time that Estonia takes the floor
on this important issue, we would like to commend
Slovakia’s leadership in adding it to the Council’s
agenda. The importance of security sector reform
(SSR) in the global peace and security agenda cannot
be underestimated. “Security is the bedrock upon
which States are built” is stated in the concept note,
and we cannot agree more. Weak security institutions
cannot prevent the outbreak of conflict, and in a postconflict situation they often cannot avoid a country’s
relapse into chaos. Therefore, support to such reform
is one of the most important tasks of the international
community — not only in order to maintain peace
and security in a country, but also to restore the rule
of law and protect human rights. Let me make some
observations in that respect.
First, one of the key factors for success is an
inclusive reconstruction and stabilization process. SSR
is not a purely technical exercise in reforming defence
forces or law enforcement agencies; rather, it is part
of a wider political process in which the lead role of
national authorities is crucial.
The best guarantee for durable stability and
successful reform and change is the involvement
of all factions of society — religious, ethnic and
social — including the political groups of the country
and women and youth. If that can be achieved, a
society’s ownership of its future — which is another
important factor of success — will be much stronger.
As inclusiveness and ownership are fundamental
in peacebuilding, they must be considered in peace
negotiations.
Secondly, very often countries in transition or
exiting a conflict need advice and encouragement. The
international community has an important role to play
in that regard in terms of capacity-building. I would
therefore like to commend the United Nations for the
steady enhancement of its peacebuilding toolbox and
its special attention to SSR as a part of that. The fact
that the number of references to SSR in the Council’s
resolutions has increased considerably and that the
majority of mandates for both peacekeeping and special
political missions include SSR is very welcome. We also
note positively that the membership of the inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force has doubled in
recent years. SSR has become an integral part of the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
agenda, achieving greater prominence each year.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, see that SSR has been genuinely linked to
the rule of law. We are also happy to see that linkage
mentioned in the draft resolution to be adopted today.
But we do not believe that the rule of law should be
considered as an end or goal in itself. SSR should be
implemented in an environment where the principles
of the rule of law are already applicable, in order to
avoid a great risk of compromising any peacebuilding
or reconstruction process.

Nations efforts, this year, for the first time, the Estonian
Government has decided to make a contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund.

Finally, there is a lot of SSR-related knowledge
available. Many Member States have taken the path
of State-building and reformed their security sector as
part of that process. A number of Member States have
already shared such experience and knowledge with
others. That applies also to regional organizations.
Experience gained in those processes is worth collecting
and sharing with those in need. We believe that the
United Nations should coordinate such efforts, and we
commend the comprehensive approach already taken
by the Secretary-General in that regard. That further
enhances the expertise of the United Nations and
contributes to improving the Organization’s capacity to
deliver.

At the outset, I would like to convey the
Movement’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
the Government of Nigeria for convening this open
debate on security sector reform (SSR). I also avail
myself of this opportunity to express my appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, for his report on the issue,
entitled “Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security
sector reform” (S/2013/480).

Estonia’s own record in reforming its security
sector could be taken as an example of success. After
the end of the Soviet occupation, our nation faced the
huge task of building up a society based on principles
and values different from those of the totalitarian
system — a society based on democracy. That meant
vigorous institution-building, adherence to good
governance, strengthening the rule of law and placing
the human being at the centre of development.
SSR became a genuine part of that process. Estonia
was lucky to have had many friends and advisers, but
real results started to emerge when we understood that
the reforms were for our own good, not for the good of
someone else. We can assure the Council that the notion
of ownership was of the utmost importance, and that is
the message that we want to reinforce today.
For the past 10 years, we have been sharing that
experience with others in supporting capacity-building.
Estonia has shared its expertise at the regional level
in the Balkans, in the Caucasus, in the Republic of
Moldova and in Ukraine. Our police and corrections
experts and trainers have been a part of the respective
European Union missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Step by step, we are trying to enhance the scope of our
involvement and become a part of wider peacebuilding
initiatives and missions. In order to share in United

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

Since 2007, when the Security Council convened
its first open debate on the issue (see S/PV.5632),
many NAM member States considered such debates
an opportunity for Council members and the wider
membership to articulate their views on the role the
United Nations should play in SSR. This is a critical
issue for all countries emerging from conflict,
particularly in Africa.
NAM believes that today’s debate is an integral
and essential part of a broader discussion about the
interlinkage among the concepts of peace, security
and development as mutually reinforcing factors,
as well about the complementarities among conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We hope
that our discussions here will provide guidance to the
United Nations on how to build institutional capacities
in States emerging from conflict as well as those in
transition.
The United Nations enjoys a comparative
multilateral advantage over other organizations. Due
to its universal legitimacy, it is uniquely positioned to
play a leading role in policy information and security
sector capacity-building and reform.
Taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any country concerned in
determining its national priorities in that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General’s report and the Notes
of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force
that national ownership “should form the cornerstone

14-313497/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the United Nations approach to SSR”. National
ownership and SSR tools adapted to each particular
country context must be key guiding principles
regarding the role of the United Nations in supporting
security sector capacity-building and reform.
The presidential statement adopted on 21 February
2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) also stresses the critical
importance of SSR in post-conflict environments and
underlines the sovereignty and primary responsibility
of the country concerned to determine the national
approach and priorities of SSR.
In August 2012, the Heads of State or Government
of the Non-Aligned Movement noted, in the final
document of their sixteenth Summit, held in Tehran,
the importance of SSR, among other important
components of United Nations peacekeeping in postconflict situations. They stressed that SSR should be
integrated in the broad framework of United Nations
rule-of-law activities, thus ensuring that SSR activities
and structures do not duplicate the work carried out in
the rule of law area. They reaffirmed that
“the development of a United Nations approach to
SSR must take place within the General Assembly,
and in accordance with the principle of national
ownership, and stressed that the formulation of
strategies to SSR, including its scope and mandate,
should be carried out through the intergovernmental
process and must be context specific”.
They also emphasized that
“SSR should be undertaken at the request of the
country concerned, and underlined the primary
responsibility and the sovereign right of the country
concerned in determining its national priorities in
this regard.”
As for the development of a United Nations
approach to SSR, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that such development must take place in the General
Assembly to ensure that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including scope and mandate, is carried out
through the widest possible intergovernmental process.
We need thorough discussions in the General Assembly
and in the Economic and Social Council to allow for the
full participation of the United Nations membership at
large in such an important and sensitive issue.
The Peacebuilding Commission is also in a good
position to coordinate the activities of the different
organs of the United Nations system in that regard,

8/19

28/04/2014

particularly in light of the experience that the
Commission has gained through its engagement. It
is of equal importance that the recipient country be
fully in charge of formulating the strategy, identifying
gaps, needs and areas of priority and coordinating
international support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me to
thank Nigeria, Sir, for organizing this important open
debate and for your excellent concept note (S/2014/238,
annex), and especially for your leadership on the issue.
The lead role Nigeria has taken is of great importance
to my country.
The Netherlands also welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480) and the
recommendations made therein. Both documents
emphasize, on the one hand, the importance of a
comprehensive approach to security sector reform
(SSR) within the United Nations system, and, on the
other hand, the need to focus SSR efforts on national
ownership. We fully support those notions.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
My Government sees a close relationship between
security, the rule of law and development. Allow me
to note the fundamental formula of the World Summit
of September 2005, that there is no peace without
development, no development without peace and no
lasting peace or sustainable development without
respect for human rights. In post-conflict situations
that interconnection between the three elements is even
more manifest and security sector reform is relevant to
all three. In my statement I will address those, as well
as the position of women, fighting crime and the role
we see for the United Nations.
First, on the rule of law, security sector reform
(SSR) cannot be seen separately from the rule of law.
Security services must operate within the framework
of the law and be accountable to civilian authorities.
The civilian perspective should be the main focus of
SSR, to make sure that security services deliver human
security and not only State security. That will give them
legitimacy from a legal perspective and trust from the
perspective of society.
SSR must be inclusive at all stages. Governance
and national ownership of SSR efforts are crucial for

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

their success and legitimacy. Therefore, the political
realities of the countries involved must be taken into
account. Substantive roles for the relevant non-State
actors and structures, national reconciliation dialogues
and activities in the field of transitional justice must be
ensured. In that respect I would also like to stress that
non-governmental organizations, the media and political
parties can play an important role in the accountability
component of SSR agendas. By establishing SSR based
on national ownership within a rule of law context, a
foundation will be laid for sustainable development.
Secondly, on the position of women, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, must be a principal guideline
in programming and reform in the field of SSR. Steps
have been taken to implement the resolution but more
remains to be done, as the open debate of last Friday (see
S/PV.7160), also under the able leadership of Nigeria,
made clear. Combating violence against women and
promoting the recruitment of female members of the
security sector should be at the core of the agenda.
Thirdly, with regard to crime, let me point out
another under-estimated aspect of SSR: international
crime. Around the world we witness the destabilizing
effects of criminal activities attracted by regions with
weak governance and poor security institutions. In such
situations, the smuggling of drugs, human trafficking
and corruption are thriving and criminal networks are
able to establish proxy security forces. That should lead
us to think about the link with international crime and
how to deal with it in terms of security sector reform.
On the role of the United Nations — my fourth
point — the Netherlands commends the report of the
Secretary-General for developing a more comprehensive
United Nations system-wide approach. The relevant
United Nations entities involved in SSR and the rule of
law and development should cooperate more effectively.
That applies both in New York and in the field. The
United Nations has a comparative advantage in playing
a coordinating role to assist communities in formulating
and asking the right questions concerning their SSR
processes and to support countries in building a human
rights-based security sector and working on sustainable
development. The comprehensive approach is therefore
crucial.
The last point I would like to make is that the
Netherlands has been a strong supporter of security
sector reform, both through bilateral cooperation
programmes as well as in the context of the United

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Nations. We supported the development of a systemwide United Nations approach. We are a strong
supporter of enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations through the
funding of SSR projects in the field. And we support
the activities of the Group of Friends of SSR, where
inclusive dialogue, policy development and building
bridges between a variety of international, regional and
national stakeholders are central themes.
In conclusion, effective security sector reform is a
result of synergy among efforts in the field in peace
and security, governance and rule of law, as well as
sustainable development. The Netherlands is proud to
be a partner of many countries in the world as well as
of the United Nations in each of those areas. We look
forward to our continued partnership to strengthen
peace, promote justice and foster development
worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are pleased
to see you, Honorable Foreign Minister Aminu Wali,
preside over today’s debate on security sector reform
(SSR), which is a testament to Nigeria’s consistent and
strong leadership on that important issue. We commend
Ambassador Joy Ogwu’s effective and elegant
stewardship of the Security Council this month.
The Secretary-General’s seminal report (S/2013/480),
the draft resolution to be adopted today and Nigeria’s
compact concept note (S/2014/238, annex) all steer
us from policy-making towards implementation,
monitoring and review. As a leading troop-contributing
country, Pakistan has actively supported security sector
reform in various theatres or peacekeeping operations,
including in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and
Timor-Leste. We, too, can testify that United Nationsled efforts have dramatically transformed the security
landscape in those countries.
We know from experience that, when security
sector institutions collapse, conflicts erupt or societies
descend into anarchy or strife, the best way to reverse
the vicious cycle is to restore and strengthen public
security institutions.
Security sector reform has become a core
component of United Nations engagement across
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. SSR rightly targets
institutions dealing with transitional justice, security

14-313499/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and police forces, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the extension of State authority, arms
control and management and organized crime. That,
in turn, helps in addressing some of the root causes of
conflict.
A professional, effective and accountable security
sector lays the foundation for durable peace, conflict
resolution, development and a prevention of a relapse
into conflict.
We believe that United Nations system-wide
institutionalization and responsibility for the security
sector should be strengthened. We should build on
capacities both in the field and at Headquarters to fully
exploit the United Nations comparative advantages.
SSR should be conceived and implemented in
the overall framework of the rule of law, a viable
and transformative security sector that enjoys the
confidence of the populations and is responsive to their
needs is key to successful transition and exit strategies.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture
has an important complementary role in promoting
SSR objectives. The General Assembly and its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations directly
contribute to policy formulation and guidance for
implementation.
The United Nations needs strong partnerships
across the spectrum to enhance the performance of
security sectors. In that context, Pakistan welcomes
the growing consultation and cooperation among the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations. The United Nations should also deepen
its partnerships with international and regional
financial institutions to make SSR more resilient and
self-sustaining.
There is also the political imperative to have an
inclusive SSR process that establishes the legitimacy
and acceptability of State institutions. Conscious efforts
should be made for early engagement of the national
stakeholders to promote national ownership of security
sector reform and its internalization. The United
Nations and international support must correspond to
the host country’s priorities.
Our debate’s focus today is better implementation
of SSR mandates and objectives. Implementation
suffers due to a lack of timely and adequate resources.
Pakistan supports the call to prioritize SSR processes in
the missions so that they get the strategic and political

10/19

28/04/2014

attention as well as adequate and predictable resources
for sustainable SSR. Along with infrastructure, training
and equipment for SSR, attention should also be given
to institutional oversight and governance.
Today’s debate complements the thematic debate
organized last week by the President of the General
Assembly on ensuring stable and peaceful societies. Last
week’s debate of the intergovernmental negotiations
process, on the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council also underscored
the importance of synergy and coordination between
the two bodies. The crux of those debates was that the
Security Council and the General Assembly must work
in tandem. We fully endorse that view.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
to say, Sir, what a pleasure it is to see you take up the
presidency of the Security Council and to reiterate to
you the full support of my delegation.
The choice of the theme of security sector reform
(SSR) clearly demonstrates the relevance of this
issue that has become central to the peacekeeping
and international security architecture. I should like
to take this opportunity to express my satisfaction at
the forthcoming adoption of the draft resolution on
this matter, which clearly illustrates the Council’s
commitment to so essential an issue.
I should also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, whose report (S/2013/480) provides abundant
information on the support of the United Nations to
SSR efforts and sheds light on what to expect in future.
The reform of the security sector seeks to
restore the effectiveness, the professionalism and the
legitimacy of the institutions in charge of providing
security to civilian populations as part of an inclusive
and participatory approach. In practice, however, its
implementation reveals a profound complexity that
is both linked to the need to convince military and
paramilitary personnel of the need to reconfigure the
security forces, as well as the need to mobilize various
types of resources so that the process has a chance of
success. The success of the reform process is based on
the premise that increasing the operational capacity of
defence forces, law enforcement bodies and penal and
immigration administration must be founded on the
need to respect the rule of law.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Such reform also has to take into account the
emergence of transnational threats that require the
pooling of efforts of the various stakeholders involved. I
am thinking, inter alia, of such threats as the trafficking
of people, the trafficking of narcotics and weapons,
terrorism and organized transnational crime.
It is also just as important that the reform of the
security sector be firmly rooted in the triad of political
consultations, national reconciliation and social and
economic recovery.
At a time when peacekeeping missions have
completed their transformation to take on a
multidimensional character, it is more important than
ever to incorporate the reform of the security sector
in a sustainable process with a particular focus on the
prevention of conflicts.
It is for all the reasons I have just outlined that the
delegation of Senegal is happy to embrace the statement
of the Secretary-General in the summary to his report
that “the viability of security sector reform efforts
depends on the political environment in which reform
is carried out.”
Furthermore,
I
welcome
the
significant
contribution of the United Nations to national efforts
at security sector reform, which is a fundamental
pillar essential to development. The establishment of a
special inter-agency SSR Task Force in support of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a positive response to the need to
coordinate in a harmonious way the activity of various
stakeholders.
The establishment of partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
African Union, as well as subregional organizations,
Member States and civil society, also contributes to
translating into practice the kind of comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated approach that we all call for.
It seems to me that that is the very thrust of the
proposed fundamental principles that were suggested
by the Secretary-General, principles to which the
delegation of Senegal fully subscribes. Their aim is to
do away with insufficient harmonization and to orient
the various interventions on the basis of priorities
defined by States in post-conflict situations.
I should also like to welcome the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, adopted by the Group of

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Seven Plus, which seeks to deal with the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts.
The advances we have just outlined are positive,
but to be consolidated they need the Security
Council to closely involve the States concerned when
elaborating the mandates for peacekeeping operations
or special political missions when dealing with SSR.
Furthermore, the viability of funding for the reform
process as well as the relative failure related to activities
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) remain important issues that need to be taken
into consideration.
In conclusion, Senegal, would like to reiterate its
commitment to elevating the reform of the security
sector to the status of a major pillar in the prevention of
the resurgence of conflicts and an essential foundation
of development.
Faithful to our tradition as a country that has
contributed to maintaining international peace and
security ever since we achieved our international
sovereignty, my country will continue fully to
support, responsibly of course, all initiatives aimed at
peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s important
debate and for your helpful concept note (S/2014/238,
annex). My delegation would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Since the Security Council held its first open debate
on security sector reform (SSR) in 2007 (see S/PV.5632),
the subject, due to its fundamental importance for
international peace, security and development, has
been acquiring greater recognition. Considering that
countries affected by conflicts have different security
contexts, and that each will develop its own palette
of strategies on security, the justice system and law
enforcement suitable to its particular requirements, the
significance of national ownership for SSR approaches
cannot be emphasized enough.
We are therefore pleased that United Nations entities
have been increasingly making efforts to have an open

14-3134911/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and inclusive dialogue with countries on addressing
their priorities and improving the United Nations
response on how best it can strengthen its support and
guidance. Because security-sector-related support in
conflicted affected regions must be accompanied by
robust support on broader peacemaking, peacebuilding
and development, the United Nations emphasis on a
comprehensive approach to SSR issues is also very
pertinent.
It is in that context that Indonesia welcomes
the first-ever stand-alone Council draft resolution
on security sector reform and the maintenance of
international peace and security, to be adopted today.
We hope that its implementation will lead to enhanced
support on SSR for countries that request it, as well
as to strengthened respect for human rights and the
rule of law, as essential elements of peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
As a country that studiously overcame instability
and continues to deepen peace and development for its
people and the region, Indonesia knows at first hand the
challenges of realizing a sound SSR. The SSR process
in Indonesia was driven by our political reform towards
democracy back in 1998. We started with military
reform, which separated the role of the military from
politics. We also made a clear and formal distinction
between the Indonesian armed forces and the Indonesian
police, which increased capacities in both institutions
for carrying out their respective responsibilities.
Our process reaffirmed the imperative for national
ownership, as well as civil society consultation, also
because the development of such a sensitive part of
the State must meet the expectations of the citizens.
Indeed, successful SSR first and foremost serves and
protects the people of the country. In this context,
and in response to some of the questions posed in the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex), Indonesia would like
to highlight the following.
First, with regard to the United Nations approach
to the SSR agenda, SSR work should be focused on
post-conflict contexts. While there is a need to support
training and professionalization on various securityrelated aspects in other contexts, it is essential that
any process for formulating related strategies in the
United Nations system should be carried out in an
intergovernmental setting, in close consultation with
Member States.

12/19

28/04/2014

Secondly, in order to incorporate the concerns
and priorities of conflict-affected countries and to
build their national ownership, the Security Council
should more meaningfully involve the host States at
the earliest stage of creating mission mandates. My
delegation underscores the fact that providing security
to citizens and the governing security sector is the
primary responsibility of the State. Furthermore, we
reiterate that any United Nations support for SSR
through peacekeeping and other missions must be
based on the request of the host country and cater to its
particular needs.
Thirdly, the success of United Nations efforts
on SSR is also dependent on the level of its financial
resources, capacities to deliver, professional operations
both at Headquarters and in the field, as well as
coherence and cooperation among concerned United
Nations and Governmental actors. Supporting the “One
United Nations” system model, it is our view that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
can also play a role in increasing the United Nations
capacity to support SSR and ensure more predictable
and sustained funding for it.
Fourthly, Indonesia places high importance on
building partnerships and exchanging good practices
and lessons learned among countries and regional
organizations. As one of the members of the informal
United Nations Group of Friends of SSR, Indonesia
is actively using that platform to communicate and
enhance cooperation with other Member States in
dealing with the future challenges of SSR.
Fifthly, in order to advance conversations on
this issue in the South-East Asia region, Indonesia
has undertaken numerous consultations, including
by facilitating an international workshop in Jakarta
in 2010 with SSR as a major topic. We believe that
regional networks of like-minded countries are vital to
understanding the local culture, and can greatly enable
programmes to support SSR. Therefore, there needs
to be regular and more frequent interaction on SSR
issues between the United Nations system and regional
organizations.
Finally, we would point out that SSR is a long-term
process that should not be rushed. There is no magic
formula for implementing such reform. However, we are
sure that today’s debate is enriching the perspectives on
SSR and on how the United Nations system can better
plan and respond in assisting concerned countries.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Indonesia will continue to engage actively with all
relevant actors on taking forward the discussion on
SSR, including by contributing to help develop the
United Nations civilian capacities initiative, which
offers to improve and expand the needed expertise in
countries emerging from conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Nigeria for convening this open debate. I will
limit my remarks to the three following points.
First, Switzerland shares the opinion of the
Secretary-General that security sector reform should
be placed in the broader context of peacebuilding.
This approach considers security sector reform to be a
vast multidimensional task that contributes to conflict
prevention and a lasting transformation to a peaceful
society. That is why it is important not only to better
explore the existing links between security sector
reform and other dimensions such as the rule of law,
human rights and development, but also to reflect on
partnerships in this matter. The global focal point for
police, judiciary and penitentiary activity coordination
for promoting the rule of law after conflicts and other
crises could offer the possibility of strengthening these
links.
We must also strengthen the inclusive nature of
security sector reform efforts pursuant to resolution
2122 (2013) by integrating the gender perspective. The
importance of this point was brought up on numerous
occasions during the open debate in the Security
Council last Friday on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.7160). Women must included fully and on
an equal footing in the security sector reform process
and the different needs of men, women, boys and girls
must be taken into account. Switzerland will explore
this and other possibilities so as to strengthen its
support for efforts aimed at strengthening the security
sector reform on the ground and at the conceptual
level, among others, in discussions held here at United
Nations Headquarters.
Secondly, we believe it essential that the competent
United Nations authorities continue their essential work
to draft common standards and technical directives. The
publication of the Integrated Technical Guideline Notes
for security sector reform was an important step in this
process. Given its global reach, the United Nations has

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

an advantage on this issue. We therefore encourage it to
pursue action in this important area.
Thirdly, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480) underscores the importance of close work
collaboration with regional organizations in order, inter
alia, to promote local ownership. We fully support this
approach. The contributions of regional organizations
must be maintained and better linked to United Nations
efforts. In this context, I should like to share some of
Switzerland’s experiences in this area since my country
has assumed the chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The strengthening of governance in the security
sector is among our priorities as Chairman of the OSCE
in 2014. Switzerland plans to focus its efforts on two
levels — the political level and the technical level. At
the political level, we supported the creation of a group
of friends for security sector governance, chaired by
the Slovak Republic. The objective of the group of
friends is to raise awareness among States on the matter
of governance of the security sector.
At the technical level, we have tasked the secretariat
of the OSCE to establish an interdepartmental working
group on governance of the security sector, which
will be tasked with raising awareness within the
OSCE and to intervene as an interlocutor in relevant
questions in this area. The working group will also
draft internal directives on security sector governance.
The Swiss chairmanship also plans to work closely
with the United Nations so as to benefit from its
experience in governance of the security sector. To
that end, a conference will be held in July 2014 with
the participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
The draft resolution that the Security Council
will adopt today will provide supplementary support
and momentum for security sector reform and thereby
strengthen efforts under way throughout the world. We
hope that the structures concerned, in particular the
security sector unit and specialized teams deployed
in peacekeeping operations and in special political
missions will enjoy the resources they need to respond
to the growing needs in this area. Switzerland remains
fully engaged and will continue to be so, including in
the informal group of friends.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.

14-3134913/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate and for the useful
concept note you have provided (S/2014/238/annex). We
appreciate the leading role of Nigeria in shaping and
promoting a deeper understanding of the critical issue
of security sector reform (SSR). The draft resolution
introduced today is a key element of this process and I
am pleased to say that Italy has co-sponsored it.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his precious engagement in
this matter, which has produced the report before us
today (S/2013/480). This document gives us a very
clear picture of the state of the art, clearly defines the
challenges we face and suggests priority avenues of
action for the future.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by
Ambassador Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European
Union, and I should like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
We attach vital importance to security sector
reform in countries emerging from conflict. The
malfunctioning or mismanagement of this sector
exposes society to continual fear and danger of violent
death, making civilian life increasingly solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish and short. Max Weber famously defined
the State as any human community that successfully
claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical
force within a given territory. In line with this traditional
definition, the security sector is indeed the backbone
of the modern State. We must realize, however, that
the concept of security has long shifted from a Stateand military-centric perspective to an approach that
emphasizes human security and the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the institutions that provide security
and justice.
The establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is thus of crucial
importance to reducing the potential for internal and
external conflict, enhancing the security of citizens,
and creating the necessary conditions for development.
The existence of a symbiotic, self-enforcing relationship
between security and development has long been
established in the literature on international relations
and in the policies and practices of States.
Helping and supporting national authorities in
their efforts to build an effective, democratically
run security sector is a long-term process. It must be
carried out consistent with the overarching principle

14/19

28/04/2014

of national ownership. In fact, the countries concerned
have the sovereign right and the primary responsibility
to determine their national approach and to outline
their priorities for security sector reform. At the
same time, the States concerned and the international
community as a whole should enhance their efforts to
promote inclusiveness in the SSR process by bringing
in civil society and vulnerable groups. A particularly
critical element, in Italy’s view, is the involvement of
women in the peace and security discussion and their
participation in the national armed and security forces.
Italy is proud of its long-standing support of SSR
processes in South-Eastern Europe, the Middle East,
Asia and Africa at the national level and through
international and intergovernmental organizations such
as NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union. We are
particularly proud of the internationally recognized
role of the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police
Units (CoESPU), based in Vicenza in northern Italy,
which will soon share its headquarters with the NATO
Stability Policing Centre of Excellence. CoESPU makes
an outstanding contribution to international efforts to
enhance the effectiveness and professionalism of police
and security agencies worldwide at both the theoretical
and practical levels. The Centre operates as a doctrinal
hub and a training centre. It develops doctrine and
common operational procedures for the employment
of Stability Police Units and the promotion of the
rule of law, and teaches operational planning, rules of
engagement and international and humanitarian law to
personnel from throughout the world.
In closing, I am pleased that the hard lessons
learned by our brave men and women in the field
dovetail with the recommendations put forth in the
Secretary-General’s report. Restoring public order
is unfortunately a necessary but elusive condition of
post-conflict situations. In order to avoid a relapse into
conflict, achieve a durable peace and pave the way to
socioeconomic developmentn we must develop and
implement an organic and comprehensive approach
to SSR — an approach inspired by the principles of
inclusiveness, effectiveness, accountability and good
governance, and designed to achieve the ultimate
objectives of increasing the security of the people and
rebuilding the bonds of trust between public authorities
and their citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Sanabria (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like first to thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate and for its concept
note (S/2014/238, annex). This debate is on an issue of
great importance to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We should also like to commend
you, Sir, for having put forward a draft resolution that
Spain is honoured to co-sponsor. I should also like to
congratulate Luxembourg for its outstanding leadership
of the Council in March.
Spain aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and wishes to add some observations
in its national capacity.
Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480), which we consider to be complete and
well-focused. We acknowledge the fundamental role of
the United Nations in security sector reform (SSR) and
its efforts of recent years to improve the coherence and
effectiveness of its actions in this area. Security sector
reform, and from a wider perspective the strengthening
of the rule of law in this context, is a key elements in two
different areas — ex ante for conflict prevention and ex
post for peacebuilding. The international community
should help and support countries finding in conflict
and post-conflict situations in the development of their
civilian capacities and in the strengthening of their
institutions.
It is critical to move from a reactive culture to
conflicts — which is often late and insufficient — to
one of prevention. The prevention requires political
will and resources to formulate and implement effective
strategies. When both elements are combined, the
results are success stories such as that of Sierra Leone,
with the recent closing of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone. Security sector
reform demands action on several fronts. Stable and
predictable legal frameworks must be established; the
creation of competent security and police forces that
are subject to and enforce the rule of law; the building
of an independent and comprehensive legal system
accessible to all; and the establishment of an adequate
penitentiary system. We must also ensure the protection
of society’s most vulnerable groups such as women,
children and displaced persons.
National ownership is, in this area as in many
others, key to success. Good planning is necessary if
actions designed on the basis of needs and priorities
identified by the host country are to be coherent and in
line with its decisions and national initiatives. Security

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

infrastructures and institutions must be at the service of
the people. Reforms must be inclusive and based on the
principles of good governance, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and accountability, all of which are
vital in fostering long-term legitimacy, effectiveness
and sustainability.
We believe that security sector reform requires a
comprehensive and strategic approach. Flexibility in its
planning, identification of the activities that are most
appropriate at every moment, an evolving perspective,
a good knowledge of the situation in the field, and a
fluid, intense and ongoing dialogue with national actors
are crucial. In order to be effective, efforts aimed at
security sector reform require a long-term perspective
and actions sustained over time.
Security sector reform based on the principles I
have just mentioned is clearly an essential contribution
to ensuring respect for and the implementation of
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians. On this point, I should like to highlight
the importance of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, of which Spain has been a member for
eight years, and of the Peacebuilding Fund, of which we
are its eighth largest donor.
National authorities and international partners also
need instruments that allow them to carry out appropriate
follow-up and evaluation of their own actions. As my
delegation did at the debate on the strengthening of the
rule of law in February (see S/PV.7113), I should like
to highlight the recent initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
develop indicators that measure the evolution of the
functioning of police, legal and penitentiary institutions
in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations in
the areas of efficiency, capacity, integrity, transparency,
accountability and the treatment of vulnerable groups.
It is a useful tool for measuring the results and progress
of our efforts in these sectors.
Spain has supported capacity-building in the
security and legal sectors in many countries. In
Sub-Saharan Africa, we have supported capacitybuilding of the national police forces of Angola and
Cape Verde. Through our collaboration with the
African Union, we support the African Peace and
Security Architecture and the Common Security and
Defence Policy, as well as the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism.

14-3134915/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

In Latin America, we have implemented
programmes for training and for sharing experiences
and good practices in legal reform by collaborating with
the creation of specialized prosecutorial offices and
by organizing seminars, courses and workshops that
address issues such as access to justice — especially
by vulnerable groups — medical-legal investigation
techniques, and the fight against human trafficking.
Since 2007, Spain has promoted and supported the
Central American Security Strategy through the
Central American Integration System in order to join
and harmonize the fight against organized crime.
In Arab countries, Spain implements the Masar
programme, which is designed to support democratic
governance processes and aligns with the needs
and priorities identified by national actors, and has
supported initiatives of public institutions and civil
society in the area of security, justice, penitentiary
institutions and human rights.
In conjunction with other States members of the
European Union, Spain has participated in civilian
crisis management missions within the framework
of the Common Security and Defence Policy of the
European Union. We are present in training operations
in Mali and Somalia and in EUCAP Nestor, EUCAP
Sahel and the European Union Operation Althea, which
seek to strengthen the security security. In this regard,
a Spanish General currently occupies the position of
Principal Adviser of the United Nations in the Republic
of Guinea and is helping to define the country’s security
model.
Our experience of cooperation with other countries
and extensive participation in peacekeeping operations
has taught us that strengthening the rule of law and
security sector reform is a critical pillar of conflict
prevention and the building and strengthening of peace.
Peace and security, human rights and development are
closely linked and are mutually reinforcing. Spain
will continue to actively participate in actions aimed
at providing support to the efforts of other countries
to establish trustworthy security capacities and
institutions that are subject to the law, with the aim of
helping to strengthen peace, security and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): At the outset, I should
like to express to you, Mr. President, the appreciation
of Algeria for convening this important open debate

16/19

28/04/2014

on the concept of security sector reform (SSR). I wish
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Aminu Bashir Wali,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to our meeting
today and thank him for his stewardship of this debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for Member States
to identify and clarify the main characteristics and
priorities of the United Nations on SSR, in particular
its normative and operational dimensions. We recall
that SSR was initially introduced in the United
Nations in the context of identifying peacekeeping
exit strategies. This concept has evolved significantly,
to the point where it is becoming a core component of
the Organization’s engagement across peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development contexts. We believe
that successful SSR is vital to establishing enduring
peace and stability in countries that are in a postconflict peacebuilding phase.
In post-conflict contexts, security institutions
are often weak and dysfunctional, ineffective in
their impact and lacking accepted legitimacy in their
foundation. The failure to address such operational
and accountability deficits has often undermined
the reconstruction efforts of the United Nations and
increased the risk of a relapse into conflict. The purpose
is to enhance the quality of security sector governance
through a focus on accountability, inclusivity and
effective management and oversight. The United
Nations should be able to provide assistance in this
area, and is particularly well positioned to support such
reforms and may have a comparative advantage relative
to other partners in providing sector-wide support.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General recognizes in
his latest report (S/2013/480) that SSR is pertinent
across the United Nations peacekeeping, human rights,
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and development
agendas.
At the same time, while much progress has been
made, the protracted conflicts, emerging threats and
complex crises witnessed in the world today certainly
require innovative and flexible responses from the
United Nations. To face those challenges, there is a need
to strengthen the role of the United Nations system in
supporting security sector reform as a key tool in the
prevention and management of conflict.

14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

That being said, Algeria believes that there is still
a lot of work to be done in those areas by enhancing
system-wide coherence and coordination, including
through the collaborative efforts of the Task Force, and
by forging partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. The African Union endeavour in its
African Peace and Security Architecture and capacitybuilding efforts is, in this regard, the perfect example
that deserves to be taken into account in this area.
The role of the Security Council is crucial in
providing strategic guidance and in defining the
institutional priorities of the United Nations, in
particular due to the fact that security sector reform has
become a key component of Security Council mission
mandates. Furthermore, Security Council mandates are
increasing not only in number but also in complexity in
relation to the demands placed on support for security
sector reform. There is a need, therefore, to reflect on
how these increasing demands are to be met by current
United Nations capacities.
My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of SSR among other important components
in the context of United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operations and post-conflict situations
that should be integrated into the broad framework of
United Nations rule-of-law activities, thereby ensuring
that SSR activities and structures are not duplicating the
work carried out in the rule of law area. Algeria believes
that the successful implementation of the many tasks
that peacekeeping operations could be mandated to
undertake in the area of SSR requires an understanding
of and action based on a perspective that takes fully
into account the fact that security and development are
intertwined. Equally, we stress the importance of the
mutually reinforcing nature of SSR and all the other
components of the peacekeeping operations when it is
mandated.
Lastly, we think that any development of a United
Nations approach to SSR must take place within the
General Assembly and in accordance with the principle
of national ownership, and that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including its scope and mandate, should be
carried out through the intergovernmental process and
must be context-specific. It is obvious that SSR should
be undertaken at the request of the country concerned,
and we underline the primary responsibility and the
sovereign right of the country concerned in determining
its national priorities in this regard.

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Sir, for facilitating the strategic discussions on
strengthening the approach of the United Nations to
security sector reform (SSR). I also express my warm
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2013/480) and recommendations on the way
forward.
As a member of the Group of Friends of SSR,
Kazakhstan fully supports all efforts to enhance peace
and security, which in turn lead to stable and enduring
sustainable development.
SSR is gaining increasing importance for addressing
war-torn areas and for countries emerging from conflict
in Africa. It is therefore critical to understand the newer
forms, patterns and manifestations of conflicts and
insecurities. Immediate and medium- and long-term
plans can be based only on understanding the root causes
of conflicts — the accelerators, the triggers and their
impacts. Hence, planning for SSR must be based on the
current shift from State-centred security to citizen- or
people-oriented security; the shift from purely military
security to non-military centred security, such as food,
environment and socioeconomic security; and the shift
from State to non-State actors, with a larger number of
stakeholders.
Recent political developments, which are taking
a most tragic toll of human life, compel us to rethink
how secure environments can be achieved as essential
prerequisites for the protection of civilians, the rule
of law, justice and respect for human rights. Our task
becomes all the more challenging when United Nations
peacekeeping operations and missions withdraw.
Thus, far-sighted and comprehensive reform is headed,
providing the vital framework for peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development, which are closely
linked to the processes of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. In addition, all national security
policies and mechanisms must also be grounded in
regional frameworks due to the transnational nature of
security challenges.
No reform can take place without providing
adequate, modern training in the new concepts of
security and upgrading institutions of the military
and, especially, the police so that human rights, rule of
law and good governance can guide their operations.
Recruitment policies should incorporate regional

14-3134917/19

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

quotas, ethnic/tribal balance and appropriate gender
mix, involving women and local communities. There
must also be a reorientation of correctional services,
customs and the judiciary, which are important
components of the security system.
These overall efforts call for strengthening the
capacity and political will of national authorities and
institutions, through political dialogue, with contextspecific policies, while also mobilizing the multiplicity
of actors. Special consideration must be given to
non-State actors, at the regional and international
levels alike, interacting with governmental authorities.
It is then obvious that new partnerships should be
explored, requiring collaboration and commitment
at all levels — from regional to international. At
the same time, there has to be national ownership of
security sector reform, which must be democratic and
representative, as this increases confidence in and the
legitimacy of security institutions, striking a balance
between national security concerns and local needs.
SSR must include research, lessons learned, monitoring,
oversight and accountability mechanisms, benchmarks
and indicators for thorough assessment.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan is determined to assist
and support United Nations efforts to evolve SSR as a
timely and effective to counteract numerous challenges,
and we support the draft resolution before the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
fully shares the views expressed in the concept note
(S/2014/238, annex) for today’s debate. We thank the
Nigerian presidency for having brought this critical
issue to the attention of the Security Council and hope
that the Security Council will continue to hold open
debates on security sector reform (SSR) on a regular
basis. We therefore welcome the draft resolution on
SSR and hope that it will be adopted today. The Czech
Republic would like to join others in announcing our
co-sponsorship of the draft.
We agree that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council as the body primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security to
ensure that the necessary priority be afforded to this
critical role of the United Nations.
The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union,

18/19

28/04/2014

and I would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.
We consider SSR to be a key step in the transition
from conflict to sustainable development. Successful
SSR is possible only by adhering to the principles of
national ownership and deepening cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society. In this context, SSR emerged as a relevant
concept addressing the core deficiencies of the State
with the aim of improving not only State security but,
in a broader sense, human security — that is to say, the
security of every single human being within the society.
The Secretary-General’s report of August 2013
(S/2013/480) clearly outlines the progress within the
United Nations system on SSR, but it also shows that
there is need for further improvement. In our view, SSR
requires a holistic approach and all activities should be
dealt with in a coherent and comprehensive manner. It is
crucial to involve all parts of the United Nations system
in this area. We therefore we welcome the creation of
the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which covers all important departments of the United
Nations Secretariat and its programmes. We also note
other ways of deepening this cooperation by involving
specialized United Nations agencies in the Task Force.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the active
participation of the Czech Republic and Czech experts
in several Common Security and Defence Policy
missions, whose mandate included SSR — in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and
Mali. My country is also undertaking particular efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace
and security, as well as resolution 1612 (2005), on
children affected by armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mwinyi (Tanzania): At the outset, allow me
to join other speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, to New York. I would also like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this open debate. We extend
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
briefing on this important matter and his reports on this
subject (S/2013/480).
This debate is extremely relevant to the work of the
Security Council, whose role is not merely to respond
to conflicts after they have unfolded but also to prevent
them. Security sector reform (SSR) is among the
14-31349

28/04/2014

Maintenance of international peace and security

many ways of safeguarding conflict-prone countries
and ensuring post-conflict societies do not relapse
into conflict, by building strong, transparent and
accountable security sector institutions. This debate
takes place hardly a week since Tanzania, Japan and
the Slovak Republic held a seminar on inclusivity in
rebuilding States, focusing on inclusivity in security
sector reform. Tanzania pioneered the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission and strongly maintains
its belief in the centrality of SSR in rebuilding postconflict societies.
We wish to reiterate some of the issues that we
deem absolutely important in advancing SSR, not only
in societies emerging from conflicts, but in developing
countries in general. First, let me address ownership.
It is important that the country in question, where
SSR is being undertaken, take full ownership of the
process. Ownership entails more than consent. It is also
about commitment and, most importantly, inclusivity.
To attain the requisite legitimacy, the security sector
reform process must involve all stakeholders, including
youth, women, traditional leaders, religious leaders and
civil society. It is also important that it involve former
combatants after peace talks have been exhausted,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration has
been accomplished and justice has been administered.
Secondly, on durability, it is of paramount
importance that security sector reform be undertaken
as an ongoing process rather than an event, particularly
when implemented under the mandate of the Council.
Post-conflict countries undertaking security sector
reform must be assisted until they attain the capability
to assist themselves. We also believe that sustainability
in the security sector reform process can only be
attained if the process is undertaken hand in hand with
the development of the concerned countries.
Thirdly, on the involvement of regional actors,
our involvement in peace processes over the past five
decades has clearly demonstrated the importance
of regional actors in conflict prevention, resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We encourage the
international community and the countries concerned
to make effective use of the enormous resources that

S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)

we can offer to our neighbouring countries in terms
of knowledge and skills in the area of security sector
reform and others. After all, we aspire to the well-being
of their nations and peoples, which is paramount for
regional stability and development.
We note with great appreciation that such value
is fully acknowledged in the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, the full implementation of
which by all stakeholders is poised to restore peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
The President: Members of the Council have
before them document S/2014/302, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Chad, Chile, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2151 (2014).
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

14-3134919/19
