S/2021/315

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 31 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Mr.
Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund; and Dr. Amani Ballour, Founder, Al Amal Fund, as well as the
statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Antony J. Blinken, Secretary of
State of the United States of America; Ms. Eva-Maria Liimets, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence
of Ireland; Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway (on
behalf of Ireland and Norway); Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Migration and Tunisians Abroad; Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, as well as by the representatives of
China, France, India, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the
Middle East (Syria)” convened on Monday, 29 March 2021. Statements were also
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-04413 (E) 050421 290421

*2104413*

S/2021/315

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I am pleased to brief the Security Council today alongside Henrietta Fore as
well as Dr. Amani Ballour. I was privileged to meet Dr. Ballour when she visited
New York in 2019, and we are lucky to hear from her today.
As Council members all know, the conf lict in Syria is now 10 years old —
a decade of death, destruction, displacement, disease, dread and despair. I have
spoken to Syrians in many parts of the country in recent weeks. They see no respite,
and they are right. Our latest humanitarian overview, which my Office released last
week, shows that needs are higher than ever. We estimate that 13.4 million people
across all parts of Syria require humanitarian aid, that is, 20 per cent more than
last year.
The deep economic decay from a decade of war has deepened further over the
past year, not least as a result of the pandemic. The Syrian pound fell to its lowest
point ever against the dollar this month. Because food is imported, one consequence
is that food prices are at unprecedented levels. A consequence of that is that more
than 12 million people no longer have reliable access to food, and the consequence
of that is growing hunger and malnutrition, especially among children. Ms. Fore will
speak more about that.
Several doctors in different parts of Syria have told me that they are seeing
many cases of malnutrition, even among breastfed children, and the situation is
getting worse. A displaced father of 11 children told me the other day that they had
all dropped out of school to look for work to help feed the family.
My update today covers three main three points: first, the protection
of civilians; secondly, humanitarian access; and, thirdly, the assistance that
humanitarian organizations are providing across Syria.
Just over a week ago, at least 30 communities in northern Syria were attacked
by artillery shells and air strikes. Artillery shells hit Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital,
forcing it to be evacuated and closed. Two boys, cousins, aged 10 and 12 years old,
were among the patients killed. Five medical staff are among the injured. Two of
them remain in critical condition.
Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital, like many others, was built underground to
escape attacks like that. It seems grotesque that hospitals, which are protected under
international humanitarian law, should have to operate underground but that is the
reality in Syria. The location of the hospital was well known to the warring parties.
The United Nations has supported it for several years. Its location was reported
again to the parties on 1 March. It was obviously a deliberate attack, and Council
members will all have seen the statement that the Secretary-General issued.
Moving on, I have expressed my concern to the Council before about the
increasing insecurity at the Al-Hol camp. A Médecins sans Frontières staff member
there was killed while off duty in their tent on 24 February. Insecurity at Al-Hol
has now reached intolerable levels, threatening our ability to operate. Forty-one
residents have been murdered since the beginning of the year.
The de facto authorities in the north-east are responsible for providing
security in the camp. A major security operation, involving large numbers of military
personnel, began in Al-Hol on Sunday, with the stated intention of restoring security
in the camp. The exercise has forced the suspension of many humanitarian services.
Residents, including children, are being screened and their tents searched.
2/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Security must be provided in a manner that does not endanger residents
or violate their rights and that does not restrict humanitarian access. There are
almost 40,000 foreign and Syrian children at Al-Hol. More than 30,000 of them are
younger than 12 years old. It is entirely unacceptable that they remain in that unsafe
environment. Countries of origin should take their nationals home.
My next point is humanitarian access. On 21 March, the same day as the
attack on the Al-Atarib hospital, multiple air-to-surface missiles hit the road leading
to Bab Al-Hawa border crossing in northern Idlib. Around 1,000 trucks of United
Nations assistance cross through Bab Al-Hawa each month, as authorized by the
Security Council under resolution 2533 (2020).
One missile struck a lot where trucks used for transporting humanitarian
supplies were parked. Twenty-four trucks were destroyed or damaged. The air
strikes also started a fire in a nearby non-governmental organization (NGO)
warehouse, which stored food and other humanitarian supplies. A quarter of the
stocks, amounting to aid for more than 4,000 people, were destroyed.
To put the impact of an attack such as that into perspective, let me outline the
extent to which people in north-western Syria depend on cross-border aid. There
are apparently some misconceptions about the scale of the United Nations role. At a
Security Council meeting earlier this year, it was suggested that the United Nations
cross-border operation accounts for 10 per cent of the assistance. I was recently
asked about that informally and said that I thought the number was in fact around
40 per cent. When I reported that conversation to my staff, they said that I had got
the number wrong. “So it is not 40 per cent?” I said. “No”, they said. “Well what is
it then?” I said. “We think it is nearer 50 per cent”, they said.
There are more than 4 million people in north-western Syria. We estimate that
more than 75 per cent of them depend on aid to meet their basic needs. The crossborder operation reaches almost 85 per cent of those people every month.
The proportions vary depending on the type of assistance. For example, the
United Nations provides the vast majority of emergency food assistance. Between
70 and 80 per cent of that is delivered by the World Food Programme. The United
Nations also plays a major role in supporting others providing assistance. Many
NGO operations rely on the United Nations for support in logistics, financing
and procurement.
The United Nations cross-border operation is one of the most heavily
scrutinized and monitored aid operations in the world. That is because the people
paying for it — mostly Western and Gulf donors — have been clear that they will do
so only if they are sure that the resources are not being diverted to terrorist groups.
We know that aid gets to the people whom it is supposed to.
Some people have suggested that aid must be being diverted, because otherwise
we would not see the kind of malnutrition that we now observe. That, too, is wrong.
The reason that there is so much malnutrition is that the cross-border operation is
too small to prevent it. More money and more border crossings would address that.
People in north-western Syria know that the Council will shortly be deciding
the future of the cross-border programme. Last week, my Office received a letter
from women’s groups in Idlib. It said:
“We are 130 Syrian women: teachers, engineers, doctors and housewives.
We are all civilians who have lived a full decade in the war in all its details.
As women, mothers and those responsible for our families, we stand against
stopping a cross-border resolution. We do not want our children to starve.”
We have also continued to try to seek agreement, as we have for more than
a year, on cross-line deliveries to the north-west. I again updated the Council on
21-044133/44

S/2021/315

that last month (see S/2021/206). The various parties have each recently described
arrangements that they could accept but we have yet to find an approach on which
everyone can agree. The discussions continue. While we deliver 1,000 trucks a
month of aid into the north-west cross-border, we have yet to see even a single truck
just once cross-line.
Let me now turn to the north-east. Cross-line humanitarian assistance to the
north-east has scaled up, but needs still surpass our ability to address them. We
estimate that 1.8 million people require assistance in areas of north-eastern Syria
outside the control of the Government. More than 70 per cent of them are considered
to be in extreme need — well above the national average.
Reputable aid organizations tell us that the availability and accessibility
of health care in the north-east is insufficient. Few health issues are adequately
addressed due to the limited functionality and capacity of health-care facilities, a
lack of adequately trained medical staff and shortages of essential medicines.
NGOs operating in the north-east report imminent stock-outs of critical
medicines, such as insulin and cardiovascular and antibacterial medicines, in
multiple facilities. The United Nations was able to support the supply chain of
medical supplies through Al-Yarubiyah until the Security Council authorization to
do so expired. Reputable organizations operating in the north-east tell us that neither
cross-line support to health facilities nor increased cross-border shipments by NGOs
have since proved a sufficient replacement.
Recent assessments in Deir ez-Zor and Al-Hasakah show that only half of
the pregnant women and new mothers in those camps are able to access obstetric or
antenatal care.
Humanitarian organizations are making every effort to bridge gaps. However,
the World Health Organization warns that funding is a key constraint, as available
resources will only cover 40 per cent of estimated health supply needs for northeastern Syria for 2021. At least nine NGO-supported health facilities will close in
the coming months if additional funding is not secured.
Let me now say a few words about the assistance that we are delivering across
Syria, notwithstanding the complexities and constraints that I have just described.
The humanitarian operation currently reaches around 7.7 million people
across the country each month. Tomorrow the United Nations will co-host the fifth
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Humanitarian
organizations, coordinated by the United Nations, are seeking an estimated $4.2
billion for the response inside Syria in order to reach 12.3 million people in need.
Another $5.8 billion is required for support to countries hosting Syrian refugees in
the region.
Our ability to deliver aid and stave off an even worse situation for millions of
civilians will depend on the political will and financial generosity of the international
community, including the countries represented on the Council. Now is not the
moment to reduce humanitarian aid to Syria. We need more money, not less, if we
are to avoid a further deterioration, the consequences of which could be dramatic
and widespread.

4/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex II
Briefing by the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, Henrietta Fore
This year marks an anniversary that no one wanted to see: the tenth year of
the Syria crisis, with homes, hospitals, schools and water systems destroyed, the
worst economic crisis in Syria’s history, plunging 90 per cent of the population
into poverty, and humanitarian law flouted with impunity. There are millions of
internally displaced or fleeing across Syria’s borders and shocking violence, which
has killed or injured a verified 12,000 children, and likely many more, since the
fighting began.
Last week, a 10-year-old boy was killed in the Al-Atarib area in yet another
attack on a hospital. There has been tragedy upon tragedy for a once beautiful
country, rendered unrecognizable today, and for a generation of children growing up
knowing nothing but war. Across Syria, nearly 90 per cent of children now require
humanitarian assistance. There are 3.2 million inside Syria and neighbouring
countries out of school. They are vulnerable to violence, exploitation, early marriage,
child labour or being forced to join the fighting. The number of families reporting
that their children were suffering from psychological distress has doubled in the
past year.
Attacks are decimating vital support systems. In 2019 alone, 46 attacks were
recorded on water facilities, disrupting water access for families in desperate need.
The constant disruption of the Allouk water station in Al-Hasakah, which serves
nearly half a million people, is forcing civilians to rely on unsafe water, exposing
them to deadly waterborne diseases.
A deepening economic crisis is placing adequate nutrition out of reach for
millions of families. Last year saw the highest number of food-insecure people in the
country’s history. In some areas of the north-west, acute malnutrition is approaching
the emergency threshold of 15 per cent among displaced children and in hard-toreach areas and camps. While the world watches, half a million stunted children
across Syria are being robbed of their full potential from a very early age. They will
never be able to grow healthy brains or strong bodies if they are stunted in their first
three to five years of life. Children cannot wait.
In the north-east, more than 37,000 children are languishing in the Al-Hol and
Al-Roj camps. More than 800 children are in detention centres and prisons.
In the south-east, 11,000 people, half of them children, are living in the
Rukban camp under worsening conditions, including a lack of food and medicine
and growing concerns about the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Across Syria, nearly 48,000 COVID-19 cases have been reported. With only limited
testing available, that number is likely much higher.
The war’s ripple effect on Syria’s neighbours, including Jordan, Lebanon,
Iraq, Egypt and Turkey, is affecting host and refugee communities alike, putting
economies and services under pressure and straining emotions, patience and
generosity. With the rest of the United Nations family and our partners, our teams
are providing health care, such as 900,000 routine vaccinations for children last year,
psychosocial support, education, water, cash assistance, information on how people
can stay safe during COVID-19 and equitable access to the vaccines.
Tomorrow’s donor conference in Brussels will be a chance to renew global
support in key areas. That includes education, which I will highlight as a critical
need, and an appeal for funding to urgently close the gap in support in north-west
Syria, where the needs are the greatest.
21-044135/44

S/2021/315

But beyond funding, we need the Council’s help in four areas. First, UNICEF
and our partners need regular access to north-western Syria to provide life-saving
humanitarian assistance. The 12-month renewal provided a necessary window to
help people in desperate need. But the needs are multiplying. In the last year, we have
seen a 20-per cent increase in the number of people needing humanitarian assistance
in the north-west. Over 55,000 children are acutely malnourished and will face dire
consequences without a continuation of access and humanitarian assistance.
We cannot turn our backs on the 3.4 million people living there, including
1.7 million children. They are living in crowded camps or informal settlements with
limited or non-existent access to electricity, health care or water plants. This aid is
the only lifeline they have.
We call on the Council to renew the resolution on cross-border assistance and
to spare no effort to reach an agreement on accessing children through cross-line
operations to reach Idlib governorate and other parts of the north-west.
Secondly, all parties should immediately stop attacks on children, hospitals,
schools and other vital civilian infrastructure, such as water plants. These crucial
services need protection.
Thirdly, support UNICEF’s call for the safe, voluntary and dignified release,
repatriation and reintegration of children in the north-east. A child is a child, no
matter who or where they are or who their parents are. They have a right to return
to their communities, be protected and receive the same services as any other child.
Many have witnessed and experienced extreme violence, and require long-term
support to recover and restart their lives.
Syrian children in Al-Hol and Al-Roj should be reintegrated into their local
communities, while third-country national children should be repatriated safely
back to their countries of origin.
And fourthly, support the United Nations call for peace. Syria is disintegrating
before our eyes. After 10 years, it is time to put the guns down, come to the negotiating
table, and reach a lasting peace agreement.
Until then, our teams are staying and delivering. We believe in a brighter
future for the children of Syria. Their courage inspires us every day — like that of
the children I met in Tal-Amara school in southern rural Idlib during my last visit,
their faces smiling and bright as they proudly showed me their work; their eyes filled
with hope for the future.
For millions of war-weary Syrian children, hope is all they have. We call on
this Council not only to keep their hope alive, but to match it with the solutions and
support they need — and the lasting peace they deserve.

6/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex III
Briefing by the founder of the Al Amal Fund, Amani Ballour
I thank you for the opportunity to brief the Council today. I would especially
like to thank Secretary Blinken for his invitation.
My name is Amani Ballour. I am a paediatrician from Damascus, Syria. I am
here today to speak not only as a doctor, but as a Syrian who cares deeply about
my country.
Syria is broken. After 10 years of conflict, it is a country in ruins — not only
in physical ruins, but also in mind and heart.
I worked in an underground hospital in eastern Ghouta for nearly six years,
the last two as the manager. The conditions in my hospital were beyond your worst
imagination — a severe shortage of medical supplies and health-care workers, a
brutal siege, which starved even the doctors and nurses, daily bombardments with
illegal weapons, and even the use of chemical weapons. We were surrounded by
suffering and death.
My worst experience occurred in 2013. In the middle of the night, I arrived
at the hospital and was shocked to see a large number of patients, many of them
children, who were suffocating and experiencing the symptoms of exposure to
chemical agents. Scores of women and children died right in front of my eyes.
Overall, more than 1,500 people were killed in this heinous attack. Independent
investigations found that the agent used was military-grade sarin, possessed only
by the Syrian military and intelligence services. And yet, even after this horrific
crime, attacks on hospitals continued, siege continued, chemical weapons usage
continued — all with no real accountability.
My first point focuses on paediatric health. During six years of siege, I
treated thousands of children. I watched them starving from lack of food; I saw
them screaming from the sounds of war planes and rockets. The lack of food led to
malnutrition, which resulted in stunting, weak immune systems and, in some cases,
death. The trauma of the conflict also caused many mental health issues. A large
number of children were born in Ghouta during the siege; they grew up knowing
only destruction, bloodshed and death. This led to depression, personality disorders,
insomnia and paranoia.
One moment I remember is from 2013. We, the medical staff, heard that there
was a meeting in the Security Council about Syria. We were all waiting with great
hope because we believed that you would help us. That you would end the siege. That
you would bring food and medicine for the children.
We told our children that “the Security Council is holding a meeting for you”.
For a brief moment, they felt hopeful. We waited and waited, meeting after meeting,
for six years. Millions inside Syria are still waiting. I am here today, a lucky survivor
who fought and continues to fight for the basic needs and rights of the innocent
women and children I treated in Ghouta. More importantly, I am here representing
their suffering and the action that must be taken to give them the basic right to life.
My second point focuses on attacks on medical facilities. According to
Physicians for Human Rights, there have been 598 attacks on 350 different medical
facilities, resulting in the death of 930 medical personnel, with no accountability.
Medical workers must be supported, not targeted.
My own hospital was targeted by an air strike in 2015, not long after Russia
began to increase its support to the Syrian military. That attack killed three medical
staff. They were my friends and colleagues. Yet the criminals have never been
brought to justice.
21-044137/44

S/2021/315

Just last week, Al-Atarib Hospital in the countryside of Aleppo, which is
operated by the Syrian American Medical Association and received support from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, was directly targeted by
artillery strikes. Five medical staff were injured and seven civilians were killed,
including two children. This hospital had even shared its coordinates with the United
Nations. There must be an immediate investigation. Only through real accountability
will these attacks finally come to an end.
My final point today focuses on humanitarian access. Cross-border assistance
is a vital lifeline for the 4 million civilians in north-western Syria. The need to
quickly distribute coronavirus disease vaccines to all parts of Syria further shows
the importance of cross-border aid.
My own experience living with cross-line aid for six years is that it is a failed
experiment. During my time in Ghouta, we lacked even basic medical supplies for
our patients. I treated children starving to death, suffering from chronic illnesses,
desperate for even basic humanitarian assistance. Yet it never came.
Approvals from the regime were rarely issued, and, even when they were,
essential items, such as baby formula, were often removed. I repeat — soldiers
would remove the baby formula from the trucks, and empty it on the ground. The
World Health Organization publicly condemned this many times, yet the practice
continued. Such cruelty is beyond comprehension.
The Council cannot allow this situation to return. Why should any of us
believe that things will be different this time? Base your decision on facts, not on
empty promises.
Renewing cross-border assistance through Bab Al-Hawa is simply the right
thing to do, and you should also open additional crossings to meet the growing needs.
I would like to end my remarks by asking a series of questions. Are the lives
of these women and children worth any less than yours? Is a Syrian child’s life worth
less than a Vietnamese child, or Chinese child, or Kenyan child? Why have they
been abandoned for so long?
Do you find it acceptable for a hospital to be targeted not once, not twice, but
nearly 600 times? If a hospital was targeted in Tunis, New Delhi or Moscow, would
you not immediately demand an investigation and not rest until there was justice?
Do you find it acceptable, in the middle of a pandemic, with humanitarian
needs growing each day, to further reduce humanitarian access? If your own countries
faced rising rates of malnutrition and disease, would you not increase access to aid?
I urge Council members to set aside their differences and refocus their efforts
on reaching a political solution that includes essential freedoms and human rights,
to act with great urgency to address the worsening humanitarian crisis, and to hold
accountable those who attack medical facilities and use chemical weapons.
I also urge Council members to move beyond words, to concrete actions. I
challenge each member of the Council and each State Member of the United Nations
to take immediate steps to support the Syrian people: donate urgently needed food
and medical supplies; increase your financial contributions to the United Nations and
its partners; agree to resettle more Syrian refugees, huge numbers of whom remain
in refugee camps in the region, desperate to avoid becoming a lost generation; offer
scholarships for university students so that Syrians can be educated and one day
return and rebuild our country.
Only through solidarity and shared humanity can we alleviate the suffering of
the Syrian people and move towards justice, peace and reconciliation.
8/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex IV
Statement by the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Antony J. Blinken
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive Director Fore for
their thorough and candid briefings and for the vital work the United Nations is doing
to deliver humanitarian aid to the people of Syria. I also thank Dr. Ballour, both for
the life-saving service he performed for his fellow Syrians amidst the most harrowing
circumstances and for his powerful, determined efforts to bring the experiences of
the Syrian people to the world and to push for their rights to be respected.
This month marks the tenth anniversary of the Syrian uprising. After a decade
of conflict in which the Syrian people have suffered immeasurably, the situation is
as grave as ever. As we have heard, an estimated 13.4 million people — two in every
three Syrians — are in need of humanitarian assistance. Sixty per cent of Syrians are
at serious risk of going hungry.
Every month, the Security Council gathers to discuss the humanitarian
situation in Syria and these massive numbers are rattled off. In the process, it is all
too easy to lose sight of the fact that contained in each one of these numbers are the
lives of individual human beings.
Like the Syrian mother who recently told a reporter she was so desperate to
feed her three children that she faced a choice: “I had to sell my hair or my body”.
She sold her hair for $55. For two days after, she wept with shame. But with that
money, she bought heating oil and food and clothes for her three kids. That is one
mother — for one Syrian family. Now remember that 12.4 million people in Syria
are food insecure, and one begins to sense the magnitude of human suffering in
this conflict.
We heard Dr. Ballour say that she is waiting on the Security Council with
hope — waiting on the Security Council with hope. Look, we all sit in these chairs,
we speak these words, we represent our countries, but how is it possible that we
cannot find in our hearts the common humanity to actually take meaningful action
to do something? How is that possible? I have two young children of my own. I
suspect many members of the Council have young children or grandchildren. I think
of my kids when I think of the Syrian children we have heard talked about today. I
ask my fellow Council members to do the same thing — think of yours, look into
your hearts and then talk to your colleagues. And despite our differences, we have to
find a way to do something to take action to help people. That is our responsibility,
and shame on us if we do not meet it.
Meanwhile, the brave people who put their lives on the line to try to help the
Syrian people continue to be targeted. On 21 March, the Al-Assad regime shelled
the Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital in western Aleppo, reportedly killing seven people,
including, as we heard, two children — cousins aged 10 and 12 years old. The attack
also wounded 15 people, including a doctor who had a piece of shrapnel embedded
in his eye. He will never see again.
The hospital had been bombed by the regime before, in 2014, and, as we heard
from Dr. Ballour, had to be rebuilt underground, in hopes that doing so would keep
people safe if it were targeted again.
Well, the cave could not keep them safe. The hospital’s coordinates had been
shared — again, as we heard — with the United Nations-led deconfliction mechanism,
meaning the regime knew exactly where it was. Al-Atarib Hospital, which is now
closed, had previously seen an average of 3,650 people every month. On the same
day the Al-Assad regime struck the hospital, Russian air strikes struck near the only
United Nations-authorized border crossing with Syria, killing a civilian, destroying
21-044139/44

S/2021/315

humanitarian supplies, putting the most effective way of getting aid to the Syrian
people at risk.
While today’s meeting is focused on the humanitarian crisis in Syria, it is
important to note that the only long-term solution to this suffering is through a
political settlement and permanent resolution to the conflict, as outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). Together with our allies and partners, the United States continues to
support Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Pedersen’s efforts towards this end.
But even as we work towards that solution, we cannot lose sight of the urgent
needs of the Syrian people that we have heard described so eloquently today. It
is clear that those needs, including having enough to eat and access to essential
medicine, are not going to be met by the Al-Assad regime. So, again, the question
before us is: What can the Security Council do to help the millions of Syrians whose
lives hang in the balance?
In the short term, we know the answer and it is simple — we must ensure
that Syrians get the humanitarian aid they need. At present, the most efficient and
effective way to get the most aid to the most people in the north-west and northeast is through border crossings. Yet the Security Council has recently allowed the
authorization for two border crossings to lapse: Bab Al-Salam, in the north-west,
which used to deliver aid to approximately 4 million Syrians; and Al-Yarubiyah, in
the north-east, which brought aid to another 1.3 million Syrians.
We have a responsibility to ensure Syrians have access to life-saving
assistance, no matter where they live. Given that goal, there was no good reason at
the time for the Council’s failure to reauthorize these two humanitarian crossings.
There is no good reason for the crossings to remain closed today. The
crossings provided a path for delivering aid that was more economical, safer and
more efficient. In their absence, delivering aid is costlier, more perilous and less
efficient. It also means that when the sole remaining crossing becomes inaccessible
for any reason — as happened last week when it was bombed by Russian forces —
aid may be halted altogether.
The reduction of border crossings also means that more United Nations aid
convoys are forced to cross multiple lines of control, negotiating access with various
armed opposition groups, travelling longer distances, all of which leaves more ways
in which aid can be slowed or stopped before it gets to the Syrian people and more
ways in which aid workers can themselves be targeted.
Now some may argue that reauthorizing humanitarian crossings and providing
cross-border aid would in some way infringe on the sovereignty of the Syrian regime.
But sovereignty was never intended to ensure the right of any Government to starve
people, deprive them of lifesaving medicine, bomb hospitals or commit any other
human rights abuses against citizens.
Others on the Council may argue, as they have in the past, that we should rely
more on cross-line assistance to deliver aid to people in Syria — claiming it is more
efficient. But as we have seen, relying more on cross-line assistance has resulted in
less aid — not more — getting to the Syrian people.
The failure to authorize border crossings is clearly not in the interests of
the Syrian people. It is not what is recommended by United Nations experts or
humanitarian experts, and it has nothing to do with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. As Secretary-General Guterres
has said, “Intensified cross-line and cross-border aid deliveries are essential” to
reach all Syrians in need.
It is also not in the interests of the Syrian people to pressure Syrian refugees
to return to Syria, including to regime-held areas, where many fear they will be
10/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

arbitrarily detained, tortured or even killed by Al-Assad’s security forces in
retaliation for fleeing. We agree with the United Nations that refugee returns must
be voluntary and well informed and should ensure the safety and dignity of the
people involved, or else they should not happen.
The current approach is unjustified, ineffective and indefensible. It is directly
resulting in the increased suffering of the Syrian people.
Let me propose a different approach: let us reauthorize both border crossings
that have been closed and reauthorize the one that remains open. Let us give ourselves
more pathways, rather than fewer pathways, to deliver food and medicine to the
Syrian people. Let us commit to using whatever pathway is the safest, quickest way
to reach people who are going hungry and dying for need of medicine. And let us not
pressure Syrian refugees to return until they feel that they can do so in safety and
in dignity.
Let us ask a simple question that will guide our decision on reauthorizing
cross-border crossings and on all questions of delivering aid to people in Syria: what
will do the most to reduce the suffering of Syrian children, women and men?
If we ask that question, the work before the Council is simple: reauthorize
the crossings, stop enabling the obstruction of aid and allow humanitarians and
humanitarian aid unhindered access so that they can reach Syrians in need wherever
they are, as quickly as possible.
Unhindered access to Syrians is more important than ever — not only because
of the growing humanitarian crisis, but also because of the threat posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
All members of the Council has witnessed in their own country the devastating
impact of the pandemic — the lives it takes and how it ravages livelihoods and
economies. Syria today provides the ideal conditions for the virus to spread. Social
distancing is impossible when one is jostling for a spot in a crowded bread line.
Many Syrians do not even have a reliable supply of clean water and soap to wash
their hands. There is approximately one Syrian doctor for every 10,000 civilians
in Syria. The hospitals that remain are still being attacked by the regime and its
backers, as we saw with the Al-Atarib hospital.
Already doctors, nurses and health workers in Syria are getting sick and dying
at alarming rates due to COVID-19; that is only going to get worse. And perhaps
none in Syria are more vulnerable than the thousands who are being unjustifiably
detained in the regime’s inhumane prisons — many for daring to speak out against
its atrocities — and the 6.7 million Syrians who have been internally displaced by
the ongoing conflict.
The Security Council takes up so many challenges that are complicated. This
is not one of them. The lives of people in Syria depend on getting urgent help. We
have to do everything in our power to create ways for that aid to get to them — to
open pathways, not to close them.
The members of the Council have a job to do: reauthorize all three border
crossings for humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people; stop taking part in,
or making excuses for, attacks that close these pathways; and stop targeting
humanitarian aid workers and the Syrian civilians they are trying to help. Stop
making humanitarian assistance, on which millions of Syrians’ lives depends, a
political issue, waiting in hope for the Security Council, waiting in hope for the
Security Council, waiting in hope for the Security Council.
Let us end the wait. Let us take action. Let us help people in Syria.

21-0441311/44

S/2021/315

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Eva-Maria Liimets
I would like to thank the briefers for their valuable insights. I wish also to
extend my gratitude to the humanitarian workers on the front lines in Syria, who
continue to provide aid to millions of people.
This month we mark the tenth anniversary of the tragedy of the Syrian people.
Unfortunately, a decade after the start of peaceful protests, the war is far from over.
Estonia calls for a full, nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We condemn last week’s
strikes by the Syrian regime and Russia in north-west Syria, especially the attack on
a hospital near Aleppo; that is a serious violation of international humanitarian law.
Despite our attempts to provide relief to all people in need, the delivery of
humanitarian aid to northern Syria has been greatly disrupted. Last year’s vetoes
by Russia and China of the extension of cross-border aid resulted in a significant
reduction thereof to many areas.
The Syrian regime has not managed to facilitate cross-line aid. There is no
reliable agreement between humanitarian organizations and the authorities for
bringing the much-needed help to northern Syria.
Estonia joins other Security Council members in calling for the renewal
of cross-border aid this July. To achieve that, we extend our firm support to the
penholders, Norway and Ireland. That vital assistance must continue, especially
during the pandemic. Further limiting access would have catastrophic consequences
for millions of people, including children, in Syria.
The European Union’s restrictive measures do not in any way impede the
provision of humanitarian aid in Syria, especially food and medical supplies. These
sanctions target only those who have committed crimes against the Syrian people.
Sanctions will remain in place until a genuine political transition is firmly under
way in Syria, in line with Security Council resolutions.
The European Union, together with its member States, is the largest donor
of humanitarian aid to Syria and the region. Estonia has contributed financially
to humanitarian relief since the start of the crisis. Tomorrow, at the fifth Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, I will pledge additional
funding to alleviate the human suffering of the Syrian people.

12/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex VI
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland, Simon
Coveney, T.D.
I thank Secretary Blinken and thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to
be with you this morning. Your presence today at the helm of our meeting — and
the strength and clarity of your remarks — are welcome signs of the urgency that
the United States attaches to alleviating the plight of Syria’s long-suffering people.
Let me begin by aligning myself with the co-penholder statement delivered
on behalf of Ireland and Norway by Minister Søreide (annex VII). Our joint role
as humanitarian co-penholders reflects consistent support for the humanitarian
response in Syria during what is now more than a decade of conflict. Ours is a
shared commitment to ensuring that humanitarian assistance continues to reach all
people in need.
I would like to make two brief points this morning in my national capacity.
The first is to focus our attention on the devastating scale of need in Syria.
I want like others to thank our briefers — Mark Lowcock, Henrietta Fore and
in particular Dr. Amani Ballour — for their stark and unsparing accounts of the
terrible realities of life in Syria today, a full decade after this conflict began.
We are confronted in Syria with a humanitarian crisis that continues to be
truly staggering in scale and severity.
We know the cold, hard facts; we hear them every month. The situation is
worsening. The Secretary-General tells us that humanitarian needs have increased
by one fifth in the last year alone. History will judge the Council so harshly for
failing, after a full decade, to protect the Syrian people from mindless war, violence
and utter misery. Women, children, hospitals, schools — whole cities in rubble. And
even now, we are unable to fully deliver basic humanitarian assistance to children in
tents starving without support or even their basic needs being met.
We collectively around this table have a duty to act — even 10 years late. The
Council must ensure that humanitarian actors can carry out their work safely.
My second point is to amplify what we have heard clearly from the SecretaryGeneral — and from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, once
again today — that in order to meet the significant humanitarian needs on the ground,
intensified cross-line and cross-border deliveries are both essential. That includes
the continued provision of United Nations support through the border crossing in
the north-west.
I visited the Bab al-Hawa crossing a number of weeks ago and saw firsthand the United Nations operation, which provides a vital lifeline to more than 3
million people in north-west Syria. While there I met with Syrian and international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies working in northwest Syria. Their first-hand accounts brought home to me again the sheer human
misery — and the waste of human potential — that results from this conflict.
I also met with the head of the United Nations monitoring mission and was
very impressed by the thorough nature of the monitoring and oversight at the transshipment hub. The ability to confirm the humanitarian nature of consignments, which,
of course, is important — and to provide thorough supervision and inspection — is
an essential part of the overall United Nations operation there.
All of the evidence that we have before us tells us clearly that the Council
needs to renew the mandate for this crossing before it expires in July. In truth,
21-0441313/44

S/2021/315

we need more crossings, more than just one, but at an absolute minimum we must
maintain what is currently there.
Ireland believes in the efforts of the United Nations to find a political solution
to the conflict in Syria, and we will work to support that. Only a sustainable political
solution can end the conflict and bring hope and stability to a country that has been
torn apart.
But in the meantime, many millions of Syrians are desperately in need of
humanitarian assistance, and they are relying on us to provide answers and support.
Let us not make them wait any longer.
The Council must not fail — any more than it already has — in our collective
responsibility to the Syrian people.

14/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex VII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Ine
Eriksen Søreide, on behalf of Ireland and Norway
I make this statement on behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian
file, Ireland and Norway. We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mark Lowcock; Executive Director Henrietta Fore; and Dr.
Amani Ballour. We thank Dr. Ballour for his courage over many challenging years,
and we thank him for sharing his powerful story with us here today.
This month we mark 10 years of conflict in Syria, a decade of loss and
suffering — it is hard to comprehend. The cost to the people of Syria has been
staggering. This morning I spoke with International Committee of the Red Cross
President Peter Maurer, who has just returned from that country. He conveyed
some sense of the hopelessness of a country facing possibly its worst humanitarian
situation yet. The Council and the international community have, sadly, failed to
protect civilians from the nightmare of this terrible conflict. At the same time,
we have witnessed one of the largest humanitarian responses that the world has
ever seen.
Tomorrow the United Nations and the European Union will host the fifth
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region.
The conference will again reaffirm the international community’s
extraordinary support for and solidarity with the people of Syria. However, the
reality is that despite all efforts, overall humanitarian needs continue to increase
and are now greater than at any previous point during the conflict. Today, more than
13 million Syrians are in need of humanitarian assistance. That includes 5 million
children, who have never known anything but conflict.
Violence continues to claim civilian lives in Syria. Last week an artillery shell
attack on a hospital in Al-Atarib, in Aleppo, killed at least six people, including a
10-year-old boy. More than a dozen civilians were injured, including five medical
staff. On the same day, there were multiple air strikes near Bab al-Hawa on the
Syria-Turkey border, where life-saving United Nations cross-border humanitarian
deliveries take place. Indeed, 24 trucks used for the transport of humanitarian
supplies were destroyed or damaged.
Furthermore, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), including vehicle-borne
IEDs and explosive remnants of war, are still causing numerous civilian casualties.
We support the Secretary-General’s Independent Senior Advisory Panel on
humanitarian deconfliction in the Syrian Arab Republic in its efforts to strengthen
the deconfliction mechanism.
We would also like to echo the Secretary-General’s statement that direct
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure, including medical units such as
hospitals, are strictly prohibited under international humanitarian law. The fragile
ceasefire that has broadly held in parts of Syria over the past few years has not
provided peace for those civilians or their loved ones. There is a need for a lasting,
nationwide ceasefire.
The accelerating depreciation of the Syrian pound continues to spur concerns
over additional food price increases and a subsequent further deterioration of the
food security situation. Indicators across Syria show a sustained deterioration over
the first two months of 2021. There is now a very real prospect of hunger in parts
of Syria.
As the Secretary-General forcefully argued before the Council earlier this
month (see S/2021/250), if you do not feed people, you feed conflict. International
21-0441315/44

S/2021/315

humanitarian law, reinforced by unanimously adopted Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2417 (2018), prohibits parties to a conflict from depriving
civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including food, crops, livestock
and water installations. Humanitarian access must be unimpeded, and the starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare is prohibited.
We, the international community, pledged to prevent a lost generation in
Syria. Syrian children, however, have largely not been able to realize their right to
an education and to a childhood. Two and a half million children are out of school;
their future is uncertain. Too many schools have been damaged or destroyed, used
as shelter for displaced families or used for military purposes. Many children have
left school to help their families survive. This is the generation that will one day be
tasked with rebuilding the country.
To address these needs, all the strategic objectives of the humanitarian response
plan must be fulfilled. Life-saving and life-sustaining humanitarian assistance is
essential. Humanitarian resilience activities are needed, such as transport of water
and protection of water sources, and these must be carried out in full accordance
with humanitarian principles and based solely on need.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation continues to be unpredictable.
The anticipated first delivery of vaccines through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility will be a step forward in our joint efforts to combat the pandemic.
We reiterate the Council’s repeated demands that all parties allow unimpeded
humanitarian access and uphold ceasefires to enable medical humanitarian teams to
safely roll-out COVID-19 vaccinations to those who need it the most.
We are very concerned by the Secretary-General’s report that parties to the
conflict continue to target humanitarian and health-care personnel and services. We
therefore also call on all parties to the conflict to respect international humanitarian
law. Health workers are not a target.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners need rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all of Syria. As the Secretary-General recently
stated, and as we have heard Under-Secretary-General Lowcock reiterate today,
greater access is needed. As long as the situation on the ground is as it is, intensified
cross-line and cross-border deliveries are essential to reach everyone in need
everywhere, including for the purpose of COVID-19 vaccination. Meeting the
humanitarian needs of the 4 million civilians in north-western Syria requires the
continued provision of United Nations support through the border crossing at Bab
Al-Hawa. This cross-border access is essential to reduce hunger, ensure access to
health care and implement efforts to contain COVID 19. Without this life-saving
humanitarian assistance, lives will be lost.
We fully support the United Nations efforts to put in place a cross-line support
mission to north-western Syria, and we call on all parties to facilitate this without
further delay. Cross-line operations providing aid across the front line in Idlib can be
a supplement to cross-border operations. However, in the light of the overwhelming
humanitarian needs, such cross-line missions cannot be expected to supplant the
cross-border operation at Bab Al-Hawa. There is currently no viable way to replace
the 4,369 trucks that crossed the border bringing life-saving support over the past
eight months. We need all modalities for humanitarian assistance to reach those
in need.
Before concluding, let me also add a brief note in my national capacity.
Tomorrow at the Brussels conference, Norway will pledge a further $190
million in support to Syria and the region this year, reaffirming our position as one
of the largest donors to the international response.
16/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

In conclusion, when speaking to partners on the ground they have one message
to convey: the Syrian people need hope for a better future. For a decade, Syrian
children, mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters have borne the brunt of the failure
to end the conflict. They continue to experience first-hand the suffering caused by
years of protracted conflict and resulting humanitarian emergencies, compounded
by impeded access for humanitarian aid.
We give our full support to the United Nations-led efforts to find a political
solution. We know that progress on the political track is the key to improving the
situation on the ground. The Council must exercise its responsibility to do its utmost
to bring the suffering of the Syrian people to an end.

21-0441317/44

S/2021/315

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Immigration and
Tunisians Abroad of Tunisia, Othman Jerandi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Antony Blinken,
Secretary of State of the United States of America, on the successful steering by the
United States of the meetings of the Security Council during its Council presidency
this month. I also wish to express our appreciation for his Government’s initiative
to convene this high-level meeting, in view of the importance of the humanitarian
dimension and its centrality to addressing various crises.
I would also like to thank Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, for their valuable briefings
on the latest developments in the humanitarian situation in Syria. I also thank the
representative of the Al Amal Fund for her briefing, and I welcome the convening of
the donor conference for Syria, which began today in Brussels.
The information we heard in today’s briefing confirms that the humanitarian
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate and underscores the magnitude of the
tragedy that the Syrian people are enduring, especially vulnerable groups, namely,
women, children, older persons and persons with special needs.
The decade-long crisis has depleted the Syrian people of its capabilities.
Millions of Syrians are at risk of food insecurity and famine, in the face of the collapse
of the economy, the depreciation of Syrian currency and the resulting unprecedented
price hikes, all of which have diminished purchasing power to procure even the most
basic items.
Millions of displaced persons have fled the machinery of violence only to find
themselves vulnerable to all kinds of exploitation, trafficking and violations, and
90 per cent of Syrian children are now in dire need of supervision and immediate
humanitarian assistance.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has exacerbated the Syrian
people’s suffering, especially in the light of the deterioration of health services and
the record-breaking rise in the price of medications — if they are available to begin
with — thereby doubling the number of Syrians who need emergency assistance just
to survive.
While it appreciates the tremendous efforts of all humanitarian organizations
and specialized agencies to alleviate the Syrian people’s suffering, as well as the
efforts of neighbouring host countries, Tunisia urges the international community to
redouble relief efforts in order to meet the Syrian people’s urgent and growing needs,
including by mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Against that backdrop, there is a need to work towards the adoption of an
action plan that is based on the following priorities.
First, a comprehensive ceasefire and cessation of hostilities in all areas of
Syria must be observed in response to the call by the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy and in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2532 (2020). In that regard, I am deeply concerned at the
military escalation, the recent resumption of violence in north-west Syria and the
resulting loss of life and extensive damage to civilian facilities. The persistence of
hostilities will not help to reach a political solution, and neither will it alleviate the
18/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

humanitarian crisis or contain the repercussions of COVID-19. All it will accomplish
will be to enable terrorist groups to return and regroup, thereby undermining efforts
to fight them.
Secondly, it is important to establish an integrated, cross-border, cross-line
multimodal system in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance is granted access
and is delivered to those in need in an impartial and continuous manner, in accordance
with international law and international humanitarian law. We therefore call on all
parties to facilitate rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas of Syria
and to ensure the safety of humanitarian relief and medical workers. We note with
satisfaction the Syrian Government’s constructive cooperation with United Nations
humanitarian missions working in that vital area.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates that the only way to end the Syrian people’s
suffering, address various factors and areas of vulnerability and isolate terrorist
groups is to reach a comprehensive political solution in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and the aspirations of Syrians. Such a solution would bolster their
resilience and help them to rebuild and move towards a future that is unifying and
inclusive of all Syrians, thereby bringing greater stability to the entire region.

21-0441319/44

S/2021/315

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Vershinin
[Original: Russian]
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their reports.
On the whole, we share the alarming estimates of the humanitarian and
socioeconomic situation in Syria as expressed by representatives of the United
Nations and other international organizations. Today the overwhelming majority
of Syrians — over 90 percent — are living below the poverty line; 60 percent of
them do not get enough food and 2 million children have no access to education.
Paradoxically, the living standards in Syria have substantially deteriorated over
the last year while violence was decreased considerably. Indicatively, the worst
situation is taking shape in the regions in the north-west, north and north-east, which
Damascus does not control. Let me remind you that responsibility for these regions
rests with the de facto occupying countries and local authorities there.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams and Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams terrorists
who control Idlib and have increased their activities in the trans-Euphrates region
remain a serious challenge for Syria. According to resolutions from the international
community, the irreconcilable struggle against them must continue. I would like to
emphasise again at this point that the actions by Syrian Government forces, with
support from the Russian military, are well-balanced and they consider the need
to ensure the safety of local civilians. In the meantime, attempts by the pseudo
humanitarians from the White Helmets to exonerate militant groups and present
them as armed opposition are unacceptable and merit condemnation.
The alarming deterioration of the situation in Syria compels the leaders of
the relevant international organizations on the ground to demand not only urgent
humanitarian aid that covers only the basic needs of the Syrian people but also to
implement projects for the early recovery and support of the population. In response,
the most responsible members of the international community, primarily the United
States and Europe, are saying that the Syrians will not receive anything for recovery
without political changes in the country. Washington and Brussels have reacted to the
appeal from the Secretary-General to reduce and lift the unilateral sanctions during
the coronavirus pandemic with unprecedented increases in the unlawful restrictions
adopted in circumvention of the Security Council, including the enforcement of the
notorious Caesar Act in June 2020.
The declared “humanitarian withdrawals” now that Syria is suffering from
a total shortage of bread, fuel, spare parts, medications and medical equipment
are not applied either. This affects not only ordinary Syrians but also specialized
United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations. In the meantime, it
is reported that United States convoys take oil and grain from Syria to Iraq every
day. According to information available on 23 March, 300 petrol trucks and over 200
grain trucks crossed the border from Syria to Iraq since the beginning of the month.
So it appears that, as the Syrians suffer from an acute shortage of basic products,
including bread and petrol, Syria’s natural resources are being smuggled in a big
way from the United States-controlled trans-Euphrates area. At the same time, the
country is being stifled economically by unilateral sanctions that are nothing more
than a form of collective punishment.
That said, now that a little less than three and half months remain before the
expiration of resolution 2533 (2020), on cross-border humanitarian aid, debates have
20/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

begun to the effect that this approach has no alternative. Indicatively, this issue
is not raised in the Security Council even while this unlawful cross-border traffic
continues, while at the same time a special resolution is required for the delivery
of humanitarian aid. It is also noteworthy that the Security Council is paying much
less attention to serious humanitarian problems in other countries — Yemen, Libya
and Venezuela.
Under resolution 2355 (2020), Bab Al-Hawa is the only border crossing that is
indicated in the cross-border mechanism for the Idlib de-escalation zone. Since July
2020, when this resolution was adopted, the crossing capacity there was increased
significantly. According to our United Nations colleagues, up to 1,000 vehicles pass
through it every month. But despite this, the humanitarian situation in the north-west
of Syria is going from bad to worse.
At the same time, a joint United Nations/International Committee of the Red
Cross/Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy has yet to cross the contact line, even though
this was agreed upon with Damascus in April 2020. From one briefing to another, we
are hearing explanations on the need to receive consent from certain parties in Idlib
on the delivery of urgent humanitarian aid. Apparently, these are the same parties
that allow similar convoys to cross as part of transborder commodity shipments. If we
recall that the Idlib de-escalation zone is controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams and
Hurras Al-Din, which are listed as terrorist groups by the United Nations, it is clearer
what parties are being referred to. In addition, the same militants are preventing the
free exit of civilians from Idlib through the special humanitarian corridors that were
opened for this purpose with the assistance of the Russian military — in the villages
of Abou Azzeidin, Miznaz and Al-Tarnaba.
I will give one example. On March 11, when humanitarian aid was sent to the
village of Al-Rami, the militants deprived civilians of food products, which led to
an armed clash with about 10 victims. This is further evidence that this aid is not
reaching its intended recipients but rather is taken by the terrorists who demand
payment for humanitarian deliveries and who cruelly harass civilians. In fact, the
militants are using Syrian civilians as hostages to get humanitarian aid through a
non-transparent mechanism. The United Nations is unable to establish proper control
over this for lack of access to north-west of Syria.
A similar situation has taken shape in the Rukban camp, in the United Statesoccupied 55 kilometre zone near Al-Tanf, in the south of Syria. By Washington’s
strange logic, its residents are supposed to receive aid from Damascus rather than
across the border with Iraq on the most direct and fastest route that is used to send
supplies to the American garrison.
The regular European Union conference in Brussels on humanitarian aid for
Syria was mentioned here. As has become common, the organizers did not invite
the Government of Syria, a United Nations Member, to attend. How can the future
of the country be discussed without its lawful authorities that, according to United
Nations representatives in Damascus, promptly provide all the necessary permits for
requested international humanitarian aid?
This is the overt politicization of strictly humanitarian issues, specifically
discrimination against the Damascus-controlled regions when distributing
humanitarian aid; refusal to facilitate the country’s recovery and the return of
refugees; the toughening of sanctions during the coronavirus disease pandemic; and
the desire to maintain a cross-border mechanism, which violates the standards of
international humanitarian law and General Assembly resolution 46/182. All this
is being done to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria for
political reasons due to displeasure with the country’s leadership. In this context, the
continuing violation by some Western countries of the spirit and letter of resolution
21-0441321/44

S/2021/315

2254 (2015) is regrettable and must be denounced. This must be done on the basis
of the resolution’s second preambular paragraph, whereby United Nations members
reaffirm their
“strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations”.

Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
I cannot fail to react to the words of my British colleague regarding the
“White Helmets”.
We believe that our Western and British partners continue to justify the
pseudo-humanitarians from the “White Helmets” with a persistence that deserves a
better cause. This practice continues despite the increasing evidence of the “White
Helmets” merging with terrorists. Also, there is growing evidence that the videos
that they have produced and on which the majority of Western allegations against
Damascus are based have been staged.
We have denounced those fakes, shared relevant materials and hosted press
briefings more than once. However, you would rather ignore all this, because the truth
is too inconvenient and bitter. What kind of characters are the people who pretend to
be humanitarian workers from the “White Helmets”? We can take the following fact
for an answer — many of them, having fled abroad once the major part of the Syrian
territory was liberated, were not adopted by their Western sponsors, despite all their
pleas, because their connection to terrorists was far too obvious.
We understand your urge to justify yourselves to the British taxpayers for the
squandering of funds allocated to support the alleged Syrian opposition. I am very
sorry for you. This is a very uneasy business, especially in light of the increasing
number of questions that have surfaced regarding the sponsor of the “White Helmets”,
Mr. Le Mesurier of the British secret service, and his mysterious death. But all these
domestic public tasks should not be resolved at the expense of a Security Council
meeting. Such tricks do no credit to British diplomacy.

22/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English Chinese]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive Director Fore for
their briefings. I also listened carefully to the statement of the representative of civil
society.
The decade-long conflict in Syria has brought untold suffering to the country
and its people. Many issues arising from the current situation in Syria warrant deep
reflection. Facts have proved time and again that respect for national sovereignty and
territorial integrity is an international norm that must be upheld. A political solution
is the only viable way to address hotspot issues. Supporting the path of development
that is chosen by a people and that suits their national conditions is the fundamental
way. Regime change is not an option and will not work. Unilateral sanctions can
only aggravate the situation. External military intervention can only cause greater
disaster and have serious consequences.
In the current circumstances, the international community should adopt
a comprehensive approach, integrating the political, security, economic and
humanitarian aspects, so as to jointly promote the early achievement of peace,
security and development. Here, I wish to touch on the following points.
First, we must stay committed to the right direction of a political settlement
and support the Syrian people in independently deciding the future of the country.
China calls on all parties in Syria to cooperate with United Nations mediation in
jointly promoting progress in the work of the Constitutional Committee. The Syrian
political process should adhere to the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned principle. The
international community should firmly support the Syrian people in exploring the
path of development. The Constitutional Committee should remain independent and
free from external interference. The Astana process and related regional countries
can play a coordinating and facilitating role. We welcome the fact that relevant Arab
States are positively considering Syria’s return to the League of Arab States. This is
conducive to advancing the political process in Syria, which should be encouraged
and supported by the international community.
Secondly, we must fully leverage the leading role of the Syrian Government
so as to fundamentally improve the humanitarian situation on the ground. Given the
acute pandemic and food security issue in Syria, targeted relief assistance should
be provided with a focus on the humanitarian needs of women, children and other
vulnerable groups. Recently, through the bilateral channel, China provided Syria
with 150,000 doses of vaccines and 750 tons of rice as a first instalment, and we
will continue to contribute to alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Syria. China
welcomes the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access plan to provide vaccines to the
Syrian people. The Syrian Government is cooperating with the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and other partners in advancing the humanitarian
operations and shipping a large amount of medical supplies to the north-east through
cross-line delivery. China expresses its appreciation. The international community
should support the United Nations in opening the humanitarian delivery route from
Damascus to the north-west as soon as possible, which will gradually reduce Syria’s
reliance on the cross-border mechanism.
Thirdly, the unilateral sanctions and economic blockade should be lifted
immediately to help Syria restore normal order. With the economy in distress, the
prices of oil and other commodities in the country have doubled and the Syrian
21-0441323/44

S/2021/315

pound has depreciated by 99 per cent compared with the pre-war period. Relying
on aid alone cannot solve the problems faced by Syria. Achieving lasting peace
and economic and social recovery and development is the long-term solution. China
appreciates the action taken by the Syrian Government to assume its responsibility
to advance agricultural reforms and promote trade cooperation.
At the same time, it must be noted that unilateral coercive measures and
the lack of reconstruction assistance have become the main obstacles to Syria’s
economic recovery. The lifting of unilateral coercive measures is a call for
justice, and denying the serious harm caused by such measures is nothing but selfdeception. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should heed
the appeals of several Security Council members and the wider membership and the
call of the Secretary-General, comprehensively assess the humanitarian impact of
unilateral coercive measures and submit a report to the Council. China calls on the
international community to extend a helping hand to Syria to rebuild infrastructure
and safeguard people’s livelihood. Relevant assistance should follow the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, and cannot be linked to the
political process.
Fourthly, foreign occupation must be stopped and terrorism inside Syria must
be eradicated. China supports the efforts of the Syrian Government to safeguard
its national sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. We oppose
intentions and actions that endanger Syria’s national security and divide Syria’s
territory. The Charter of the United Nations contains clear provisions concerning the
exercise of the right to self-defence, which cannot be misinterpreted, abused or used
as an excuse for excessive force entrenched in Syria. Terrorist groups in Syria listed
by the Council can stir up chaos at any moment, threatening the security and stability
of the country and even the entire region. The international community must remain
vigilant, strengthen cooperation and resolutely combat terrorism in accordance with
international law and Council resolutions. Countless facts have proven that, on the
question of counter-terrorism, politicization and double standards benefit no one and
can cause endless harm.
An early solution to the Syrian issue is the ardent hope of the Syrians and in
the interest of regional countries and the international community at large. China
wholeheartedly hopes that Syria can emerge from the gloom of war and restore
peace and tranquillity as soon as possible. We will continue to play a constructive
role in this respect.

24/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Riviere
[Original: French]
It is an honour to see you presiding over this Council, Sir, and I would like to
thank the United States presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
I also thank Mr. Lowcock, Ms. Fore and Dr. Ballour for their briefings.
The Syrian people continue to pay the price for this conflict every day.
Hundreds of thousands of people have lost their lives, more than 13 million Syrians
are in need of humanitarian aid, 90 per cent of the population live below the poverty
line, half are displaced or refugees, and most Syrian children have known nothing
but war.
Ten years after the start of this tragedy, the conflict is far from over. There
is an urgent need to put in place an immediate cessation of hostilities under United
Nations supervision, as well as a humanitarian pause, in accordance with resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2254 (2015).
The strikes near the Bab Al-Hawa crossing-point are of great concern.
France has strongly condemned the attack on Al-Atarib hospital, in the north-west.
We cannot accept these intimidating messages. Even wars have rules. Attacking a
hospital is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and a war crime.
The coordinates of that hospital had been communicated to all parties as part of the
deconfliction mechanism. We call for all light to be shed on this heinous act. France
will continue to give its full support to the mechanisms to combat impunity.
International humanitarian law must be strictly observed by all — not only
the protection of civilians but also full humanitarian access. The needs continue
to grow in a context marked by food insecurity and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
The systematic blocking of aid by the regime shows that there is no alternative
to the cross-border mechanism. Let us be clear — Damascus is not providing
sufficient and timely permits to meet the needs of the population in areas under its
control, let alone in those beyond its control. This blackmail is unacceptable. The
announced opening of crossings inside the country is far from sufficient. Cross-line
aid delivery remains marginal and can in no way serve as a pretext for calling into
question the cross-border aid mechanism.
France is resolved to see this mechanism renewed wherever it saves lives,
in accordance with the Secretary-General’s appeal. This is also essential to allow
equitable access to the COVID-19 vaccine.
The current donors’ conference is a key milestone. France and the European
Union are there. Since 2011, more than €24 billion have been mobilized by the
European Union and its member States in response to this crisis.
Without a comprehensive political solution, the position of France and the
European Union on normalization, reconstruction and sanctions will remain
unchanged. A political solution also requires justice, access to aid and the restoration
of rights.
Finally, the instrumentalization of the question of sanctions in the context of
the pandemic in order to obfuscate the responsibility of the regime is not fooling
anyone. European sanctions are targeted; they target individuals and entities that
participate in repression and benefit from the fallout from the conflict. They provide
solid arrangements to preserve the delivery of humanitarian and medical aid.
21-0441325/44

S/2021/315

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr.
Antony Blinken, for convening this timely meeting on Syria today. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I also thank UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore and Dr.
Amani Ballour, Founder of the Al Amal Fund, for their respective briefings.
Today’s meeting is yet another reminder to the Council of the grim
humanitarian situation in Syria. The decade-long conflict has had a devastating
effect on the people of Syria. We are deeply concerned by the alarming statistics.
An estimated half-million people have died, millions have been displaced, both
internally and externally, the health infrastructure has collapsed, and children have
been deprived of basic education. Women, children and youth especially have been
deeply impacted. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further aggravated the
humanitarian situation.
Syria’s economy has suffered multiple shocks over the past decade. The
substantial depreciation of the Syrian pound, which has lost more than three-quarters
of its value over the past year alone, has led to spiralling inflation and dwindling
purchasing power for the average Syrian household.
The last decade has largely been lost for the Syrians, particularly for the
children and youth, who have not seen anything but violence and conflict since
2011. This suffering should certainly move Council members. The Council needs to
introspect about the cost of its actions and inaction. There is an urgent need to build
consensus on the humanitarian situation and to collectively work to ameliorate the
suffering of the people in Syria. We cannot afford to be unmoved.
Keeping in mind the scale, severity and complexity of humanitarian needs,
those who advocate linking humanitarian assistance to the political track should
revisit the matter immediately. The politicization of the humanitarian track does not
help anyone, least of all the millions of suffering Syrians. What we need immediately
is an engagement that is both consistent with Syrian independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty and that addresses the urgency of the humanitarian issues
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
At the same time, concrete steps need to be taken to address hurdles that
are obstructing the functioning of both cross-border and cross-line operations, in
particular delays in granting requisite approvals to humanitarian aid convoys.
The recent flare-up of hostilities in north-western Syria on 21 March reminds
us again of the serious impediments to our efforts. India strongly condemns the attack
on the surgical hospital in Al-Atarib that resulted in the killing of innocent civilians.
India has consistently underlined the need to protect health and humanitarian
workers. We have equally underlined that we cannot allow terrorists to take any
further advantage of the situation and that the Council should speak in one voice
on terrorism. Let us not lose sight of the need to resolutely combat terrorists and
terrorist groups.
We welcome the hosting of the fifth Brussels Donors Conference today and
tomorrow, 29 and 30 March, and remain convinced that efforts towards improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria will positively impact the political track as well.
We need to engage on Syrian reconstruction as well.
For our part, as we mentioned earlier, India has already extended immediate
medical assistance and food assistance to Syria recently, in addition to its development
26/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

cooperation projects, including $265 million in soft loans and substantial human
resources development initiatives under our technical cooperation programme. Our
fitment camp for the artificial limb well known as the Jaipur Foot — manufactured
by the Jaipur-based Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti organization in
India — which was conducted in Damascus, benefited over 500 Syrians affected by
the conflict. We undertook the Jaipur Foot initiative under the rubric of “India For
Humanity”. We certainly need humanity now more than ever in the humanitarian
crisis facing Syria.

21-0441327/44

S/2021/315

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on a successful stewardship of the
Security Council this month.
I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Ms. Henrietta Fore and Dr. Amani Ballour for
their briefings.
This month marks the tenth anniversary of the grim and protracted conflict in
Syria, which has resulted in a colossal refugee and internal displacement dilemma
and a humanitarian crisis of unimaginable proportions.
Syria, a country that once knew peace and prosperity, is facing the biggest
economic crisis with the depreciation of the value of the Syrian pound by 99 per
cent, as we have heard today. As we speak, about 60 per cent of the population
is food insecure. There has been an increase of over 200 per cent in the cost of
an average food basket in the past year that has made food unaffordable for the
average family.
In addition, a generation of children in Syria have been robbed of their
childhoods, as all they have ever known is conflict and violence. Many children have
to support their families by looking for food instead of going to school and dreaming
of a bright and hopeful future.
The drawn-out man-made humanitarian crisis in Syria, 10 years on, is simply
not acceptable to Kenya and should not be to this Council. The Council has a moral
obligation to engage on and act decisively to alleviate the protracted suffering. To
this end, I wish to underscore four points.
First, it is fundamental that the delivery of principled humanitarian assistance
be unimpeded and unhindered in order to reach the most people in critical need. Crossborder and cross-line assistance must be streamlined, strengthened and operationalized
in line with applicable commitments and international humanitarian law.
Secondly, civilians and humanitarian workers must be protected.
Humanitarian workers are targeted regularly by terrorists and armed groups,
including in the camps that host the most vulnerable, including the elderly, persons
with disabilities, women and children. Stemming attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including by terrorist groups, should be prioritized to make the
delivery of humanitarian aid possible.
Thirdly, it is important to begin placing emphasis on a resilience-based
development response to the crisis in Syria that includes the reconstruction of critical
infrastructure such as schools and hospitals and building social cohesion measures.
The exceptional resilience of the Syrian people has been overstretched, as they have
had to cope with conflict for far too long. We therefore see merit in the rebuilding
of this resilience through a gradual transition towards recovery and transformation.
Fourthly, the international community should redouble its efforts in the
provision of the much-needed humanitarian support. Kenya appreciates the countries
and institutions that have stood with the Syrian people by offering generous support.
We commend the European Union for convening its fifth international donor
conference for Syria in Brussels, which starts today, and hope for its success. We
also commend the ministers who have today made commitments to increasing their
aid to the Syrian people.
We all know that the only sustainable solution to the humanitarian crisis is a
political solution to the conflict in Syria. Regrettably, this conflict has drawn huge
external interest.
28/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Divergent foreign interests must not be allowed to paralyse the hopes of the
Syrian people for a bright conflict-free future. We urge foreign Powers, including
members of the Council, that have an interest in Syria to set aside their differences
and work together to facilitate the long-desired consensus towards a political solution
in an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process.
We remain convinced that the multilateral system, and in particular the Security
Council, must find ways to generate and facilitate consensus and collaborative
approaches towards the peace, reconciliation and dignity that the people of Syria
have for so long deserved and longed for. Now is the time to deliver. The people of
Syria and the world expect the Council and multilateralism to offer real solutions.
Kenya will continue to make this point at every turn.

21-0441329/44

S/2021/315

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, Executive Director
Henrietta Fore and Dr. Ballour for their briefings, and you, Secretary Blinken, for
convening us and for the successful presidency of the United States for the month of
March. I also welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran to this meeting.
As we have heard, this month marks a decade since the beginning of the
conflict in Syria — 10 years in which the suffering of the civilian population has
been a constant, starting with the large number of human lives lost, to the extent that
international organizations have noted the impossibility of keeping a record with
precise and exact figures. The duration of the conflict is reaching the sum of the two
world wars and has already seriously called into question the United Nations ability
to keep the peace.
We express our strong condemnation of the recent attacks in north-western
Syria, which impacted the operations of the Baba Al-Hawa border crossing, and we
also condemn the attack on the Al-Atarib hospital, in which seven civilians lost their
lives and more than a dozen people, including medical personnel, were injured.
Essential infrastructure for the civilian population, such as medical units,
must be protected at all times, and attacks on such facilities are strictly prohibited. In
addition to being serious violations of international humanitarian law, such attacks
constitute war crimes and cannot go unpunished. We join those who have said this,
but it is not idle to repeat that the violence has to stop and we have to open more
effective spaces for diplomacy.
The Council must comprehensively consider the humanitarian consequences
of the conflict. An example of this is the need to raise awareness of the impact that
the conflict has had on people’s physical and mental health. The harsh reality is
that human and material losses have also left deep, invisible traces on individuals.
A recent survey among young Syrians prepared by the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) provides alarming data: 73 per cent of the young people
interviewed experience depression and 54 per cent suffer anxiety, as well as other
types of mental health disorders. The young people surveyed indicate that access to
psychological and social support is one of their main needs. If we do not take action
now, we will lose an entire generation that will always be haunted by the ghosts of
this war.
The physical and mental health of children, especially those who have been
displaced by violence or who have greater difficulty accessing food or attending
school, is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of conflict. The effects on children’s
mental health will become more obvious in the longer term, but mental-health and
psychosocial-support services need to be incorporated into humanitarian responses
now. Following his recent visit to the Al-Hol camp, the President of the ICRC
estimated that this is possibly the worst child-protection crisis his organization has
ever faced, considering it a scandal that the international community allows this
situation to persist. We should prioritize Al-Hol as an emergency and seek solutions
that put the interests of children above all political considerations.
The assistance and services required by the Syrian population depend on
timely and unimpeded humanitarian access. To this end, the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing is vital to delivering necessary humanitarian assistance, including medical
30/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

supplies and medicines, to north-western Syria. Humanitarian operations at this
border crossing cannot be replaced by roads across conflict lines. We therefore
support the renewal of the authorization of this crossing at a minimum. Today’s
briefings by the representatives of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and UNICEF reaffirm this point. It is unacceptable that humanitarian
assistance becomes a hostage to the conflict.
It is equally important to improve the flow of humanitarian assistance.
Approval times must be reduced. In the current context of the pandemic and the
imminent distribution of coronavirus-disease vaccines, both the cross-border and
crossline mechanisms are essential.
We must act without further delay, so that the millions of Syrian children
under the age of 10, who have known no other reality than war, have a chance to
know what it means to live in peace. We are already 10 years in their debt. How much
longer are we going to make them wait?

21-0441331/44

S/2021/315

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Antony Blinken, Secretary
of State of the United States of America, for the excellent way in which his country,
through its Permanent Representative, has conducted the business of the Security
Council during this month of March.
On several occasions, the Council briefings on the humanitarian situation
have shown us how worrying the situation is. Today, again, the briefings that Mr.
Mark Lowcock and Ms. Henrietta Fore have made on the humanitarian situation in
Syria should push us to be more committed to finding urgent solutions. Ms. Amani
Ballour’s poignant plea simply calls for action.
Nearly a decade of war has thrown Syrians into an ever-worsening spiral of
despair and deprivation, and they are now facing unprecedented levels of hunger,
leaving millions extremely vulnerable. This has led to food insecurity, rising prices
for basic necessities and the deterioration of Syria’s socioeconomic situation, which
has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In this context of immense humanitarian need across Syria, my delegation
once again calls for greater cooperation between the parties concerned for the safe,
unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all those in
need in the country. In this regard, my delegation reiterates its strong support for
the cross-border and crossline mechanisms, which remain an essential life-saving
apparatus for millions of Syrians. It is therefore imperative that these mechanisms
continue to meet the immense humanitarian needs, in accordance with the principles
of international humanitarian law.
My delegation remains concerned about the millions of Syrians residing
in various camps and other informal settlements that do not have the means to
implement the necessary protective measures against COVID-19, in addition to the
other adversities that confront these people on a daily basis. This is no longer the
time to dither or retreat into geostrategic positions, but to agree on the imperative
need to save innocent human lives, including a whole generation of children that for
a decade has known only deprivation, lack of access to education and the trauma of
war. Through these children, it is the future of Syria that is being compromised if the
actors in the conflict and their supporters are not able to come to an agreement on
this crucial aspect of the crisis. We would also like to urge all parties to the conflict
to find a lasting solution for the Allouk water station and to ensure access to clean
water for hundreds of thousands of people, including displaced persons in the camps.
The Niger also remains concerned about the continuing hostilities in the
northern parts of Syria. We urge all parties to adhere to the provisions of the
ceasefire and previous agreements, including their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
For example, we condemn the recent spate of attacks in north-west Syria that have
resulted in injuries and loss of life. Similarly, the continued presence of foreign
forces — as well as external interference, especially in terms of support to these
armed groups — contributes to the exacerbation of tensions and hostilities and must
be stopped.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to reiterate that the call for a ceasefire
and the need for a common and collective effort aimed at dealing with the COVID-19
32/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

pandemic must not distract us from the fight against terrorism, especially since the
facts have shown that the terrorist groups that are ignoring the Secretary-General’s
call for a ceasefire are trying to take advantage of the current situation to regenerate
themselves and regain lost ground. As a Sahel country facing the same challenges in
the fight against terrorism, the Niger deplores and condemns their attitude.
In conclusion, as the Syrian people continue to face this terrible humanitarian
crisis, the ongoing conflict and the pandemic of COVID-19, we urge the international
community to continue the outpouring of solidarity towards the Syrian people who
have suffered so much. As Mark Lowcock said, aid to Syria must be stepped up now
more than ever, and we echo the Secretary-General’s call for the lifting or easing of
sanctions at this difficult time for the Syrian people, who are ultimately the victims of
these measures. The forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on the issue under
consideration should include an assessment of the impact of unilateral sanctions on
the living conditions of the Syrian people. Suffering and frustration breed despair,
which in turn fuels violence. Let us bring hope to Syria and help the Syrians rebuild
a country of reconciliation, peace, justice and prosperity. This is indeed possible.

21-0441333/44

S/2021/315

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, Ms. Henrietta
Fore and Ms. Amani Ballour for their informative briefings.
For a decade, the Syrian people have endured the perils of war and the resulting
effects of living through one of the worst humanitarian crises the world has ever
witnessed. The country’s dire situation is further exacerbated by an amalgamation of
factors, including severe socioeconomic decline, which has precipitated commodity
shortages and food insecurity, climate-related severe-weather events and the global
pandemic. The provision of timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
assistance, in coordination with the Syrian Government and in line with humanitarian
principles therefore remains imperative for the sake of human dignity. The crossborder mechanism continues to perform a critical role in this regard and must be
preserved and scaled up to adequately meet the steeply rising humanitarian needs
across the country. Further, assistance and access through the crossline modality
ought to be strengthened to complement the mechanism and fill the existing gaps.
Cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have continued to rise in Syria in
recent weeks. Those who reside in densely populated and overcrowded areas such
as internally displaced persons camps and other informal settlements, which lack
the means to implement necessary protective measures, are especially susceptible
to contracting the virus. Accordingly, the equitable and efficient distribution of
COVID-19 vaccines is an important component of the overall humanitarian response.
We recognize the vital role of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility in this regard by providing the first shipment of vaccines. It is our hope
that the rollout will begin soon to mitigate the public-health and economic impact of
the pandemic.
The protection of civilians and objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population must remain a priority. Insecurity persists, despite the ceasefire
in the north-west and the many appeals for an immediate nationwide cessation of
hostilities. We continue to be alarmed by the indiscriminate attacks on both civilians
and humanitarian actors. We firmly condemn these acts, which constitute serious
violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law,
and we reiterate that perpetrators must be held accountable to prevent impunity and
bolster confidence in justice.
Ten years of war have decimated Syria’s critical infrastructure, obstructing
the provision of health care, depriving hundreds of thousands of children of their
right to education and displacing millions — transforming them from ordinary
citizens into refugees and internally displaced persons. We renew our appeal to the
international community to contribute to the country’s reconstruction efforts so as
to support its long-term recovery for the benefit of the Syrian people.
We strongly urge all parties to prioritize and address the deteriorating security
situation and urgent health needs in displacement camps. Further, we emphasize the
importance of pursuing a sustainable solution to the frequent disruptions of the water
supply in the north-east. Access to a safe and reliable supply of water and sanitation
services is essential to preserving the health of the people, especially when we take
into account the pandemic.
Syria’s humanitarian situation will only continue to worsen, and stability
will be hindered in the absence of a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). The international community has
34/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

an obligation to help Syria and its people through positive and pragmatic action.
The politicization of the grave humanitarian situation must come to an end. This
requires the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures, which have deepened the
socioeconomic crisis and are incompatible with international law. They also impede
the movement of humanitarian aid despite the humanitarian exemptions. It further
requires a targeted and collaborative approach to counter-terrorism and the removal
of all unauthorized foreign forces present in Syria in violation of the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I close by reiterating the commitment of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
supporting Syria and its people so that they may emerge from the untold despair and
suffering created by this protracted conflict.

21-0441335/44

S/2021/315

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
Let me begin by welcoming the participation of the ministerial-level
representatives at today’s meeting. I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock,
Ms. Henrietta Fore and Ms. Amani Ballour for their briefings. I welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran.
This month marks the tenth anniversary of the conflict in Syria. Yet there
appears to be no possible end to the untold sufferings and losses of the Syrian people.
Our delegation notes with great concern the extremely desperate and worsening
humanitarian situation in the country, which is aggravated by the impact of economic
hardship and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is distressing that each and
every time the Council meets on this topic, we hear about the rising numbers, inter
alia, of people in need of assistance, people suffering from food insecurity, and
civilians and civilian objects being attacked.
Even though the past year has been the calmest period of the conflict,
instability has continued to affect the protection and livelihoods of civilians all over
the country. We take note of efforts by concerned parties to maintain the ceasefire
in north-western Syria. However, we note with concern the recent flare-up, which
reportedly has caused civilian casualties and destruction of civilian objects.
In every crisis, children, women and other vulnerable groups bear the brunt
of hardships. Half of the children in Syria are growing up without knowing the
meaning of peace. They are missing out on education and other basic services. They
cannot be allowed to miss out on their future.
To cope with the current situation, it is important to maintain safe, unimpeded
and sustained humanitarian access. It is encouraging that assistance continues to
reach people in need across all of the governorates. As the need remains paramount,
we urge all parties and the United Nations to enhance their coordination to ensure
timely delivery of humanitarian relief. Parties should facilitate the delivery of this
relief by swiftly granting approvals, especially in the light of the medical-supply
shortage in the north-east. We also call for early agreement and further cooperation
with the United Nations in an effort to establish crossline access into the north-west.
With regard to the humanitarian response, Viet Nam pays tribute to the
tremendous contributions of United Nations agencies, international partners and
donors, as well as all humanitarian workers on the ground. We note the various
efforts undertaken to improve the humanitarian response, including those within the
framework of the Brussels conferences. At the same time, we would like to stress the
importance of coordinated international efforts to achieve the desired result.
In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we reiterate the importance of assisting
Syria in its preparedness and response capability. We are delighted to see the plan
for vaccination through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility
and look forward to its implementation. Our delegation also supports the appeal
of the Secretary-General for the waiving of sanctions that hinder the humanitarian
response to the pandemic.
It goes without saying that humanitarian assistance will never be enough.
What we need is an “exit door” — a long-term and sustained solution to the protracted
crisis; otherwise, we will have to return to this place over and over again to hear
about the predicament of the Syrian people. The only way to find an exit is through a
political solution, and the only way to achieve that long-awaited political solution is
through the unity of the international community and respect for international law.
36/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

In this regard, the Security Council is expected to play a vital role in making
the peace process viable by promoting trust and dialogue and by sidelining division
and politicization. We will continue to work in this direction.
To conclude, my delegation would like to reiterate our strong advocacy of
a comprehensive and inclusive political solution, led and owned by the Syrians,
facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full
accordance with international law.

21-0441337/44

S/2021/315

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
We have heard recently from the Secretary-General and other United Nations
officials about the risk of hunger in Syria in 2021. This leaves no doubt about
the necessity and urgency of mobilizing international assistance to address this
critical challenge.
While providing food and other humanitarian assistance to the people in need
is necessary and must be pursued as a high priority, in the long run it cannot by itself
resolve the problem. However important, providing humanitarian assistance can in
no way substitute for fundamental measures that need to be taken in order to ensure
durable peace, security and stability in the country.
The first and foremost of such acts is ensuring Syria’s full sovereignty and
territorial integrity by uprooting all terrorists, withdrawing uninvited foreign forces,
ending the occupation and securing its borders.
Furthermore, necessary measures must be taken for the reconstruction of the
country’s critical infrastructure and further improving the conditions conducive for
the return of all refugees and internally displaced persons, as well as stimulating
further progress in the political process.
We cannot overemphasize that there is no military solution to this conflict.
It must be settled peacefully and in full conformity with international law. At the
same time, a political solution can neither be achieved in isolation or overnight nor
must progress in that domain be considered as a precondition for assisting in making
progress in other areas.
Politicizing humanitarian assistance and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons or imposing unilateral sanctions are hurtful, as they only prolong
both the crisis and grief of the Syrian people, who are already suffering seriously
from other hardships, particularly the coronavirus disease pandemic.
While 10 years of conflict have negatively impacted Syria’s economic
condition, the destructive effects of unilateral sanctions in further worsening the
economic situation of the country are self-explanatory. It has now become quite
obvious that certain countries have intended to achieve, through imposing sanctions,
the objectives that they have failed to gain by military means or political leverage. By
imposing sanctions, these countries are punishing the entire Syrian nation, adding
insult to the injury for the most vulnerable segments of the society.
No State shall use economic, political or any other type of measures, including
unilateral sanctions, to coerce another State. Weaponizing food and medicine and
endangering the food security of a nation are unjust and unacceptable, and the socalled humanitarian exemptions are not panaceas, as in practice they do not work
within the vast and sophisticated sanctions web.
As a tool for collective punishment of entire nations, unilateral sanctions are
flagrant violations of the purposes and principles of the United Nations and must
therefore be removed immediately.
We once again call for the mobilization of international assistance to address
the current humanitarian situation in Syria, while stressing that its long-term
solution is to work towards ending the conflict, ensuring Syria’s full sovereignty and
territorial integrity, removing unilateral sanctions and avoiding the politicization of
humanitarian issues such as reconstruction and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
38/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

In its turn, Iran is committed to a political resolution of this crisis and will
continue supporting a truly Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated
political process, as well as assisting the people and the Government of Syria to
restore the unity and territorial integrity of their country.

21-0441339/44

S/2021/315

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: English and Arabic]
Once again, some Member States are continuing to use the platform of the
Security Council to politicize humanitarian work in the Syrian Arab Republic and
relevant discussions and to promote a selective perspective of the humanitarian
situation there. These countries’ statements focused on what would serve their
goals, including their feverish efforts to extend and strengthen the cross-border
assistance mechanism. At the same time, they deliberately ignore the disastrous
effects of the unilateral coercive measures imposed by them on the Syrian people.
This makes clear that these countries do not aspire to genuine humanitarian work,
but rather to achieving political goals through the misuse and exploitation of the
humanitarian situation.
It would have been more useful for the delegations of those countries to seize
this high-level meeting to denounce their failed policies over the past 10 years and
to prioritize humanitarian considerations over their narrow interests. Would it not
have been more productive for the United States to announce the termination of
its occupation of Syrian territories, put an end to its support for separatist militias
and stop the plunder of Syrian wealth? Would it not have been more productive to
demand the Turkish regime to withdraw its military forces from Syrian territory and
stop its support for terrorist organizations? Would it not have been more productive
to speak with one voice against all those who deny Syrians access to their utmost
needed economic resources?
The positions of some countries, the United States being in the forefront,
to which we listened today do not in any way help to improve the humanitarian
situation in my country, Syria. Enshrining dictations by these countries, imposing
conditionality on reconstruction, ignoring all calls for the lifting of unilateral
coercive measures and obstructing the return of the displaced are all factors that do
not contribute to establishing an environment conducive to a political solution and
restoring security and stability to Syria.
We were looking for Mr. Lowcock's briefing today to be more balanced and
to indicate the significant efforts made by the Syrian Government to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid. We were waiting for it to refer to the disastrous effects
of the unlawful coercive measures on the Syrian people, and also to the targeting by
terrorist organizations, supported by the Turkish occupation, of two neighbourhoods
in the city of Aleppo with rocket-propelled grenades, which caused the death of two
civilians and the wounding of several others, including children.
The Syrian Government reaffirms that the centre of humanitarian work in
Syria is Damascus, the capital, and not any other city in neighbouring countries
or beyond. This is the simplest embodiment of the principle of the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is affirmed by all
relevant United Nations resolutions. This also means there is a need to engage in
constructive cooperation and effective coordination with the Syrian Government to
enhance humanitarian work and support the joint efforts of the Syrian Government
and its partners in providing humanitarian aid and delivering it to those who deserve
it, in order to achieve tangible qualitative improvement.
As for the cross-border assistance mechanism, the Syrian Government has
repeatedly expressed its serious concerns over it, especially with regard to its
violation of the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and
40/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

the parameters for humanitarian work established by General Assembly resolution
46/182. The Syrian Government — and based on its concern for the needs of the
Syrians on all its territories and the provision of aid to them — took the initiative
of strengthening the cross-line assistance mechanism to improve the humanitarian
situation, bearing in mind that the conditions that prevailed at the time of the adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014), on 14 July 2014, no longer exist. In this regard, I would like
to briefly point out a number of grave flaws that accompanied the implementation of
the cross-border assistance mechanism.
The so-called monitoring mechanism has shown over the past years the inability
of those in charge of it to guarantee verification and accuracy standards that ensure
due credibility and professionalism. Unfortunately, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) office in the Turkish city of Gaziantep does not
adhere to the work controls as mandated in the Charter of the United Nations, which
leads to its exploitation as a tool to serve the agendas of some countries.
The distribution mechanism represents the most dangerous aspect of this
process due to the lack of transparency and identification of the third parties or
partners that OCHA refers to in its reports. Add to that the experience of past years,
which has shown the terrorist organizations monopolizing the largest amount of
humanitarian aid that the United Nations drops at the borders, and using it to finance
their terrorist activities, gain loyalties and recruit new terrorists.
In addition to the above, this mechanism allowed the Turkish regime to
freely sponsor terrorist organizations and to move forward with its policies aimed
at changing the demographic character and imposing “Turkification” measures on
various aspects of life in that region, including the imposition of Turkish curricula
and the circulation of the Turkish currency.
Committed to delivering humanitarian aid to all Syrian regions, including
cross-line, the Syrian Government stresses the importance of the humanitarian
crossings that are opened in cooperation with Russian friends, including the one it
recently opened in Saraqib. However, the Syrian Government condemns the terrorist
groups preventing our people in Idlib from existing through these humanitarian
crossings and holding them as hostages and human shields. The Syrian Government
considers some countries’ intentional disregard of these practices, which represent
a violation of international humanitarian law, as an act of support for terrorist
organizations controlling Idlib.
It is reprehensible to hear the statements of some countries blaming the
Syrian Government for everything related to the human tragedy that its people are
undergoing. Today the world has come to realize that these statements are only
part of the campaign to mislead public opinion and draw its sympathy in order to
convince it that these countries have nothing to do with what befell Syria after 10
years of terrorist war against it. However, despite the extent of the disinformation
contained in these statements, they cannot convince anyone that these countries are
not responsible for bringing thousands of foreign terrorists to Syria.
What is worse is that these Governments now refuse to repatriate terrorists to
their countries of origin in order to be prosecuted for their crimes and to rehabilitate
and reintegrate their women and children. They want those who listen to their
statements to believe that the illegitimate unilateral coercive measures imposed by
these Governments against the Syrian people, the most recent of which is the so-called
“Caesar Act”, do not represent economic terrorism and collective punishment and
have nothing to do with the economic crisis that the Syrian people are experiencing.
They want us to believe that imposing conditionality on reconstruction does
not impede the provision of an environment conducive to the voluntary and dignified
21-0441341/44

S/2021/315

return of refugees and displaced persons to their areas, or that it may cause a new
refugee crisis. They want us to believe that the Brussels conference held today is a
forum for assisting Syrians, while it is just a useless parade due to the exclusion of
the Syrian Government and a platform to target the Syrian Government and tarnish
its image.
In conclusion, I stress that the discussions of the Security Council cannot
achieve progress through provocative statements and the use of inappropriate and
sometimes rude terms. Progress is possible only through open and constructive
dialogue based on the mutual respect among Member States, taking into account the
views of the countries concerned with the discussion.

42/44

21-04413

S/2021/315

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
I thank you, for convening this meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their insightful briefings. And
I salute Dr. Amani Ballour, who bravely saved countless lives in an underground
hospital in eastern Ghouta.
In March 2011, the Syrian regime detained and tortured demonstrators in
Dar’a. These young people had wanted to express their desire to live in a democratic
and free society. That was the beginning of Al-Assad’s horrific war against its
own people.
Ten years have passed. Since then we, the international community, have not
been able to bring an end to the violence and human rights violations in Syria. The
figures are appalling. More than 60 per cent of Syria’s pre-war population were
forced to flee their homes. More than a half million people died. Inside Syria, over
80 per cent of people are living in poverty. Eighty-six per cent of refugee children
do not want to return to Syria; they feel unsafe to go back. At least two aid workers
and eight medical personnel are killed every month. Fifty-six per cent of the Syrian
people are afraid to live near health facilities, because these are regularly targeted
by the Al-Assad regime and its supporters. These numbers only get worse. And the
Security Council holds meetings, one after another, to no avail.
My country is faced with all the security implications and humanitarian
consequences of the conflict in Syria. We have been hosting 4 million Syrians. We
have ensured that United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance reaches
millions of people in Syria. We set a red line in Idlib and protect 5 million vulnerable
people from Al-Assad and his backers.
Turkey is the only NATO country that engaged in hand to hand combat in Syria
with Da’esh. And we maintain our resolute fight against the terrorist organization
Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units and its separatist agenda, which
aims to establish totalitarian rule in north-east Syria.
The perpetrators of mass atrocities in Syria continue to target civilians and
civilian infrastructure. The barbaric attack on Atarib Hospital last week, a United
Nations-deconflicted facility, is the latest example of the war crimes taking place
in Syria. The perpetrators killed innocent civilians and destroyed 24 aid trucks and
relief items for more than 20,000 people. We strongly condemn these violations of
international humanitarian law. The perpetrators should be, and will be, exposed and
held accountable.
Today the humanitarian situation in Syria is worse than it was nine months
ago, when resolution 2533 (2020) was adopted. As it was stated before me, 13.4
million people are in humanitarian need. This is a 20 per cent increase from last
year. As part of the United Nations cross-border assistance, over 12,000 aid trucks
crossed into the north-west in 2020, including over 10,000 through Bab Al-Hawa.
Millions of people need vaccines against the coronavirus disease.
This human-made situation can be compared only to the most terrible crimes
of human history. We all remember the heartbreaking images of Syrians from six
years ago. They were fleeing for their lives. We could face another mass exodus
if the United Nations cross-border humanitarian operation is not renewed in July.
We do not have time to waste with discussions about cross-line access, which can
never meet the scale of cross-border operations. It is particularly futile to advocate
cross-line aid subject to the regime’s approval. Damascus itself tops the list in terms
21-0441343/44

S/2021/315

of humanitarian needs, with an additional half a million of its residents becoming
vulnerable compared to last year. Unilateral initiatives that do not have the consent
of the local population can only serve attempts to legitimize Al-Assad’s dictatorship.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock emphasized today, and as has been
highlighted by the Secretary-General on different occasions, the most scrutinized
system in the world has been put in place to monitor the United Nations operations
from Bab Al-Hawa. The lies that we heard today about Bab Al-Hawa are yet another
attempt to cover up the most unlawful and inhuman starvation campaigns that have
been conducted against Syrian people.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), in 2014, was one of the most
important signs of unity within the Security Council. It is time for all members of the
Council to prove that they really care about the urgent needs of the innocent people
of Syria and authorize the renewal of the United Nations cross-border mechanism.
The Syrian people have endured the darkest decade of our time. The current
humanitarian situation is a consequence of the Al-Assad regime’s fight against the
legitimate demands of the Syrian people — and we all know it.
While we await the political process to deliver in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), we need to respond urgently to the deepening humanitarian situation.
This is a fight between right and wrong. This is a matter of humanitarian principles,
and millions of human lives are at stake. We need real action now.
As to the statement made by the Syrian regime’s representative, I will repeat:
I do not consider him as my legitimate counterpart. His presence here is an affront
to the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the
regime, and therefore I will not honour his delusional remarks with a response.

44/44

21-04413
