S/PV.7530

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7530th meeting

Thursday, 8 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2015/667)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30429 (E)
*1530429*

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2015/667)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Jamaica,
Mexico, Peru and Uruguay to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/667, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to Spain in its capacity as
President of the Security Council and to all members of
the Council for convening today’s meeting to examine
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2015/667), issued on
31 August.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to take this opportunity
to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

2/33

08/10/2015

(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to express my special gratitude to all
the countries that have contributed troops and police
elements to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to all Member States that
are collaborating in the peacebuilding process in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
On 9 August, Haiti took the all-important step
of holding the first round of elections to renew
the executive, legislative and local leadership of
the country. On 27 September, after protracted
deliberations by the electoral tribunals on 203 contested
cases, the Provisional Electoral Council published the
results, according to which 2 of the contenders for the
20 Senate seats and 8 for the 119 seats in the Chamber
of Deputies won an outright victory. Twenty-five
electoral districts will require re-runs of the first round
for 6 Senate and 25 Chamber of Deputies seats because
of electoral violence or irregularities affecting the vote.
First- and second-ranked candidates will be competing
for 12 Senate and 86 Chamber of Deputies seats in the
second round run-offs on 25 October.
I am encouraged by the ongoing preparations of
the Haitians authorities, and I am confident that Haiti
is now moving resolutely towards the renewal of its
democratic institutions and the re-establishment of
institutional balance crucial for the consolidation of
democracy and stability.
Notwithstanding the efforts of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government and the Haitian
National Police (HNP), severe acts of violence and
some technical irregularities invalidated the 9 August
voting in 13 per cent of the country’s voting centres. In
that regard, I am encouraged by the actions taken by the
Provisional Electoral Council aimed at addressing those
shortcomings and at responding to recommendations
from political parties, candidates and observer
groups. These actions range from a swift response to
the violence that occurred on 9 August and a revived
interaction with political parties and candidates, which
is important for the transparency and inclusiveness
of the electoral process, to corrective measures
aimed at improving technical aspects of the electoral
operations. These include the timely publication of
voter lists, a reassessment of voting centres, a review
of the performance of the Provisional Electoral Council
staff, addressing the issue of party poll-watchers, and a
modification of the electoral calendar to simplify voting

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

by deferring the local Government vote from the second
to the third round on 27 December. To recapitulate,
therefore, the 25 October polls will include the firstround presidential, the second-round legislative and the
municipal vote, together with the re-runs for the first
round legislative vote in the constituencies affected on
9 August.
It is to be noted that, for the first time in the electoral
history of Haiti, the Provisional Electoral Council has
taken punitive action against instigators of electoral
violence. On 19 August, 16 candidates from 10 different
political parties were barred from further participation
in the elections following their involvement in acts
of electoral violence. Warnings were also issued to
17 political parties whose supporters were reported to
have instigated criminal acts and voter intimidation.
This has sent a clear signal to all contenders that the
use of force and electoral violence will not be tolerated.
I urge the judiciary to follow suit and take appropriate
legal action, where needed, to send a firm message to
all who contemplate the use of force to pursue their
goals, irrespective of their political affiliations, that
impunity is not an option.
In the wake of the continued consolidation of
MINUSTAH, these elections also serve as a test of
the capacity of the Haitian National Police to maintain
security during a challenging period. It is against that
background that I note that the security environment has
remained generally stable, more calm and less violent as
compared with previous electoral cycles. Though fewer
and short-lived, violent election-related protests remain
an element to be carefully monitored as we approach
the second round of the voting, in which the political
stakes will be higher. I note that commitment expressed
by the Haitian National Police to undertaking measures
to improve police performance in the upcoming round
with a view to contributing to a conducive electoral
climate. To that end, the Haitian National Police, with
the Provisional Electoral Council and supported by the
United Nations, is working in an integrated manner
to adjust logistics and security plans for the coming
rounds and is conducting operations in violence-prone
communes across the country ahead of the polls.
In parallel, work continues towards the
implementation of the HNP 2012-2016 development
plan, which is now in its fourth and final year. To build
on the achievement of the National Police and the current
level of security and stability obtained in a number of
departments, the United Nations is working towards

S/PV.7530

reshaping its assistance to acknowledge progress and
concentrate its action where criminality most affects the
main security indicators, such as homicides and gang
confrontations. I encourage Member States to provide
experts in administrative, technical and operational
support in the form of Government-provided personnel,
as well as specialized teams in key fields of policing,
with a view to creating longer-term post-MINUSTAH
partnerships among the Haitian National Police, donors
and other international partners.
While the organization of the 9 August polls bears
testimony to the increased capacity of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government of Haiti and the
Haitian National Police to assume greater responsibility
in leading the country’s democratic process, the
engagement of the United Nations system, including
MINUSTAH and its uniformed components, continues
to be required in support of operations, logistics and
security. Equally, while acknowledging the Haitian
Government’s substantial budgetary allocations in
support of the process — including as the largest donor to
the United Nations Development Programme-managed
basket fundamental — the financial contributions of
Haiti’s international partners continue to be critical to
the completion of the electoral cycle.
(spoke in French)
We believe, however, that this will be the last
election in which electoral assistance at the level of
that provided by the peacekeeping operation will be
necessary. Future elections in Haiti should be managed
by the Haitian authorities, with the targeted and limited
logistical and technical assistance of United Nations
agencies and international partners.
(spoke in English)
To allow for an orderly and sustainable transfer
of these and other activities currently undertaken
by MINUSTAH as part of a transition process to the
Haitian authorities and other partners, and mindful
of the tasks ahead of us to assist Haiti’s authorities in
completing the electoral cycle, the Secretary-General
has recommended the extension by one, possibly final
year of the MINUSTAH mandate at the current troop
and police levels. An integrated strategic assessment
mission will be deployed after the completion of the
electoral cycle and the installation of a new President
and new authorities to formulate recommendations for
the future presence of the United Nations in Haiti.

15-304293/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

In the meantime, MINUSTAH will concentrate
on specific areas, including good offices, police
development, the rule of law and human rights, while
intensifying work with the United Nations country
team to identify areas where the latter can strengthen
its engagement and joint programming can be
developed. A one-year extension will also afford the
new Administration a period of continued support to
allow for the consolidation of State authority and the
time necessary to articulate how best the country’s
institutions may be support by the United Nations in
the future. That is of prime importance to the orderly
and durable transition of the current peacekeeping
presence.
Haitian ownership of the future posture of United
Nations assistance is vital so that the Government
and society can build on the achievements of the past
11 years and further consolidate the stabilization gains
for the well-being of the Haitian people. The early
involvement of the new Administration in the transition
planning and decision-making process with respect to
the future United Nations presence will be as critical as
unity in the efforts and the vision of the international
community in support of a durable transition.
(spoke in Spanish)
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that it is
of the greatest important that the electoral cycle be
completed in accordance with the Constitution, that the
fiftieth legislature can take office on 11 January and
that the new President take office on 7 February 2016.
(spoke in French)
I would like to commend the commitment of the
Haitian political actors in these elections, in spite of the
challenges that the process has faced. Carrying out an
equitable, transparent and inclusive electoral process in
a climate of peace is a prerequisite for Haiti to continue
moving forward on the path towards stabilization,
democratic governance, strengthening the rule of law
and socioeconomic development. I urge all political
actors to continue making their contribution so that
these vital elections take place in a climate of calm
and mutual trust, allowing the greatest possible voter
participation. I call on all voters to exercise their right to
vote in peace in order to contribute to the consolidation
of Haiti as a more stable, democratic and prosperous
country.

4/33

08/10/2015

(spoke in English)
I call on all of Haiti’s international partners to
continue to support the country’s electoral process,
as well as its long-term stability and development,
following the installation of a new Government.
I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this transformative period. Allow
me also to pay tribute to our former Force Commander,
Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., who
passed on 30 August. On behalf of MINUSTAH and the
wider United Nations system in Haiti, I thank members
for their messages of condolence and for accompanying
the United Nations and the family of the former Force
Commander through this difficult moment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Honoré
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is the first time that I am taking the floor
in the Chamber this month, I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for its leadership and work during
its presidency of the Council in September. Similarly,
we congratulate Spain on its assumption of the Council
presidency in October. The Spanish delegation can
count on our full support in carrying out its important
duties.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her
briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement to
be made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We begin by remembering the late Force
Commander, Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy,
Jr., and we express our gratitude for the work he did.
We welcome the new Force Commander, Lieutenant
General Ajax Porto Pinheiro, who has my country’s
full support.
Haiti is at an important stage on its path to the
consolidation of stability and democracy. A positive
sign of this is the beginning of the electoral process
on 9 August. With regard to the electoral process, we
recognize the work done by Haitian institutions and
authorities, in particular the Provisional Electoral

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

Council, but we also believe it is necessary to
underscore the role played by the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security. We hope that the
difficulties encountered in this area are resolved in the
coming stages.
At a time when the transition from emergency
relief to development is being planned, we must not
forget that there are still humanitarian challenges. We
welcome the relocation of the majority of internally
displaced persons, but we are concerned by the end of
the funding for basic services and relocation subsidies
for those who remain. We are also concerned about the
food and health insecurity, and we hope that efforts
to erradicate cholera will continue. The support of
the international community must be strengthened,
particularly contributions to financing the call for
transition and the urgent humanitarian funding
appeal launched by the launched by the Humanitarian
Coordinator in Haiti in August.
The process of reconfiguring the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) must be
subject to the needs of peace of the country and the
region, and not to special interests. We must ensure
long-term progress and support Haiti on the path to
inclusive development and social peace. That is why we
are pleased to see the proposal to conduct a strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti.
This exercise should be undertaken without prejudging
the outcome, be flexible enough to be able to base
decisions on the conditions on the ground and, most
importantly, be carried out in coordination with the
new Haitian authorities.
The MINUSTAH consolidation plan establishes
four specific priority areas that must show the way
forward. In this regard, the training of police capacities
remains fundamental. We value building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police to carry out its work, but
we hope that efforts will be stepped up to achieve all
the objectives set out in its development plan.
Despite this, we cannot overlook the deterrent role
that MINUSTAH continues to be play, nor the support
that the police units and the military contingents offer
to the Haitian National Police. That is why we welcome
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
maintain the police and military personnel currently
authorized for the next 12 months.
Important progress has been achieved in Haiti
through a joint effort of the population and the Haitian

S/PV.7530

authorities, with the support of MINUSTAH, the
United Nations system and international partners.
This collective effort over all these years must help
to strengthen institutions that are effective, inclusive
and ready to be accountable, particularly those in areas
relating to the rule of law. This should make it possible
to achieve inclusive and sustainable development,
as well as the full exercise of human rights and the
strengthening of a democratic society. The international
community should maintain its support in accordance
with the principle of national ownership.
I conclude by paying tribute to each and every one
of the staff of MINUSTAH, who have worked for peace
and development in Haiti, in particular the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing
and her commitment.
I associate myself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Everyone knows that there are major challenges
in Haiti. This country, which we hold dear, has not
been spared by the scourges of poverty, insecurity and
natural disasters during its recent history. The structural
difficulties it faces call for a sustained and long-term
commitment by the international community. France
fully plays its role through its general contributions to
United Nations operations, funds and programmes, but
also bilaterally, as demonstrated by the recent visit of
the President of the Republic to Port-au-Prince, in May.
As Council members know, during this important visit,
President Hollande announced a pledge of €50 million
for the education sector over the next five years.
It would not be fair to depict only the dark and
negative side of Haiti. It is also a country where many
dynamic forms of progress are at work at various levels,
which are as many reasons to hope, and which we
should appreciate and wholeheartedly encourage.
The first and foremost reason for hope is democratic
progress. The organization of the long-awaited and
desired elections is finally here. The first round of the
legislative and senatorial elections were held and the
results were published. While we naturally deplore the
few cases of violence in which there was an unacceptable

15-304295/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

loss of life and some irregularities, those incidents were
contained and duly noted. Most important, the security
of the electoral process as a whole was ensured. The
Provisional Electoral Council took up its responsibilities
and announced, in particular, the organization of new
voting in one quarter of the polling stations and the
removal of the candidates involved in the unrest.
France expresses the hope that the presidential
elections, whose first round will be held in a few
days, are conducted in a calm, serene and democratic
atmosphere. These elections should continue to be free,
transparent and inclusive. The continued rigorous work
undertaken by the Provisional Electoral Council and
the responsible commitment of all political actors will
be decisive in this regard.
Eleven years after its establishment and the
approval of its first mandate, it is clear that the current
configuration of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) is no longer truly
adapted to the realities of the situation in Haiti. Much
progress has indeed been made since 2004, first and
foremost in the area of security. Haiti and its people
can now rely on a national police force whose level of
professionalism and growing capacity should enable
it in the near future to independently ensure the
maintenance of order throughout the territory.
Several signals recorded in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667) are encouraging
and worth noting: the country’s security situation has
remained generally stable since the adoption of the
previous mandate of the force, including during the
holding of the first round of the legislative and senatorial
elections; the Haitian National Police now operates
effectively at the front line in almost all situations; and
the level of violence in departments where the military
component has withdrawn has not increased.
Clearly, then, we need to do some deep thinking on
the future of the United Nations presence and role in
Haiti. We need to know how to collectively acknowledge
the achievements obtained with the support of
MINUSTAH in Haiti, while ensuring, naturally, that
the gains are maintained. A consolidation process for
that purpose was begun last year; it is important to
bring it to completion.
It is in fact our responsibility to develop the means
deployed locally to best meet the needs of the country
and its people. The credibility of the work of this
Council depends on it, as does its effectiveness. France

6/33

08/10/2015

is convinced that it is now time to move from a logic of
maintaining peace to a logic of peacebuilding in Haiti.
Haiti’s long-term security and stabilization rests on the
assumption of responsibility by the Haitian authorities
and the sustainable development of the island.
A United Nations presence is obviously highly
necessary today. However, it must be recalibrated
around the main objective of strengthening the capacity
of Haitian institutions, particularly in the areas of
security, rule of law, governance and respect for human
rights. Children’s rights, dysfunction in the judicial and
prison systems and the problems of access to economic
and social rights in the context of reconstruction are
still of concern. It is particularly crucial to address
the significant gaps that remain in these areas, where,
although the Haitian authorities are proactive, they are
still not equal to the task.
France
therefore
warmly
welcomes
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that a
strategic review be conducted in Haiti. We hope
that this leads to the presentation to the Council of
concrete policy recommendations on the future of
the presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti
in order to complete the consolidation effort within
MINUSTAH, in the interest, once again, of Haiti and
its people. We should like this exercise to be carried
out the day after the conclusion of the electoral cycle in
progress, and sufficiently in advance of the end of the
next and possibly the last mandate—which the Council
will consider next week— provided that the security
conditions remain unchanged, of course.
The situation in Haiti challenges us all. The support
of the international community and the United Nations
commitment remain more necessary than ever. But our
responsibility in this Council is to do what it takes for
our efforts to be as appropriate and effective as possible.
The challenges facing Haiti and the expectations of its
population do not allow us the luxury of delaying before
taking the necessary decisions.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing today’s
meeting. I also listened attentively to Special
Representative Honoré’s briefing.
Thanks to the strong support of the international
community and the preparations made in all walks of
life in Haiti, the first round of the legislative elections
took place in August. The elections as a whole were

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

peaceful and orderly, which was positively received by
the international community.
At present, the security situation in Haiti is stable. Its
economy continues to grow. These are positive factors
that are laying a foundation for the smooth conduct of
elections in Haiti. Nevertheless, the situation in Haiti
remains complex and fragile. Cases of cholera are on
the rise. The task of providing humanitarian relief to
displaced people who need to be resettled remains
enormous. Peacebuilding has a long way to go.
China hopes that the international community will
focus its assistance in the following three areas. First,
active efforts should be made to move forward with
Haiti’s elections. The second round of the legislative
elections, the presidential runoff and the local polls
will take place on 25 October. Whether this round
of elections will turn out to be successful will bear
significantly on the political process in Haiti.
China hopes that all the Haitian parties will refrain
from violence, maintain their unity and work together
to create a good atmosphere for the elections. We hope
that the international community and the regional
organizations concerned will continue to provide
vigorous support and help for the elections in Haiti by
providing monitoring and coordination on the basis of
respect for Haiti’s ownership role.
Secondly, efforts should be focused on helping
Haiti in its development. Lack of development is the
root cause of Haiti’s political and social problems. Only
development can solve these problems and provide
effective guarantees for the fundamental rights of the
Haitian people. The Government of Haiti should take
advantage of the current momentum in economic
growth to scale up infrastructure construction, build
its capacity in the fields of health, disease prevention
and disaster reduction, safeguard food security and
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The international community should deliver on its
commitment of assistance to Haiti in support of the
country’s efforts to achieve accelerated economic
and social development and to establish the rule of
law, helping Haiti achieve poverty reduction and
independent development in the near future.
Thirdly, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should play its full role. Under
the leadership of its head, Ms. Sandra Honoré, the
Mission has played an important role in promoting
elections in Haiti and in enhancing Haiti’s security and

S/PV.7530

stability. China expresses its appreciation in this regard.
We hope MINUSTAH will continue to communicate
and coordinate with the Government of Haiti, step up
its training of the Haitian National Police and improve
the country’s own capacity for security, thus making a
greater contribution to the achievement of lasting peace
and stability at an early date.
Mr. Lucas (Angola) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish you and the Spanish delegation every success,
Mr. President, in presiding over the Security Council
this month. You can rely on our full cooperation.
(spoke in English)
We congratulate the Russian delegation on its
successful presidency of the Security Council in the
month of September.
We are grateful to Ms. Sandra Honoré for her
briefing on the situation in Haiti.
We wish to relay our heartfelt condolences to the
family of Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy,
Jr., former Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
extend our condolences to all United Nations military
contingents and civilian personnel who benefited from
his leadership. We echo the words of the SecretaryGeneral in recognizing his leadership and dedication
to peace in Haiti.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH (S/2015/667) and President Michel Joseph
Martelly’s address to the General Assembly at its
current session (see A/70/PV.22) instils in us a high
degree of confidence in the prospects of consolidating
democracy, the rule of law and development in Haiti.
Such confidence has been reflected in recent political
developments, particularly the success in the first round
of parliamentary elections, held in August, and the
climate of stability that the country currently enjoys.
We recognize and appreciate the excellent work
accomplished by the provisions of the Provisional
Electoral Council and by the national and international
observers, which, according to the Secretary-General’s
report, progressively gained greater credibility by
demonstrating throughout the electoral process their
ability to comply with the electoral calendar despite
tight deadlines. Notwithstanding the occurrence of
some incidents, we are persuaded that the electoral
outcome created a climate conducive to the holding of a

15-304297/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

second round, to take place on 25 October, and later to
the municipal and presidential elections.
We note with satisfaction the work of MINUSTAH
and the Haitian National Police, including their joint
exercises, the creation of a new rapid intervention force
with a capacity to intervene throughout the country, and
the elimination of buffer zones between communities
formerly controlled by criminal gangs. This effective
cooperation was crucial to the establishment of a
security climate conducive to the holding of elections,
while reducing the overall violence in the country. The
mandate for the renewal of Justice Council members; the
appointment key administrative staff, as well as to the
administrative Department of Correction Services; and
the completion of the project to assess the performance
of Judges, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, are positive developments in the enforcement of
the rule of law and in the improvement of human rights
in the country.
Concerning humanitarian development issues, we
are closely following the bilateral efforts between Haiti
and the Dominican Republic regarding the repatriation
of Haitian refugees. We recognize the support of the
international community in ensuring that both countries
resume dialogue and take advantage of the current
encouraging situation to improve the management of
their common borders and strengthen cooperation in
order to create new opportunities for their citizens. In
that context, we commend the role of the Organization
of American States for expeditiously deploying a factfinding mission. We look forward to its outcomes and
recommendations.
Despite the efforts of the Haitian Government to
improve the living conditions of its citizens, we regret
the reduction of funds limiting the capacity of the United
Nations system and its partners to respond adequately
to development challenges facing the country, including
the cholera epidemic outbreak in 2015 that claimed
more than 175 lives. Recent United Nations awareness
and advocacy initiatives have been encouraging, since
concerted efforts and consistent funding may reduce
the incidence of the epidemic. Similarly, we commend
the technical assistance provided by the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as well as
the joint work of MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Ministry of Health of
Haiti in order to improve the conditions of the Haitian
people.

8/33

08/10/2015

We fully acknowledge the important role
MINUSTAH has been playing in Haiti since its
deployment in 2004. In order to keep the positive
momentum and gains achieved in recent years, we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
for the extension of the MINUSTAH mandate until
15 October 2016 at the current strength in military
personnel and a review of the Mission’s mandate.
Such an extension will, with the wider support of the
international community, ensure a peaceful political
transition through transparent, inclusive and credible
elections, which are vital factors for the consolidation of
democracy and peace in Haiti. In addition, the presence
of MINUSTAH for yet another year would consolidate
the successes achieved in key areas of governance, such
as the ability of municipal authorities to implement
administrative and financial procedures; recruit, train
and certify key personnel; and develop and standardize
tools and procedures for financial management and
transparency.
Finally, the extension of MINUSTAH’s mandate
would ensure a climate of stability, encourage foreign
direct investment and, after several decades of
stagnation, allow the national economy to finally grow.
We are eager to witness in January and February 2016 the
empowerment of a new Parliament and a new President
and the establishment of an enabling environment for
the socioeconomic development of Haiti, which are
decisive indicators of the performance and success of
MINUSTAH after 11 years in the country.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thanks Ms. Sandra Honoré for her
comprehensive briefing and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) staff,
the troop- and police-contribution countries, and the
United Nations country team and their partners. I thank
them all for their efforts to support Haiti and its people.
I would also like to offer our condolences to the
Brazilian Government on the passing away of the late
Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., former
Force Commander of MINUSTAH.
Thanks to the determination of its people and
the commitment of its leaders, Haiti has been able to
move towards democracy and to put an end to political
uncertainty by holding legislative elections following
a considerable delay. We trust that those legislative
elections will conclude peacefully and that they will
be free, transparent and inclusive. Above all, in those

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

constituencies where a second round of elections will
be held, there is a need to bolster trust in the electoral
process in Haiti. We need investigations into cases of
violence, and irregularities must be addressed.
We urge Haiti to hold local, municipal and
presidential elections in accordance with the timetable.
In that regard, we welcome the role played by the
Provisional Electoral Council, which has proven its
capacity to manage a very complex electoral process.
Moreover, we commend the Haitian Government for
providing the necessary resources to the Provisional
Electoral Council and to the Haitian National Police,
and we call on the international community to provide
Haiti with the aid necessary to conclude the entire
electoral process.
The security situation in Haiti is overall stable, but
peace and stability require consolidation of the rule of
law in that country. There is also the need to address
clear shortcomings in the judicial system, particularly
the inhumane conditions in the prison system, which is
overburdened. We welcome efforts made to strengthen
the police force and improve security in Haiti. We
reiterate the importance of providing aid and training to
enhance the presence of the Haitian police throughout
the country. Special attention must be paid to the
humanitarian situation in Haiti. Cholera continues to
rage throughout the country even though the number
of cases has declined. Moreover, Haiti is experiencing
drought, which has decreased its food supply. There is,
therefore, a need to bolster food aid to Haiti, as soon as
possible, to prevent rising levels of malnutrition.
Haiti, working together with the United Nations,
has made historic progress that must be built upon.
Once again, we call on all countries and organizations,
which have strong relations with Haiti, to provide aid to
the Haitian people throughout all stages of the political
transition process. In that regard, we reiterate that the
role played by the United Nations remains crucial in
Haiti and we support the renewal of MINUSTAH’s
mandate in order to preserve stability in that country.
In addition, that mandate must respect the situation on
the ground, especially the needs of the people in all
areas. There is also a need to guarantee peace, security,
stability and the success of future plans to build a
modern State.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Honoré for her briefing
today and for her continued leadership. Our gratitude
also goes to the troop- and police-contributing countries

S/PV.7530

to Haiti, the Group of Friends and the dedicated women
and men serving in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who, like us, are
committed to Haiti’s future. We, too, wish to offer
our sincere condolences for the loss of the late Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Jaborandy.
Today, I would like to touch briefly on three main
topics: Haiti’s elections, MINUSTAH’s contribution
to Haiti’s present and future, and the importance of
development. Haiti’s upcoming elections are naturally
the centre of attention for many in the Chamber today
and for good reason. They represent a milestone for
how far Haiti has come in its political process since
the earthquake. One round of voting has been held and
the second round, which includes the first presidential
ballot, is fast approaching. The process has not been
without challenges and the international community
remains concerned about the scattered acts of violence,
poll interruptions and other misconduct. While not
widespread, we ask Haitian authorities to investigate
those incidents and bring the perpetrators to justice. By
prioritizing transparent elections this year, the Haitian
Government will give Haitians a renewed voice in their
governance.
In the coming months, we encourage all actors to
participate fully in the electoral process and to pledge
to a high standard of transparency. That is because
strengthened confidence in Haiti’s political system
could, naturally, help attract investment and jobs. As
Haiti moves toward the completion of elections and
the formation of a new Government, we also note the
success of the continued drawdown of MINUSTAH
and the ongoing development and professionalism of
the Haitian National Police, who have continued taking
on increasing responsibilities for nationwide security.
We commend their admirable efforts to provide
election security during the first round of elections
and implement the security plan coordinated with
MINUSTAH. The role of the Haitian National Police
in providing security for the upcoming election rounds
is key. Given the high number of candidates registered
for the elections and the scale of the voting operation,
we urge additional planning and coordination for the
remaining rounds.
In the longer term, we are also working with
MINUSTAH through police and corrections advisers,
who are working to build the Haitian National Police
and Haiti’s law enforcement capacity through training,
equipment, technical assistance and infrastructure

15-304299/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

improvement. As part of that process, we support
MINUSTAH’s commitment to continue developing
the Haitian National Police and assist the Haitian
Government as it takes on greater responsibility for its
own security and policing.
As the Haitian National Police grows and as Haiti
completes its ongoing elections, stability is crucial. For
that reason, we support maintaining MINUSTAH’s
current force size and configuration. The terms of the
MINUSTAH mandate renewal must continue to be
conditions-based. We strongly believe that any decisions
on a further reduction of troop levels need to be taken
after the elections, preferably after a new Government
is seated and on the basis of a formal recommendation
from the United Nations following a thorough strategic
assessment that takes into account security. That leads
me to an important point on development.
Five years after the devastating 2010 earthquake,
Haiti is making the transition from recovery to
a period of long-term economic development.
Significant challenges continue, however, to face
the Haitian people, such as chronic poverty and high
unemployment. The Government of Haiti, with support
from the international community, needs to improve
the economic environment in the country. That means
investing in job creation, infrastructure and the
provision of key services, among other initiatives that
will ensure a better future for Haiti.
A sign of the strength of our partnership with Haiti
came earlier this week, when Secretary of State Kerry
visited Haiti at the invitation of President Martelly.
In a joint statement, both he and President Martelly
emphasized the importance of fair and peaceful
elections and encouraged all Haitians to go to the polls
on 25 October. His visit underscored the commitment
of the United States of America to the Haitian people.
As Haiti’s neighbour and assistance partner, we have
a deep and enduring interest in ensuring Haiti’s longterm security, democratic development and economic
growth. Since the earthquake, the United States has
provided over $4.2 billion in assistance. We remain
firmly committed to the Haitian people and are working
with the Haitian Government to ensure a more secure,
stable and self-sufficient Haiti.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing
and commend her astute leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Nigeria
commends the transitional Government in Haiti for the
10/33

08/10/2015

significant progress recorded in the country’s political
process. The first round of legislative elections, held
in August, attests to the commitment of the country’s
leaders and, indeed, of the people of Haiti to democratic
governance. It is understood that all political parties
in the country have a pivotal role to play in ensuring
the success of the electoral process. We urge the
Government to align the decisions of the Provisional
Electoral Council with those of the courts in order to
minimize the risk of violence and foster the necessary
consensus for elections to be held as scheduled.
Successful
elections
will
require
robust
international support. That is why we welcome the
indispensable support of the international community
in the collective effort of assisting Haiti to sustain
democracy and good governance. The participation
of international election observation missions would
inspire the confidence of political parties, candidates
and voters in their electoral process.
We commend the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for Project
Services, MINUSTAH and other international
partners for the technical and logistical assistance
they have provided in support of the elections in Haiti.
The anti-fraud measures that are being put in place,
including the electronic transmission of tally sheets
from polling stations to operations centres, give some
assurance that the elections will be credible. That is
crucial to an outcome that reflects the will of Haiti’s
voters.
Beyond those significant developments in
organizational matters, we welcome the ongoing
initiatives aimed at securing a peaceful environment
during the elections. The Haitian National Police has
worked hard to create an atmosphere conducive to
holding peaceful elections. We are hopeful that the
integrated security deployment planned by the joint
electoral cell, composed of both Haitian police and
MINUSTAH uniformed components, can eliminate
the possibility of electoral violence. We commend
MINUSTAH for arranging special protection for
female candidates during the elections, which should
help to encourage the women of Haiti to participate in
their country’s electoral process.
In Haiti today, the National Police needs to grow,
both in size and in capability. We note the efforts that
have been made to strengthen its specialized units and
increase the number of trainees admitted to the police
training programme, with a view to reaching a target
15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

of 15,000 officers by 2016. The increase in violence
and unrest during the reporting period underscores the
importance of improving police capacity in the area of
crowd control and other aspects of law enforcement.
Efforts to enhance the competence, professionalism,
accountability and discipline of the police will serve to
build public confidence in that key national institution.
Nigeria takes positive note of the Haitian
Government’s ongoing efforts to cooperate with
MINUSTAH and other partners and stakeholders
in strengthening the country’s legal and judicial
frameworks. Those represent noteworthy steps towards
consolidating the rule of law in Haiti. The renewal of
the mandates of seven members of the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and key administrative nominations
have greatly improved the capacity of the justice sector.
Similarly, the consultations on a draft Penal Code
involving a broad range of stakeholders, including
some from civil society, and the revision of the
Criminal Procedure Code, represent significant steps
forward in legislative reform. We want to encourage
the Government to work to expedite the process of
renewing judges’ terms so as to enhance the judiciary’s
efficiency.
While such positive developments in Haiti are
testament to MINUSTAH’s effectiveness, we would
like to encourage the Mission to continue to use existing
means and capabilities within its mandate to enhance
stability there. There is considerable merit in the
Secretary-General’s proposal in his report (S/2015/667)
to undertake a strategic assessment of the situation in
Haiti. As the situation evolves, so must the role of the
United Nations.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
first like to congratulate Spain and your delegation,
Mr. President, as you take on the work of the presidency
of the Council this month. You can be assured that New
Zealand will do all it can to support you. I would also
like to thank and commend the Russian delegation for
the very calm and efficient way in which they managed
the Council through a very difficult month.
I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her
briefing and her commitment to the reconstruction
of Haiti, as well as the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
troop-contributing countries for the important work
they are doing. Today’s discussions on MINUSTAH
come at a very important time in Haiti’s emergence

S/PV.7530

from a long period of instability as the country seeks to
consolidate its democracy and institutions.
New Zealand welcomes the positive trends in Haiti’s
stabilization, in particular the commencement of a longoverdue election process. In that regard, the holding of
legislative elections on 9 August was a significant step
towards a renewal of Haiti’s democratic institutions. As
we have heard, the elections were not completely free
of irregularities or violence, but the fact that they were
judged to be inclusive and transparent is nonetheless a
sign of genuine progress. We are also encouraged by
the performance of the Haitian National Police, which
has continued to develop, with MINUSTAH’s support.
We commend Haiti’s electoral institutions for their
efforts and urge them to implement the lessons learned
from the August elections in preparation for the next,
more challenging phase of the electoral process. We
also urge all Haitian political actors to do everything
possible to ensure that the elections take place in stable
and peaceful conditions.
It is vital that the Haitian authorities lead the
management of the elections and appear at the forefront
of efforts to maintain Haiti’s security and stability. It is
also clear that MINUSTAH has a role to play during this
period in supporting a secure and stable environment
conducive to free and fair elections. But as we said in
this Chamber in March (see S/PV.7147), MINUSTAH
will not be in Haiti forever. The Mission should evolve
as the situation on the ground allows and as the Haitian
authorities and institutions become ready to assume full
responsibility for Haiti’s security. For that reason, we
too support the Secretary-General’s proposal to conduct
a strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti after the
current electoral cycle and in close consultation with
the Haitian Government.
While we do not want to prejudge the outcome
of that assessment, should the positive trajectory
in Haiti’s stabilization continue, New Zealand will
certainly welcome a discussion on the footprint of
the United Nations in Haiti, and in particular on the
future of MINUSTAH. The capacity of the Haitian
National Police to manage Haiti’s security challenges
should be central to that discussion. In considering the
future United Nations presence in Haiti, it will also be
important to take into account some worrying aspects
of the humanitarian situation in Haiti, including those
relating to cholera and internally displaced persons.

15-3042911/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti is
at a critical point on its path to restoring an inclusive
and representative democracy. We hope that, in the
coming months, it will complete a peaceful political
transition and show proof of the progress it has made
in taking full control of its future. We also hope that
the Council will continue to exercise due patience and
prudence, and be united in expressing its support to
Haiti at this important time.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her briefing today,
and to join others in offering our condolences on the
passing of General Jaborandy, who served the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
with distinction. We welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/667) and appreciate the
valuable contribution that MINUSTAH has made to
stability and progress in Haiti.
My statement today will focus on three key points:
the collective achievement in stabilizing Haiti, the
expected drawdown of MINUSTAH forces by the end
of 2016 and the need for early planning for a successor
presence of the United Nations. As I said in our last
discussion in March (see S/PV.7147), MINUSTAH has
successfully delivered for the Council. I commend
the efforts of all of its peacekeepers in collectively
achieving the Mission’s objectives, so that we are now
contemplating MINUSTAH’s final mandate. We should
pause to reflect on what an achievement that has been
for Haiti and for the United Nations.
In January, the Council had an opportunity to
see at first hand the contribution of MINUSTAH. It
was also a chance to see the positive steps that Haiti
is taking to ensure its own development and security.
One such step was the recent holding of the first
round of legislative elections and the scheduling of the
presidential election. In the Secretary-General’s words,
there are encouraging signs that the political leaders of
Haiti have embarked on a positive path. We agree with
that sentiment and encourage all levels of Government
to continue taking steps along that path over the next
six months. The failure to hold elections in 2014,
together with the dissolution of Haiti’s Parliament,
led to uncertainty among Haiti’s people. So we also
welcome the formation of the Provisional Electoral
Council, the publication of an electoral decree and the
announcement of the electoral calendar.

12/33

08/10/2015

We are pleased that the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on MINUSTAH makes a positive overall
assessment of the security situation in Haiti and
confirms that important progress has been achieved.
For example, and as you have just told us now Sandra,
the recent polls in August were notably calmer than the
previous electoral cycle. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral, this was testament to the increased capacity
of Haiti’s institutions to take on greater responsibility
in leading the country’s democratic processes. There
has been no increase of insecurity or violence in the
departments from which the military component
withdrew.
Similarly, the statistics on the performance of the
Haitian National Police, which is demonstrating an
increasing ability to operate without MINUSTAH’s
support, are impressive. For example, demands
for MINUSTAH crowd-control support to the
10 departmental units for crowd control have
dramatically fallen from 146 incidents to 18 over the
past two reporting periods. We do of course recognize,
however, that there is more to be done in increasing police
numbers and expertise. These enhanced capabilities
can be seen as successes for both MINUSTAH and
the Haitian National Police, but the real victory is for
the people of Haiti. Their peace of mind and hope for
a more stable and secure future grow with every step
their national institutions take forward.
But the final success of MINUSTAH will be to
build on these achievements by planning a smooth
transition to a successor United Nations presence. The
Council has always been clear that the main role of
MINUSTAH is to help Haiti take back responsibility
for its security. And while MINUSTAH undoubtedly
still has a stabilization role to play in Haiti during the
electoral period, I think we can agree that it is right
that the Mission continues to consolidate, increasingly
focusing on bespoke areas where it can offer the
greatest support to a stable Haiti. This is precisely why
transition planning needs to start early to ensure that
Haiti has the support it needs post-MINUSTAH. By
starting the planning early, we can provide the United
Nations and the new Haitian Government the time they
need to prepare for a smooth transition.
With an electoral process finally under way, Haiti
now has the opportunity to put behind it the uncertainty
of the past few years and start planning for a future
where it has full responsibility for its own security.

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for introducing the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2015/667) and for her assessment of the situation in
that country.
Major progress has been achieved in Haiti of late in
terms of strengthening stability. Long-awaited elections
have taken place with reasonably good organization
and in acceptable security conditions. We hope that
the presidential elections will also go smoothly. The
successful organization of the electoral campaign
is evidence of the scrupulous work of the national
authorities, including the law-enforcement bodies. The
Haitian National Police showed its overall ability to
keep the situation under control, although there were
a few outbreaks of violence. Moreover, the local police
was compelled to seek assistance from MINUSTAH
only a few times.
We are grateful to the United Nations Mission,
which provided valuable assistance to Port-auPrince and proved its worth, even in times of gradual
drawdown. We also recognize the Chilean peacekeeper
who died in the line of duty on 13 April. We offer our
condolences to the family and loved ones of the former
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Jaborandy, and
express our support for the new Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Pinheiro.
The Haitian people have suffered a great deal in
recent years. However, the leading political actors
in the country, with the support of the international
community and MINUSTAH, were eventually able
to overcome their differences. The most pressing
issues have been resolved, including the building of
the national law-enforcement and judiciary systems,
reducing the numbers of temporary internally displaced
persons and holding free, fair and transparent elections.
We trust that early next year the new President and
legislative and local authorities will take office in
Haiti. That should be a new milestone in the country’s
development and help resolve the urgent tasks it faces.
If Haiti is to successfully move forward and achieve
full socioeconomic normalization, Port-au-Prince will
continue to require the assistance of the United Nations
Mission and the international community. However,
the events of the past six months suggest that the main
political stakeholders of the country are able to resolve
their differences and set aside their own ambitions

S/PV.7530

to ensure a successful future for all Haitians. The
professional training of the Haitian National Police has
been stepped up, as has the number of law-enforcement
agents. We trust that in the course of the United Nations
drawdown, the Mission will draw fully on its existing
resources to fulfil its mandate to assist stabilization in
Haiti. That work will be all the more effective the closer
it is coordinated with the newly elected authorities.
As progress is achieved, functions needs to be
gradually transferred from the Mission to the national
authorities. We remain troubled by the difficult
humanitarian situation, including with respect to
food security and the rising number of cases of
cholera registered in the spring. In that regard, the
United Nations specialized agencies, international
organizations and Haiti’s donors have a key role to play.
For our part, we are ready to consider in-depth the
Secretary-General’s strategic assessment of the future
of the United Nations presence in the country once it
is prepared. We believe that if the process of restoring
statehood is to be effective and successful, the country’s
national Government needs to play the central role,
and that further measures taken by the United Nations
should be fully aligned with the priorities of the
authorities and people of Haiti. Following the elections,
the new Government will enjoy a sufficient margin of
confidence on the part of the voters that will allow it to
act as effectively as possible and be a reliable partner to
the international community.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time I
am taking the floor in a public meeting of the Security
Council this month, I congratulate Spain on assuming
the presidency of the Council for October. You can rely
on our full support, Sir, in contributing to the successful
discharge of your important responsibilities. I also
congratulate the Russian Federation on its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council in September.
Like previous speakers, we extend our condolences
to the people and Government of Brazil on the
passing of Lieutenant General Jaborandy, the late
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We thank you, Sir, for convening this debate to
address the situation in the Republic of Haiti. We also
welcome the introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/677) by his Special Representative and
the Head of MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra Honoré, to whom

15-3042913/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

we reiterate our congratulations on her active role in
supporting the authorities of the Haitian Government
on their path to peace, stability, democracy and
development.
Venezuela is committed through deep historical,
political and cultural links to the independent,
political sovereignty and strengthened democratic
institutionality in Haiti. We therefore appreciate the
successful holding of the first round of parliamentary
elections on 9 August. The Haitian people and
authorities demonstrated their democratic commitment
and political maturity once again, as well as their
ability to take control of their own destiny. At this
key moment for peace and political stability in that
brotherly Caribbean country, combating poverty and
social injustice requires everyone to contribute.
We are pleased to recognize the outstanding work
of President Michel Martelly over the past five years
towards achieving these goals. We also acknowledge
the efforts of the United Nations, through MINUSTAH,
which continues to play a critical role in ensuring
political stability in Haiti. We also commend the
countries contributing troops and police to MINUSTAH.
This year is vitally important to the strengthening
of Haitian institutions. The United Nations system and
the international community as a whole should continue
to support the work of the Haitian Government and
the electoral authorities of Haiti through appropriate
technical and logistical support and the provision of
adequate financial resources, in order to encourage the
successful completion of the upcoming elections.
We believe that a positive indicator of political
stability will be the peaceful unfolding of the
elections that will begin the political transition to a
new Government in 2016. It is therefore essential that
all political factors in Haiti work together to promote
greater voter participation of Haitians in the election of
their authorities, strengthening the trust of the citizens
in the institutions of the country, and so that the new
authorities feel that they are fully supported by their
people and the international community.
Concerning the future of MINUSTAH, we
welcome the recommendations in the report of the
Secretary-General with regard to carrying out a
strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti, after the
establishment of a new Government. Such a review
must take into account the level of political stability
and security throughout the country. We must avoid

14/33

08/10/2015

making hasty decisions that could set back the progress
that has been achieved in the political, economic and
social fields.
For that reason, any decision on the future of
MINUSTAH should be taken in coordination with the
Government and in line with the security and stability
conditions on the ground, taking into account the
response capacity of the of the Haitians in managing
their internal and security affairs. That is why we
consider it a priority to reinforce the capacities and
increase the number of officers of the Haitian National
Police, in accordance with the 2012-2016 development
plan.
We should appraise the proposal made by President
Martelly in his address to the General Assembly (see
A/70/PV.22), in which he reiterated what had been
said last March in his letter to the Secretary-General
(S/2015/191, annex) on the need to resume, in a gradual
and organized manner, the MINUSTAH reconfiguration
plan, in line with a consensual timetable agreed upon
with the new Government, starting in 2016. That should
be done without jeopardizing the progress already
made, or the country’s internal and external security.
Despite the progress that has been made, there are
still major challenges to be overcome in addressing the
root and structural causes of poverty and exclusion that
the Haitian people have suffered from for decades. We
are troubled by the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and by the reduction in financing for assistance
programmes, which have limited the ability of the
United Nations system and the Haitian Government to
adequately address the problems affecting the social
and economic development of that country.
We believe the efforts to support the actions of
the health authorities in Haiti should be redoubled, in
order to set up mechanisms for controling cholera. That
epidemic has taken the lives of hundreds of Haitians in
recent years. The creation of the High-level Committee
for the eradication of the epidemic and the campaign
for its prevention and elimination should be reinforced
with the support of the international community.
Our country is committed to maintaining and
strengthening its cooperation with Haiti. In the last
decade, together with the countries of the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, we have created
various initiatives, projects and funds for projects
considered priorities by the Haitian Government. Those
have had a positive impact in that nation. We have

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

actively contributed in the fields of ​​social development,
humanitarian assistance, construction, rehabilitation,
maintenance of infrastructure, and education, through
the PetroCaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement.
Our country will continue to support this sister
nation in the Caribbean, joining with regional efforts
and with those of the United Nations, with a view to
contributing to overcoming the enormous challenges
of consolidate peace, stability and democracy on the
basis of respect for Haiti’s sovereignty and political
independence.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Spain for having organized this debate
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). I take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, as well as your entire team, on
acceding to the presidency of the Security Council, and
I assure you of the support of Chad. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Sandra Honoré and Head of MINUSTAH, for
her briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667)
under consideration, covering the period of 4 March
to 31 August, mentions concrete progress marked by
the preparation of presidential, municipal and local
elections, the first round of which is scheduled for
25 October. That progress, it must be noted, is the
result of intensive work of consultations and restoration
of trust between President Michel Martelly and the
opposition political parties, which has made it possible
to reach a consensus on the continuation of the electoral
process.
Chad welcomes the improvement of the political
climate and of the security situation in Haiti, after a
very long period of political tensions and institutional
paralysis. We hope that the violence that we saw during
the last part of the campaign, the first legislative round
held in August, does not recur in the coming elections.
We also welcome the solid cooperation between the
Haitian Government and its international partners,
including MINUSTAH. The latter’s support in police
training and in the health field is decisive in preparation
of what will come after the United Nations departure.
In that regard, we note with satisfaction that 11,900
police officers, including 1,022 women, have been
trained within the framework of reaching the target of
15,000 officers by the end of 2016.

S/PV.7530

Despite the significant progress achieved, thanks
to the joint efforts of the Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, a great number of challenges remain
in the judicial, health and humanitarian fields. The
judicial apparatus is encountering major difficulties
owing to inadequate funding and lack of sufficient
infrastructure. That has consequently led to excessive
delays in trying those who have been detained and an
increase in the prison population, already estimated to
number 10,624 prisoners.
The health situation remains deeply disturbing,
owing to the significant increase in cases of cholera,
175 of which have been fatal. The international
community urgently needs to do more to assist
the Haitian authorities to develop and implement
appropriate strategies to improve public health, help the
sick and eradicate that epidemic. From a humanitarian
standpoint, the fate of the 60,801 internally displaced
Haitians, in 45 different camps, deserves the sustained
attention from humanitarian agencies and the entire
international community. The consolidation of the
stabilization process also means relocating and
reintegrating those vulnerable groups, living in
extremely difficult conditions.
With respect to the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH,
Chad is in favour of the Mission’s two-stage drawdown
plan in two stages, proposed by the Secretary-General
in accordance with resolution 2180 (2014). However,
the gradual drawdown of the Mission should take into
account the evolution of the situation on the ground.
Chad also supports the renewal of MINUSTAH’s
mandate for a period of one year.
Chad thanks all the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment alongside the Haitian
people. We pay tribute to all the military, police and
civilian personnel who paid the ultimate price in the
course of their duties in Haiti.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania) (spoke in French):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
Undoubtedly, on 9 August the first round of
legislative elections in Haiti marked an important step.
Even if elections took place within a tense climate, the
very fact that they have taken place without any major
incident shows Haiti’s serious commitment to democracy
and the rule of law. We are convinced that Haiti is on the
right track. However, much remains to be done, and the
results that have been achieved are not irreversible. The

15-3042915/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

situation requires our ongoing attention. The proposed
electoral calendar must be respected and implemented.
It is important for the political parties to continue to
behave responsibly, constructively and pragmatically.
Successful elections will be decisive to Haiti’s stability,
future and sustainable socioeconomic and political
development.
Efforts to establish and strengthen the rule of law
in Haiti should continue. We look forward to seeing
the Government and courts take serious steps to end
impunity for all those responsible for human rights
abuses and violations, including police officers and
prison guards. It is urgent to advance such measures as
the drafting of a new penal code, the approval procedure
for judges and police officers, and the expansion of
legal aid services.
The human rights situation is of ongoing concern.
We strongly urge the Haitian authorities to establish a
strategic plan for 2015-2018 to strengthen institutional
capacity in the protection of human rights. To ensure
an effective democratic process, it is essential that all
stakeholders of Haitian society fully take part.
Economic growth remains a crucial factor for
the country’s stability and development. While the
country has experienced a considerable decrease in
the number of internally displaced persons, other
negative factors — such as the increased number
of returning nationals, drought and cholera — have
increased the country’s humanitarian needs and slowed
its development, thereby endangering stability and
security. In that context, international support remains
crucial. Haiti still requires robust assistance in various
areas of public life, and we are pleased that the European
Union is the most important partner in that respect.
From the security standpoint, we see a decrease in
violence and increased responsibility on the part of the
Haitian National Police in maintaining public order.
That important achievement proved evident during the
legislative elections. We hope that, with the support of
the United Nations, the objective of training at least
15,000 police officers by 2016 can be achieved.
However, crime remains a major challenge. A
strengthened Haitian National Police with greater
accountability is necessary to deal with persistent
crime. We welcome the recent adoption of the national
crime prevention strategy for the period 2015-2017.
Internal discipline of the police must be addressed in
a serious and responsible manner. Swift and effective

16/33

08/10/2015

action on the part of the Haitian Government will not be
enough without genuine support from the international
community.
We recognize the role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in
stabilizing security and strengthening rule of law
in Haiti. The very presence of MINUSTAH in the
upcoming elections in October and December will
be a calming factor. Taking into account the current
situation and the challenges facing Haiti in the near
future, we support the extension of the MINUSTAH
mandate in its current composition. However, we share
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that,
after the inauguration of the new President, a strategic
assessment be carried out to adapt the Mission to its
new situation and the new needs of the country.
To conclude, we welcome the positive achievements,
but we also recognize their fragility. The women and
men of Haiti still need our political and financial
support.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your team on
assuming the presidency for this month and to reaffirm
Malaysia’s full support. I also wish to congratulate the
Russian Federation on its stewardship of the Council
during the past month.
I join other Council members in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Sandra
Honoré for her briefing on the latest developments in
Haiti. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/667).
Since the Council’s last discussion on this issue
(see S/PV.7408), Haiti has seen a number of significant
developments, most notably the holding of the first
round of legislative elections on 9 August. We are
encouraged to note that the election period was marred
by only isolated instances of violence. We hope that the
subsequent rounds scheduled for later this month will
be equally, if not more peaceful.
In organizing and preparing for the elections, we
note that the Provisional Electoral Council discharged
its role and its responsibilities in a professional and evenhanded manner and accommodated many demands
from various quarters and from potential candidates. In
our view, such efforts are crucial towards cementing the
Provisional Electoral Council’s credibility and could
positively contribute towards deepening trust in Haiti’s
democratic institutions. We are confident that with the
15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

necessary support of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations and
other international partners, the Provisional Electoral
Council will be able to successfully conduct the
subsequent rounds and the municipal and presidential
polls scheduled for later this month. We also commend
President Martelly and the transitional authorities in
Haiti, including the Haitian National Police (HNP), for
taking the steps necessary to ensure a safe and secure
environment for the conduct of the elections.
We note the extensive preparations for the elections
carried out by the security actors, including the holding
of simulation exercises with MINUSTAH. The fact that
State functions such as security and law enforcement
are increasingly Haitian-led bodes well for the future.
In terms of checks and balances on the Haitian National
Police, Malaysia notes that the Inspectorate General
has been empowered to exercise oversight functions
over the HNP and that it has exercised that role well.
We urge the Haitian authorities to stay the course and
continue working towards the holding of inclusive,
transparent elections, and we hope that the Government
will continue to allocate the required resources as and
when needed.
We are also pleased to note that during the
reporting period, Haiti submitted periodic reports to
the human rights treaty bodies for the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We also note the emphasis placed on containing the
spread of HIV/AIDS in the country and the awarenessraising programmes on gender-based violence, underage
pregnancy and sexual and reproductive health.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, which
remains dire, we are of the view that the Government
should also consider stepping up its readiness and
responsiveness in responding to possible emergencies,
particularly in relation to cholera, drought and the
upcoming hurricane season.
We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts on
administrative and legislative reform and urge the
Government to step up efforts to cement the rule of
law in the country. In that regard, we note the positive
steps taken to address prolonged pre-trial detention
and prison overcrowding, including concerning women
detainees.
On the development front, while we take note of
the various plans and the implementation of measures

S/PV.7530

to stabilize the economy, serious challenges, including
food insecurity, remain. Ultimately, the goal must be to
improve competitiveness and attractiveness to investors,
with a view to achieving sustainable economic growth.
With regard to the consolidation of MINUSTAH,
Malaysia notes the developments and progress under the
four stabilization benchmarks. The gains made under
police development and electoral capacity-building are
indeed noteworthy, while further improvements could
be made under rule of law and human rights and on key
governance issues.
To conclude, I take the opportunity to express
Malaysia’s appreciation to MINUSTAH, its leadership
and all its personnel for their sustained and exemplary
contributions in support of the Government and people
of Haiti. We take note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH.
In light of the unfortunate passing of Force
Commander Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy
Jr., we hope that his successor will be appointed soon,
given the heavy tasks that lie ahead.
We look forward to working alongside other
Council members, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Honoré, MINUSTAH and the wider
United Nations family, as well as institutional donors
and other partners and stakeholders, towards achieving
the goals of stability, security and development for
Haiti and her people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to express my thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her statement and for her excellent work on the ground
in Haiti. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
August report (S/2015/667).
I would also like to add my voice to the condolences
expressed by a number of colleagues on the sad passing
of our Force Commander in Haiti; in that connection I
send my heartfelt sympathy to the delegation of Brazil.
I will, of course, align myself with the statement to
be delivered later in this meeting by the observer of the
European Union.
It is obvious that Haiti faces a great challenge.
For only the third time since 1989, a transition will
take place following presidential elections, which we

15-3042917/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

all trust will be entirely peaceful. Spain supports that
process from a threefold perspective.
First, with respect to the electoral process itself,
we are participating in the mission of the Organization
of American States with four observers, as well as
with financial resources. Our second level of support
concerns the political realm, through our active
participation in the Group of Friends of Haiti, as well
as through the Friends of the Economic and Social
Council, and of course by promoting the important
missions of the Club de Madrid, which have received
financial support from the European Union, whose aim
is to further dialogue. The third important arm of our
support for Haiti is through Spain’s official development
assistance. Spain has provided €255 million, or nearly
$300 million, in total official development assistance to
Haiti for reconstruction since the earthquake, and Haiti
remains a priority country for Spanish cooperation,
which has allocated €159 million, most of which has
already been released, for the period 2015-2017. That
means that Spain has maintained, and will maintain,
its commitment to Haiti, which remains the leading
recipient of Spain’s official development assistance in
the world.
With respect to the 9 August elections, they were
indeed more peaceful than previous iterations, as the
British representative has indicated, but it is no less
true that there were incidents of violence in 13 per
cent of the polling places. I would like to believe that,
without the presence of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), there would have been
more such incidents. For that reason, Spain believes
that MINUSTAH’s continued presence in the country
is, and will remain, absolutely fundamental for the
establishment of the new Administration and for
ensuring a peaceful transition.
Spain therefore supports the renewal of
MINUSTAH’s mandate for another year and, as the
Secretary-General recommends, the retention of the
number of authorized personnel that we deem essential
to enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate. Spain
also fully supports the deployment of the evaluation
mission that the Secretary-General proposes in his
report in order to assess the role and presence of
the United Nations in Haiti once MINUSTAH has
fulfilled its mission. Spain agrees on the importance
of that evaluation being shared with the new Haitian
Government in order to ensure the successful transition
to a post-conciliation phase. For that reason, it makes

18/33

08/10/2015

sense for the evaluation mission to be deployed once
the new Government has been constituted and after
the new Government, with MINUSTAH’s support, has
ushered in a period of stability,
Spain has always maintained in its statements to the
Council that decisions respecting MINUSTAH should
be taken with flexibility. Stability will not be guaranteed
with the last round of elections on 27 December. We
need to give the country more time in order for Haiti’s
political, economic and social stability to become fully
established. Haiti is entering a crucial year. It is will
be vital for the Security Council to closely follow the
evolution in Haiti, and Spain will likely propose that
the Council, in due time, hold consultations to closely
examine the results of the evaluation mission that will
travel to Haiti early next year to define the fundamental
parameters of the final phase of MINUSTAH’s mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank the Security Council for
inviting the Government of Haiti to participate in
this meeting and to share its response to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667) of 31 August
concerning the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Allow me also to express the
gratitude of the Haitian Government to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and for the
commitment that he has constantly shown throughout
the implementation of MINUSTAH’s mandate. The
report he has just submitted to the Council bears ample
witness to that.
The report is all the more important, coming as it
does at a crucial moment. Indeed, Haiti currently faces
two major challenges. On the one hand, the country
must successfully hold free, inclusive and transparent
general elections that will ensure an uneventful
political transition in 2016, allow for the consolidation
of democracy and securely set the country on the
path to modernization and lasting development. On
the other hand, it must ensure that the gains achieved
through MINUSTAH’s presence in the country over
the past 11 years, in particular in the realm of security,
are sustained, and it must effectively take the reins as
the gradual drawdown and departure of the Mission
approaches.

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

The Haitian Government has reviewed the
Secretary-General’s observations with the greatest
possible interest and has given its close attention to his
recommendations. The report paints a fair and balanced
picture of the political situation in Haiti, as well as of
recent developments concerning the electoral process
currently underway, along with the establishment of
the rule of law, security, the human rights situation,
development activities and the humanitarian situation.
The report rightly emphasizes the holding of the longawaited elections, which are widely regarded as a test,
not only for Haiti’s institutions but also for MINUSTAH.
The holding of free, transparent, inclusive and
secure elections is clearly essential in order to ensure the
continuity of Parliament and to consolidate democracy,
stability and the rule of law, which are all critical
factors for the modernization of the country. With that
firm conviction and based on their commitment to
the Haitian people, the Head of State, His Excellency
Michel Joseph Martelly, and the Government, with
the precious help of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, have worked tirelessly to
create the conditions necessary for holding democratic
elections, as the report makes clear.
In that regard, the Government welcomes the
Secretary-General’s assessment, namely, that the
Electoral Council has shown its capacity not only
“to manage a highly complex electoral process ...
notwithstanding the logistical and financial challenges”,
but to do so “inclusively and transparently” (S/2015/667,
para. 2). Haitian institutions, as a whole, have fully
played their role and have demonstrated their ability to
take ownership of and steer the process. The positive
role played by the Haitian National Police, among
others, in maintaining the climate of security was also
mentioned in the report.
Haiti has made important progress in the renewal of
its democratic institutions, with the holding of the first
round of legislative elections, as stated in the report.
However, the process is not over yet. If the realization of
the first round marks a key step in the political transition
process and in the strengthening of democracy, the
fact remains that the election on 9 August was only
the first step in an electoral cycle that will continue
in the coming months. The presidential campaign was
officially launched on 9 September. On 25 October,
we will have the second round of legislative elections,
concomitantly with the first round of the presidential
elections, which will be followed by a second round in

S/PV.7530

late December at the same time as the municipal and
local elections.
From the outset, everything has been done to
bolster overall confidence in the integrity of the
process. Attaching great respect to the independence
and prerogatives of the Provisional Electoral Council,
the Government remains convinced that the Provisional
Electoral Council, aware of its responsibilities and the
importance of what is at stake, will make every effort
to meet the expectations of the population, adopting
all necessary measures to address the shortcomings
noted in the first round by national and international
observers, so as to resolve the problems identified. The
credibility of the elections is at stake, and their success
is critical for the success of the political transition in
2016 and for stability.
The Haitian Government takes this opportunity
to reiterate its deep gratitude to all friendly countries,
all cooperation partners of Haiti and United Nations
organizations, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and MINUSTAH,
for their involvement in the holding of the elections.
We are grateful for the quality of their support to the
Provisional Electoral Council, including additional
commitments announced at the donors’ meeting in
July, which included the participation of the Prime
Minister of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Evans Paul. We
are confident that they will continue to stand by the
Haitian people at this critical juncture by helping the
Electoral Council to remedy the existing gaps in the
financial, technical and logistical resources that are
needed to prepare the next phase of the elections, which
will be decisive in nature.
Allow me to express the gratitude of the Haitian
Government to ​​
the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago, which has just announced on 18 September a
contribution of $1 million to the UNDP trust fund for
the holding of the elections of 25 October.
The Secretary-General’s report mentions several
other positive developments since the last visit to Haiti
by the members of the Security Council in January.
You, Mr. President, were there. These advances include,
inter alia, the significant improvement in security,
the promotion and defence of human rights, the
establishment of the rule of law and the strengthening
of institutions, which are the guarantors of, among
others, the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the
National Police, whose numbers continue to increase,
with a target of 16,000 members by 2016, in accordance

15-3042919/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

with the objectives established by the Organization’s
development plan. While progress may seem slow,
prison reform is also under way. The implementation
of the new Penal Code should help to contribute to the
overall progress.
Alongside those various capacity-building initiatives,
the Haitian Government welcomes MINUSTAH’s
participation in a wide range of projects focused on the
reduction and prevention of violence, the fight against
poverty, meeting the needs of vulnerable groups and
young people and communities at risk, the establishment
of legal aid offices, and the labour-intensive activities
focused on the development of infrastructure or on
environmental protection, not to mention the support
given to electoral awareness campaigns.
Furthermore, the Government takes notes of what
the report describes as a significant deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, while condemning the reduction
of the funding of such activities, which has had the effect
of limiting the ability of the United Nations system
and its partners to respond satisfactorily to all kinds
of challenges. Two of those challenges are a source of
major concern: the upsurge in cholera cases, on the one
hand, and, on the other hand, the tensions that have
arisen in Haitian-Dominican relations, following the
repatriation to Haiti of migrants and the descendants of
Haitian migrants. The Government supports the call of
the Secretary-General for revitalizing an action plan to
eradicate cholera. With respect to the relations between
Haiti and the Dominican Republic, the Government
fully supports a resumption of dialogue between the
two parties, as the Secretary-General has suggested, in
order to find a solution that guarantees that all migrants
will enjoy respect for their human dignity and the
protection of their human rights, while promoting the
resumption of cooperation in all areas between the two
countries.
After overcoming a host of obstacles that have
threatened to derail the electoral process, the Haitian
Government welcomes the prospect of the upcoming
installation of the fiftieth legislature and a peaceful
and calm political transition in a climate of restored
security.
The primary objective of MINUSTAH, which
is to foster sustainable stability, as outlined in the
mandate established by resolution 1542 (2004) and
confirmed by subsequent Security Council resolutions,
is in the process of being achieved. A new order is
emerging in Haiti. The country is calm, with stronger
20/33

08/10/2015

institutions. We are focusing on the fundamental issues:
modernizing economic and social structures, reducing
poverty, substantially reducing unemployment,
promoting education and human rights, protecting the
environment and increasing investment with a view
to ensuring stronger and more sustained growth and
sustainable development.
In his address on 1 October to the General
Assembly, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly, said the following (see
A/70/PV.22):
“The progress achieved in recent years in
Haiti has been made possible thanks in part to the
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Those achievements represent a notable
contribution to the country’s stability without
which no prospect of economic modernization
or sustainable development can be seriously
considered. MINUSTAH is in the process of
adapting to a new context, different from the one in
which it was established. The Haitian Government
is opting for a reconfiguration plan that takes into
account the evolving situation on the ground. I
reiterate our hope to see the progressive and ordered
withdrawal of troops continue. The withdrawal
and transfer of military, police and development
responsibilities to Haitian institutions will be made
in accordance with an agreed calendar. This will
prevent any damaging vacuum in the internal and
external security of the country.”
At the time of the forthcoming political transition
and the installation of a new Government in 2016, the
Haitian Government is supporting a reconfiguration of
the mandate, together with the transfer at an appropriate
pace of the responsibilities of MINUSTAH to the
national authorities. This transfer should take into
account at each stage the progress made and also the
existing vulnerabilities, so as to avoid any premature
withdrawal that could create a vacuum in the security
situation, as the Secretary General has constantly
reminded us. The key is to ensure maximum flexibility
in terms of the withdrawal and the implementation of
the reconfiguration plan.
The Haitian Government has specifically noted in
the Secretary-General’s report the following passage:
“I recommend that the Security Council extend
the mandate of MINUSTAH for an additional and
possibly final year, until 15 October 2016, with

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

the current authorized uniformed strengths of
2,370 troops and 2,601 police officers. Following
the completion of the electoral process and the
installation of a new President, I propose to carry
out a strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti,
including the degree of stability throughout the
country and the professionalism and strength
of the national police, with a view to presenting
the Council with recommendations on the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti
ahead of the expiration of the Mission’s mandate
in 2016. Without prejudice to the outcome of the
strategic assessment, I anticipate that, if the recent
positive trends continue, the nature of the United
Nations presence in Haiti will evolve significantly,
including its security posture” (S/2015/667,
para. 65).
The people and the Government of Haiti attach
particular value to the prominent role the United Nations
has played in Haiti in recent years, particularly within
the framework of MINUSTAH. This is an opportunity
for me to commend, in this regard, the quality and
scope of the work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré. In
exceptionally difficult circumstances, Ms. Honoré has
always shown composure, poise and intelligence where
others would probably have yielded to the temptation
of alarmism and trepidation. I appreciate Ms. Honoré’s
steadfastness and her understanding of the complexities
of my country.
I would like to salute once again the efforts of the
Secretary-General, whose report will certainly be a
valuable contribution to the deliberations and decisions
of the Council concerning the composition and
future of MINUSTAH, I wish to reiterate the Haitian
Government’s determination to continue to work closely
with the Security Council and the Secretariat for the
full realization of the MINUSTAH mandate, which is
to assist the Haitian people and their Government in
their quest for lasting stability based on the rule of law
and democratic institutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure for Guatemala to participate
in this debate organized by the Spanish presidency. We
wish Spain every success during its term throughout
October. I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of

S/PV.7530

the Secretary-General, Ambassador Sandra Honoré,
and thank her for her detailed report (S/2015/667).
She knows that she can count on the full support of
Guatemala. I also wish to thank the representative of
Haiti for his valuable statement.
We are pleased to hear that Haiti is experiencing
a period of general stability, which presents a window
of opportunity for the country to move to a more
sustainable path of economic growth and political
development. A week ago we listened with great
interest in the General Assembly to President Martelly
(A/70/PV.22), who told us that progress in his country,
as Ambassador Régis just emphasized, was made
possible in large part thanks to the support of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
He also said that the electoral process — initiated on
9 August and due to continue until 25 October — was
a good indicator for measuring the performance and
success of the Mission over the past 11 years. It is an
assessment that we share, because these elections are
an opportunity for the Haitian authorities, including the
Haitian National Police, to show their ability to manage
this complex national electoral process without relying
on MINUSTAH, and, similarly, because they will result
in the third democratic transfer of power in Haiti.
This historical experience also reminds us of the
need to establish and make operational a permanent
electoral council to keep a record of the many best
practices evidenced during this election cycle, taking
into account the frequency and regularity with which
elections are held in Haiti, as required by its Constitution.
It is also important if Haiti is to gradually reduce its
dependence on international electoral assistance.
Looking to the future, elected officials must be
held to account in terms of the tangible results hoped
for by the people who chose them as their leaders. .
The progress and achievements made to date will make
a difference in Haiti so long as they are significantly
reflected in the standard of living of the entire
population. Accordingly, we must continue to invest
in socioeconomic programmes aimed at reducing
inequalities and providing humanitarian assistance to
the most vulnerable populations. We view with great
concern the recent humanitarian appeal launched
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in August highlighting the triple threat that the
country is currently facing: mixed migration flows, a
cholera epidemic and food insecurity and malnutrition.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

15-3042921/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

Development, we have the opportunity to redouble our
efforts to ensure that nobody is left behind and that all
populations enjoy a better future.
On the issue of safety, we believe that strengthening
the Haitian National Police remains central to
guaranteeing security and stability throughout the
country. The key aspects of fulfilling this task are
are increasing the number of troops in 2016, fully
implementing the current plan for the Haitian National
Police and developing the next five-year plan with
a view to fostering the protection of human rights,
accountability and the maintenance of beneficial
cooperation with MINUSTAH.
We look forward to the results of the strategic
assessment to be carried out by the Secretary-General
next year. This should only be done once the new
Government has been installed, in order to allow
for a period of stability and provide an opportunity
for deciding how the United Nations should support
the country’s institutions in the future. It is our
expectation that the process will focus on consolidating
achievements and will take into account the realities on
the ground.
In
conclusion,
Guatemala
supports
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
extension of the MINUSTAH mandate for a further
year. We assure the Permanent Representative of Haiti
of the full support of Guatemala for his goals and for
the increasing stability and development of his country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the Spanish delegation for
organizing this very important debate on the situation
in the brotherly nation of Haiti.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her
briefing and reiterate the gratitude and respect of my
Government for her leadership and her ongoing support
for the strengthening of peace and democracy in Haiti.
I thank Ambassador Denis Régis of Haiti for his
statement.
I take this opportunity to once again thank the
members of the Council for the many messages of
condolence following the recent death on 30 August of

22/33

08/10/2015

Lieutenant-General José Luis Jaborandy, Jr., the former
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). At a recent meeting
of troop-contributing countries, the President of Brazil,
Ms. Dilma Rousseff, while acknowledging his passing,
stressed his professional and personal qualities as
well as his valuable contribution to stability in Haiti.
Following an accelerated selection process, the new
Force Commander, Lieutenant-General Ajax Porto
Pinheiro, has already arrived in Port-au-Prince and will
soon assume his duties.
We welcome the holding of the first round of the
legislative elections on 9 August in a relatively stable
environment, while regretting the incidents that led to
loss of life as well as the disruptions in certain polling
stations. The handling of the electoral process by Haitian
authorities helps to normalize the exercise of legislative
power. Furthermore, we are convinced that for the
third time in a row a democratically elected President
will lead the country on the path towards sustainable
development, stability and peace. Brazil in cooperation
with the international community will continue to
support the efforts of the Haitian Government to hold
the local, legislative and presidential elections under
way.
On the basis of our own experience in Brazil, we
believe that respect for the democratic process is a
prerequisite for the development and the continuation
of the progress observed in recent years in Haiti.
Besides the financial contribution being made to the
electoral process, Ambassador Celso Amorim, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister of Defence
of Brazil, will lead the electoral observation mission of
the Organization of American States in Haiti during the
upcoming presidential elections.
(spoke in English)
Brazil supports the Secretary-General’s assessment
regarding stability and security in Haiti, while
recognizing that there are still reasons for concern
with respect to security, including in the context of
the ongoing electoral process. We also support the
recommended extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH
for an additional year, until 15 October 2016, with the
maintenance of the current troop and police levels. The
military and police components have a relevant role in
the logistics and security operation. As stated in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2015/667), it is
important to keep them as mobile and visible as possible.

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

We concur with the Secretary-General’s proposal for
a new strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti as
a basis for his making recommendations on the future
United Nations presence in the country. It is important
to undertake the assessment after the formation of a
new Government and for the reconfiguration process
to be guided solely by the conditions on the ground and
by the need to preserve the progress made in the past
11 years.
Despite the enhanced performance of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) in preventing crimes and
controlling civil unrest, it is worth underlining that the
force has yet to reach the target of 15,000 officers by the
end of 2016. Furthermore, only 8 of the 70 goals of the
2012-2016 HNP Development Plan have been fully met.
We encourage the HNP to continue to benefit from the
MINUSTAH efforts to ensure a successful handover of
responsibility for security in critical areas.
Brazil also believes that MINUSTAH should keep
its mandated tools to develop community violence
reduction programmes and quick-impact projects
as well as an adequate engineering capability. The
experience of Haiti has clearly shown that such
activities directly benefit the local population and assist
in confidence-building in the peace process and the
Mission throughout its life cycle. Any future presence
of the Organization in Haiti should take this success
story into account and ensure the continuity of such
activities, so as to contribute to the sustainability of the
reconstruction efforts.
The humanitarian situation continues to raise
concern. Although there is a downward trend in the
number of internally displaced people, currently at
60,000, there was an increase in the number of new
cholera cases — 20,000 cases and 175 deaths — and a
worsening of the levels of food and nutrition insecurity
in rural areas, mainly due to drought and the effects
of the El Niño phenomenon. In this scenario, the
international community’s relationship with Haiti
should increasingly be guided by the establishment of
partnerships capable of improving the living conditions
of Haitians.
The Brazilian Government is committed to
maintaining its humanitarian cooperation efforts as well
as the current special immigration policy for Haitians.
We expanded our capacity to issue permanent visas in
Port-au-Prince, with the support of the International
Organization for Migration, to ensure an appropriate

S/PV.7530

entry and a dignified welcome for those migrants in
our country. Currently, close to 2,000 permanent visas
are issued per month by the Embassy in Port-au-Prince.
A similar measure has already resulted in a decreased
flow of immigrants across the border in the state of
Acre in northern Brazil and has been an effective tool
against human traffickers.
We believe that the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission could support the stabilization and
development efforts in Haiti. There are important
elements for Haiti’s development and stability that
deserve more careful consideration. Among those
elements, let me highlight two areas that we believe
will continue to be at the core of our collective support
for Haiti and that may play a constructive role during
the transition, namely, improved access to justice and
poverty reduction. Improved access to justice should
empower the weakest and the poorest, especially
through the effectiveness of social rights, and produce
tangible dividends for the most vulnerable. We welcome
the Haitian Government’s allocation of resources to
guarantee the continuation of the important work of the
Bureau d’assistance légale, which has been supported
by the MINUSTAH community violence reduction
programme.
Brazil also welcomes the revised United Nations
Integrated Strategic Framework for Haiti and its
alignment with Haitian priorities. The challenge
henceforth is to make the gains of recent years
sustainable, while the country moves forward,
increasing stability and making institutional, economic
and social progress.
(spoke in French)
As Ambassador Régis has said, a new order is
currently emerging in Haiti. Brazil continues its
commitment towards our Haitian brothers and sisters
in their efforts to build a future of democratic stability
and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): It is an
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/667) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his statement. Turkey, the

15-3042923/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, candidate countries, endorse this
statement.
Haiti is committed to a delicate process of democratic
renewal, which is a precondition for the success of the
huge development efforts made by the country in recent
years, especially since the disastrous earthquake in
2010. The country is seeking to consolidate its as yet
fragile gains in democracy. Grave social and economic
inequalities persist. The efforts of all to ensure stability
and security remain paramount.
The EU remains a faithful partner of the Republic
of Haiti and is determined to act in unison with the other
partners to support the country in the current delicate
phase. After the 2010 earthquake, the EU stepped up its
efforts to support the reconstruction and consolidation
of the country, particularly of its infrastructure,
administration and economy. We welcome the continued
decline in the number of internally displaced persons
still living in camps, but grave humanitarian needs still
persist. As a result, the EU has decided to maintain
its humanitarian response programme again in Haiti
this year, with €11.6 million committed to meeting
the needs of persons still displaced, helping to keep
the cholera epidemic under control and assisting in a
sustainable manner the victims of food insecurity in the
rural population. The European Union also supports
the 2015-2016 transitional appeal recently launched by
the Haitian authorities and the United Nations, which
puts resilience at the heart of its strategy.
The European Union and Government of Haiti
signed a national indicative programme of assistance
for the period from 2014 to 2020 amounting to
€420 million, a testament to the European Union’s
continued commitment to supporting the Government
in its strategy for development and socioeconomic
recovery. The European Union and the Government of
Haiti will continue to cooperate in order to improve the
country’s financial capacity to promote administrative
reform, better budget management, a strengthened State
and governance and support for the implementation of
national policies in the areas of education, food security
and infrastructure and urban development. Together,
we are preparing a joint humanitarian development
framework. The European Union remains open to
conducting a dialogue with the relevant United Nations
humanitarian agencies in order to discuss concrete
opportunities for cooperation.

24/33

08/10/2015

Haiti cannot afford any major new political or
security crises and must ensure that the progress it makes
cannot be reversed. The European Union welcomes
the start of the electoral process, which represents
a fundamental step in the right direction, despite the
violent incidents and irregularities that occurred during
the first stage of the elections on 9 August. The process
of restoring the country’s democratic institutions should
continue in an atmosphere of peace, inclusiveness,
transparency and equality, and it is essential to ensure
that that is what will prevail during the next phase of
the elections, in order to improve the whole process and
avoid the violence and irregularities of the first. The
European Union has made a substantial contribution to
this process through a grant of €5 million to the election
fund managed by the United Nations Development
Programme. We have also deployed, as we did during
the 2010 elections, an election observation mission of
about 80 people. Together with the Club of Madrid, the
European Union has also been conducting a programme
of discussion and advice, aimed at a large number of
institutional actors and representatives of civil society.
The security situation remains delicate. The
European Union believes it is essential to ensure
a more stable and inclusive political climate. The
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSТAH) remains absolutely crucial. The
European Union believes that MINUSTAH’s presence
and its active participation, in particular, in securing
the upcoming elections in October and December is
essential. It can make a very significant contribution
to ensuring peace and stability throughout the electoral
process and thus supporting a peaceful political
transition.
I would like to express the European Union’s
appreciation for MINUSTAH’s important contribution
to stabilizing security and consolidating democracy
and the rule of law in Haiti. We remain committed to
supporting the efforts of the Haitian authorities, the
United Nations and the international community to
ensure a better future for all the people of Haiti.
Since this is the last time I will address the Security
Council in my capacity as Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, I would like to take the opportunity
to thank the Council through you, Mr. President, for
the splendid cooperation it has shown to the European
Union and its delegation here in New York over the past
four years.

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed that this is the last time that the observer of
the European Union will take the floor in the Council,
and I believe I am conveying the sentiments not only
of the members of the Council but of all the members
of the United Nations represented here today, which
reflect our sadness at the departure of an Ambassador
who has done his job admirably first as Ambassador of
Austria and since then of the European Union. He has
consistently displayed skill and ability. I know he has
earned the full respect of every member of the United
Nations. He is a man of much experience whom we will
miss. On behalf of us all, I would like to wish him every
happiness in his future professional and personal life.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is the first time I have taken the floor of
the Council under your presidency, Sir, I would like
to congratulate you and your country and wish you
a successful month. I would like to heartily thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her detailed briefing and her
ongoing commitment, to which we can testify firsthand.
Colombia associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the Ambassador of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. As others have
before me, I would like to express our condolences to
the Government and people of Brazil and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
on the death of General José Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., who
worked so tirelessly and with such dedication at the
helm of MINUSTAH.
Achieving security, stability and better conditions
for the Haitian people, as well as strengthening its
democracy’s institutional capacities, must continue to be
a priority of the international community’s commitment
to Haiti. We were pleased with the results of the first
round of legislative elections on 9 August, since despite
some violent outbreaks, reflected in a somewhat low
turnout — which we hope will improve in the second
round — we can acknowledge the Government of Haiti’s
commitment and effort in stabilizing its democratic
institutions and holding the elections. The important
work done by the Provisional Electoral Council and
the Haitian National Police deserves special mention,
and we are sure they will also perform well during the

S/PV.7530

presidential election and the second round of legislative
elections, which will take place very soon.
We acknowledge the progress that Haiti has made
in such areas as security, reducing violence, relocating
people in the camps — where a lot of progress has
been made — and economic growth, among others,
but, as others have said, the challenges to development
remain huge and the international community must
continue its support. In addition to organizing bilateral
cooperation programmes in the areas of agriculture
and infrastructure, Colombia has assisted Haiti by
contributing police to MINUSTAH. Our contribution
includes institutional advice, operational support,
prevention through checkpoints, training in police
academies, investigations by the judiciary police and
community outreach. We intend to continue training a
group of female Haitian police officers in Colombia.
I would also like to inform the Council that in
accordance with the commitment made by President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón on 28 September, Colombia
will expand its support to MINUSTAH, as Ms. Honoré
said, with another 58 police officers accredited by the
United Nations. In that regard, I would like to thank
the Canadian Government for sending us instructors to
provide accelerated training for those officers.
There are still many challenges ahead, however,
as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/667)
indicates. Any decisions on MINUSTAH should be
based exclusively on the conditions on the ground, and
only after the strategic assessment mission that the
Secretary-General will soon put together has made its
recommendations.
I reiterate that we must at all costs safeguard the
gains achieved, and, in line with the report, we think
that, before we take any action, the new Government
should have a reasonable period to consolidate stability.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Colombia’s
support for the invaluable work of MINUSTAH,
which seeks to ensure the sustainable well-being of the
Haitian people. That is why my country is in favour
of a one-year extension of MINUSTAH’s mandate
at the same military and police level — as you said,
Mr. President — with the goal of strengthening the rule
of law, good governance and the level of safety and
welfare of the Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.

15-3042925/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to convey my delegation’s satisfaction
to see the Permanent Representative of Spain in the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to extend my condolences to the United Nations and
the Government of Brazil on the passing of Lieutenant
General Jaborandy.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru,
United States of America, Venezuela and my country,
Uruguay. I commend you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate to discuss the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2015/667). The Group of
Friends welcomes the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and
thanks her for her comprehensive briefing and for all
her hard work.
Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are the key elements needed to achieve
greater stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends welcomes the organization of the
first round of legislative elections that took place on
9 August 2015 in a relatively peaceful environment.
We acknowledge the steps taken by the Haitian
institutions to take corrective measures to address the
irregularities identified and to improve the upcoming
rounds of elections. We also note the important role
that the Government of Haiti, the Electoral Council
and the political parties must play in ensuring that the
upcoming round of elections are conducted in a free,
fair, peaceful and democratic manner and in accordance
with the electoral law.
The Group of Friends calls on all Haitian
stakeholders to engage constructively, exercise
maximum restraint and work peacefully together in
order to maintain confidence in the electoral process.
It also welcomes the efforts carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.
The Group also welcomes Ms. Honoré’s efforts to
promote an ongoing dialogue among all national
stakeholders aimed at strengthening the ongoing
political process and mitigating the risk to Haitian
democratic institutions. We thank her also for her
efforts to convince the diplomatic and international

26/33

08/10/2015

community to continue contributing in a coordinated
manner so as to encourage political dialogue.
The Group of Friends recalls the Security Council’s
mission to Haiti in January 2015, which was conducted
in accordance with the provisions of its terms of
reference (S/2015/40) and whose primary objective
was to reaffirm the continued support of the Council
for the Government and people of Haiti, highlighting
the importance of an inclusive and constructive climate
for political stability, democratic governance and
development, and urging all political parties to work
cooperatively.
The Group of Friends recognizes that the security
situation in Haiti is generally stable and underscores
the importance of condition-based security-related
decisions about the future of MINUSTAH. We also note
that incidents of sporadic violence occurred during the
first round of elections, although no increase was noted
in the levels of insecurity or violence in the departments
from which the military component had withdrawn.
The Group recognizes the increased capacity of the
Haitian National Police, and believes that the presence
of MINUSTAH remains important for ensuring
security and stability in Haiti. In the light of Haiti’s
current security challenges, including those related
to the current elections, the Secretary-General should
continue to closely monitor the situation on the ground.
In accordance with his latest report, the SecretaryGeneral should conduct a strategic assessment
mission to Haiti, preferably within 90 days after the
inauguration of the new President and ideally after the
formation of a new Government, so as to be able to
present recommendations to the Council on the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of
the commitment on the part of the Government of the
Haiti to strengthen the rule of law and to make further
progress in strengthening the judiciary and security
sectors. In that regard, the Group would like to welcome
the ongoing strengthening, professionalization and
reform of the Haitian National Police, and we reiterate
that capacity-building in the form of police training
should remain the most critical task for MINUSTAH.
We also note the partial progress in the implementation
of the five-year Haitian National Police Development
Plan (2012-2016). The Group of Friends acknowledges
the progress in the judicial sector. However, it is urgently
necessary to reduce lengthy pretrial detentions and to

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

eliminate inhumane conditions of detention. We have to
achieve accountability and end impunity, including for
past human rights violations. The Group of Friends also
calls on the Ministry of Justice to continue its efforts
to deal with the issue of prolonged pretrial detention.
In that connection, the Group of Friends welcomes
Operation “Coup de Poing”.
Despite the willingness shown by the Haitian
authorities to engage with international human rights
mechanisms, the limited national capacity for human
rights protection remains a concern, as well as the fact
that the new Government no longer includes a Minister/
Delegate for Human Rights and Extreme Poverty. The
Group of Friends notes the launching of the national
policy of the Haitian Government on equality between
women and men.
The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
done by the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and
others to protect members of vulnerable groups,
and calls for greater attention by all stakeholders
to the prevention of and reduction in violent crimes,
particularly against women and children, including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence. The Group
of Friends notes with concern the increasing number
of reported rapes in the past two reporting periods. We
also urge Haitian citizens to continue reporting such
crimes so that the allegations can be investigated and
those responsible can be held to account. In that sense,
the Group also supports ongoing efforts to reduce
violence by promoting the well-being of at-risk youth
and vulnerable communities. The Group of Friends
continues to support the attention accorded to gender
issues and to child protection.
The Group of Friends also expresses concerns
about the continuing humanitarian challenges,
including living conditions in the remaining camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs). The Group of
Friends welcomes the significant progress made during
2015 regarding the resettlement of people displaced by
the 2010 earthquake, but it should be underscored that
the funding to provide basic services and relocation
subsidies for the remaining IDPs is no longer available.
The Group of Friends notes with concern that food
insecurity as a result of the drought and the resulting
decrease in the harvest during the period from March
to June could impact the humanitarian situation and
stability.

S/PV.7530

The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti so as to meet the needs of the
Haitian people. In this regard, the Group recalls the
United Nations two-year plan focused on short-term
actions in support of the 10-year national plan for the
elimination of cholera in Haiti. Likewise, the Group of
Friends of Haiti acknowledges the efforts of the donor
community and calls upon donors to fulfil without
delay the pledges made.
The Group of Friends welcomes the first meeting of
the High-level Committee on Cholera since the change
of Government that took place in January, co-chaired by
Prime Minister Evans Paul and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honoré, and notes that
the increase in cholera cases reported at the end of 2014
and in the first four months of 2015 began showing
signs of reversal in May. Unfortunately, the situation
remains of concern in the departments of Ouest, Centre,
Artibonite and Nord, which accounted for more than
80 per cent of the total number of cases between March
and August.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy of sexual exploitation and abuse, and in this
regard expects all United Nations personnel to adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges
all actors involved to assume their responsibilities in
order to prevent such cases, investigate allegations and
hold those responsible accountable.
The Group notes with concern that the International
Monetary Fund reports that the reduction of international
cooperation could put growth in Haiti significantly at
risk. The Group is also concerned about alarming and
persistent food insecurity in the country and the limited
capacity of the State to generate revenues, which greatly
affects the public finances.
The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthened democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions,
and further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority

15-3042927/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

08/10/2015

and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.

in the convening of the elections, and to actively
participate in them.

The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation.

Peru reiterates its firm conviction that decisions on
the future of MINUSTAH should be made exclusively
on the basis of the conditions on the ground. While the
security situation in Haiti remains stable thanks to the
crucial support of MINUSTAH, the situation is still
fairly complex given the increase of protests, political
fragmentation, hightened economic crisis, the lack of
basic services and a rise in political tensions that are
typical of any electoral year.

The Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
important role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti, and expresses its support for and
recognition to the women and men of MINUSTAH for
their dedication and tireless efforts to support recovery
and stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank you, Sir, for your leadership of
the Security Council and for convening this debate. I
also welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, Sandra Honoré, and
thank her for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Haiti (S/2015/677).
Peru is committed to strengthening the security,
stability, sustainable development and institutional
strengthening of Haiti. My country has therefore
participated in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004 and intends
to continue contributing to the operation, which is the
only United Nations peacekeeping mission deployed in
the Americas. My delegation endorses the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti, especially as regards
the recognition of the important work being done
by MINUSTAH in support of the stabilization and
security of Haiti and the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the rule of law in that country.
I shall make just a few additional comments in my
national capacity.
Peru welcomes the holding in August of the first
round of legislative elections in Haiti, and hopes
that it can adhere without problem to the electoral
timetable for the presidential, legislative, municipal
and local elections scheduled for the coming months.
These elections represent a milestone in the process of
democratic consolidation in Haiti. We therefore reiterate
our call on all Haitian political forces to cooperate with
the Government and the national electoral institutions

28/33

While recognizing the important progress made
in the recruitment practices, professionalization and
training of the Haitian National Police, the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes that the majority of the goals laid
out in the 2012-2016 development plan have yet to be
achieved, which is why that institution still lacks the
necessary capacity to maintain public order and security
of the population throughout the country. We therefore
think that the operational and strategic cooperation of
MINUSTAH in Haiti remains essential to helping the
Haitian authorities in maintaining security and order,
as part of the process of stabilization and democratic
consolidation in that country.
Peru therefore agrees with the Secretary-General
on the importance of maintaining for an additional
12 months the authorized troop strength of the military
component of MINUSTAH in order to give the Mission
the operational capacity necessary to help ensure
security in Haiti. We also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to carry out a strategic assessment
of the level of stability in Haiti in order to define the
future configuration of the United Nations presence
in that country. My delegation agrees that such an
assessment should begin after the inauguration of the
new democratically elected Government.
My delegation has consistently subscribed to the
principle of national ownership, in the understanding
that peacebuilding must be an inherently national
process in which peacekeeping operations support
national authorities in implementing their priorities for
stabilization and development. To that end, we believe
that the new Government to be elected in Haiti must
have the opportunity to decide for itself, in a sovereign
manner, the nature of the support that it will require
in the future, as well how its partnership with the
United Nations and the international community is to
evolve. Peru therefore believes that it is vital for the
Council to take into consideration the position of Haiti
15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

when it decides on time frames for the transition in the
MINUSTAH mandate, as well as on the nature of the
future presence of the United Nations in that country.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
significant achievements that MINUSTAH has realized
in stabilizing Haiti should not leave the impression
that the United Nations work in that country is done.
We must not repeat the mistakes of the past when the
Organization decided to withdraw its presence from
the ground prematurely. For that reason, my country
wants MINUSTAH to be able to successfully conclude
the mission that it has been carrying out so well free of
pressure and artificial deadlines.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I would
like to start by conveying my country’s appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honoré for her statement this morning. We would also
like to take this opportunity to offer the condolences of
all Canadians to those who knew Lieutenant Jaborandy,
Jr., the late Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who
tragically passed away a few weeks ago.
Canada aligns itself with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Uruguay on behalf of the Friends of the
Secretary-General for Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Haiti is at a very critical point in its democratic
development. The current electoral process is an
opportunity to advance long-term stability and
democracy in the country, and it must be seized. We
must start today by expressing sadness and offering
condolences, on behalf of all Canadians, at the tragic
loss of life during the recent election. Canada deplores
the acts of violence that led to those situations, and we
have encouraged the Haitian authorities to investigate
those incidents without delay and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Canada strongly encourages all
Haitian political actors to respect democratic principles
and contribute to the success of the current electoral
process. It is crucial that the Haitian authorities and
all political actors work together for the completion of
transparent, inclusive, credible and peaceful elections,
in keeping with the established calendar.

S/PV.7530

(spoke in French)
Canada also reminds all Haitian citizens, and in
particular women and young people, of the importance
of voting. While we are pleased that many exercised
their right to vote during the first round, we hope for
greater participation on forthcoming election dates.
We also encourage efforts under way to raise voter
awareness.
(spoke in English)
The organization of the first round of legislative
elections reflects the efforts of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government of Haiti and the
Haitian National Police, and we very much welcome
the progress made. We thank all members of the
international community who have also contributed,
via both their expertise and their financial resources, to
the organization of these elections.
(spoke in French)
We recognize and appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH in providing logistical support and other
electoral assistance, while stressing the importance of
strengthening the capacity of Haitian institutions to
take on their full role in the future.
(spoke in English)
Canada has a long-standing commitment to
the people of Haiti and continues to play a leading
international role in support of its development and
prosperity. Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.6 billion in development and humanitarian assistance
to the country. We are one of the largest contributors of
humanitarian aid that has improved the health, education
and economic opportunities for Haitians, especially in
the area of maternal, newborn and children’s health.
Our future engagements will be strongly anchored in
mutual accountability and greater aid coordination to
ensure concrete and sustainable results for the Haitian
people. We have the responsibility to ensure that aid is
delivered in a manner that is effective for those in need
and accountable to Haiti, its partners and Canadians in
our country. We will continue work with the Haitian
Government, the Haitian people and the Haitian
diaspora across Canada to achieve that progress, and
we will continue to focus our efforts on ensuring that
we achieve long-term sustainable development and
stand ready to offer our support to the people of Haiti.

15-3042929/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

Canada continues to support the important work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For
10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve security
conditions and contribute to lasting stability in Haiti.
Considerable progress has been made in this regard.
(spoke in French)
Canada supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Mission be maintained at
its current levels for a further year, and that a needs
assessment mission be conducted once the new Haitian
President has been inaugurated and a new Government
is in place.
(spoke in English)
Canada maintains that any further reduction of
the United Nations footprint in Haiti must reflect the
situation on the ground and the capacity of the Haitian
State to deliver security to its population. Indeed,
the Haitian National Police (HNP) has demonstrated
increasing capacity, and we commend the Government
of Haiti, MINUSTAH and the HNP itself for this
achievement. Canada is proud to be among the top police
contributors to MINUSTAH, including with several
specialized teams. We are proud of the contributions we
have made to the strengthening and professionalization
of Haiti’s police, in particular in the area of training
and mentoring. We salute the fellow Member States we
are working alongside and urge others to join in this
essential work.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the recent efforts of MINUSTAH
and the Government of Haiti to address the problem of
long-term preventive detention. We urge the Haitian
Government to prioritize the development of the
National Police and to prioritize the establishment of
an independent and strengthened judicial sector, so that
the Haitian people can enjoy the rule of law.
(spoke in English)
While MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution
for security in Haiti, we must avoid mission drawdown
scenarios that could jeopardize the results achieved
to date, with increased risks to security and stability
for all Haitian citizens. Indeed, we want to ensure that
MINUSTAH is the last United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Haiti, which means we cannot be too hasty
in encouraging the departure of the Mission.

30/33

08/10/2015

(spoke in French)
Haiti and Haitians deserve a stable, secure and
prosperous future, and together we are contributing to
making that a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Spanish delegation for convening this
debate and Ms. Sandra Honoré both for introducing
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/677) and for her leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
at a highly critical moment for the future of the
country. This debate is particularly relevant for Mexico
because it is our first participation since Mexican
military personnel were deployed to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
My delegation is pleased to note that the situation
in Haiti has seen progress in security, the strengthening
of the rule of law and the training of Haitian National
Police (HNP), and above all that the long-postponed first
round of legislative elections was able to take place in
a relatively peaceful environment, making it one of the
most important milestones for Haitians of recent years.
We are pleased to have been able to support the conduct
of the elections through financial contributions to the
Electoral Observation Mission of the Organization of
American States, and the basket fund for elections in
Haiti administered by the United Nations Programme
for Development. We commend MINUSTAH personnel
for having provided special protection to the candidates
following the agreement between the Mission and the
Ministry for the Status of Women and Women’s Rights.
The August elections are testimony to the growing
capacity of institutions in Haiti to assume greater
responsibility in the democratic life of the country. We
call on all political actors in Haiti to act in the same
spirit to ensure that the next round of elections is free,
fair, inclusive and transparent.
Mexico hopes that institution-building, especially
in terms of the HNP, will remain the cornerstone of
efforts to reconfigure the United Nations presence
in the country. We also consider it essential that, in
addition to playing a security role, MINUSTAH and the
United Nations agencies in Haiti continue to provide
socioeconomic alternatives to bolster progress in other
key areas in the daily lives of the Haitian people. The

15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

prevention of sexual violence and quick-impact projects
focused on strengthening the rule of law and good
governance are just some of the items with a significant
multiplier factor.
However, my delegation remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation. Public health problems
are hot spots at any stage of national reconstruction
and rehabilitation, and it is important that the Haitian
authorities and the international community ensure that
those challenges do not become additional obstacles
for lack of proper care. We welcome the decision to
reactivate the High-level Committee on Cholera, since,
according to Haiti’s national statistics, that disease
remains a major challenge in several departments of
the country.
Mexico supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the MINUSTAH mandate
for another year without any change in the number of
troops. We share the nearly unanimous efforts of the
Group of Friends of Haiti to ensure that MINUSTAH’s
force reduction is progressive, not accelerated, and
prudent rather than hasty. We strongly welcome
the coherence, consistency and commitment shown
over the past 10 years by Argentina, Chile, Uruguay
and Guatemala,\ during periodic assessments of the
presence and future of MINUSTAH.
Mexico believes that the reduction and eventual
withdrawal of the Mission from Haiti must be anchored
in a coordinated transition plan among MINUSTAH,
the States Members of the United Nations — especially
the troop- and police-contributing countries — and,
above all, the Haitian Government. We also appreciate
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that
a strategic assessment on the future presence of the
Organization be undertaken, based on the progress
made over the past 11 years, the degree of stability in the
country and the capacity of the Haitian National Police
to assume its growing responsibility. In our opinion,
that assessment should occur once the electoral process
is complete and once the new President and Parliament
have taken office.
We are inspired by the progress made by the Haitian
people. The update of the situation in the country that
was given to Haiti’s partners by a number of Haitian
ministers last week reflects broad progress in various
areas.
These periodic reports are important for
maintaining relations between Haiti and its partners in
the international community, in the public and private

S/PV.7530

sectors, and for continuing to consolidate stability and
democracy.
As we assess the future relationship between Haiti
and the United Nations, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission could be, if the Haitian Government
sees fit, the structure under which the relationship
could be further enhanced. Haiti’s experience could
contribute decisively to the development of other
countries emerging from conflict. Whatever the path
charted by Haiti and the international community for
their future relationship, we are sure that this Council
will continue taking appropriate decisions that enable
the consolidation of progress. Mexico’s commitment
to development and stability in Haiti, at the bilateral
level, with the United Nations and through the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social
Council is for the long term.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sandra Honoré, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and to acknowledge her work and the results that she
has been achieving as she helps to strengthen dialogue
and institutions in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis
Régis, and his active delegation. Likewise, I would like
to reiterate our condolences to the family of Lieutenant
General Jaborandy. I would also like to welcome the
new Force Commander, Lieutenant General, Ajax Porto
Pinheiro, and Commissioner Serge Therriault.
When the Council considered the situation in Haiti
in March this year (see S/PV.7408), we were pleased
because Haiti had taken decisive steps toward the
holding of elections, thanks to the effort, the dialogue
and the joint work carried out by political players and
the Haitian people. Today, with the electoral process
already underway and the first round of elections held
on 9 August, what remains to be done is to encourage
the Haitian authorities and people to continue along
the path to democracy, organizing and carrying out
the general presidential elections on 25 October in a
peaceful and transparent manner, in accordance with
the law.
With respect to the report of the Secretary-General,
we welcome the fact that the Provisional Electoral

15-3042931/33

S/PV.7530

The question concerning Haiti

Council was able to manage the complex electoral
process last August in an inclusive and transparent
manner, with the support of the Haitian National Police
and MINUSTAH. However, with a view to upcoming
general elections, we would like to call attention to what
the Secretary-General said with respect to the fact that
despite relative calm during the campaign, there was an
increase in incidents of insecurity during the last days,
due to an upsurge in politically motivated killings.
We note the actions by MINUSTAH’s personnel.
MINUSTAH continued to work hard, although it had
to prioritize specific areas in order to comply with its
mandate owing to a reduction it personnel in accordance
with resolution 2180 (2014).
In line with what was recommended in the
Secretary-General’s report, Argentina supports the
renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate for another year, with
the current number of troops and civilian personnel, so
as to complete the electoral process, which must end in
December by holding the second round of presidential
elections, if necessary, swearing in the new President in
March 2016 and establishing a new Government. That
will be the most appropriate time for the SecretaryGeneral to assess the general security conditions on
the ground, make recommendations and listen to the
opinion of Haiti’s new Government with regard to the
Mission’s activities and presence in the country, or to
consider the option of reconfiguring its presence to
reflect the circumstances.
Taking a decision before the end of the electoral
period or thinking about restructuring the Mission
without waiting for the new Haitian authorities to be
elected and assume their functions would be risky
and dangerous. We believe that it is important to
proceed with caution and take decisions on the basis
of conditions on the ground to make it possible to
successfully conclude the only peacekeeping operation
currently deployed in the Americas.
We understand that MINUSTAH cannot remain
in Haiti for longer than is necessary. It must remain
for as long as is required by the democratic Haitian
Government. At the same time, we believe that it is
important to learn lessons from the past and bear in
mind the consequences of a hasty withdrawal, which
in the past caused the Council to retrace the path it had
already taken.
When conditions on the ground allow, Argentina
will be ready to assist the United Nations presence in

32/33

08/10/2015

Haiti to restructure itself in a way that is more geared
toward strengthening institutions, always working
alongside the Haitian people and Government so that
democracy, human rights, security and peace will be
established in the country once and for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Ambassador of Jamaica.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I address this Council
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community, CARICOM.
CARICOM welcomes and appreciates the
comprehensive report of Ambassador Sandra Honoré,
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti. We note with interest
her comments on developments in Haiti, especially as
they relate to the first round of parliamentary elections
that were held in August. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report, S/2015/667, on the mandate of
MINUSTAH during this reporting period.
CARICOM is very much encouraged by the recent
developments in Haiti during this transformative
period, and particularly by the conduct of elections.
This augurs well for the prospects for the second round
of parliamentary, presidential and municipal elections
later this year. In our view, the holding of elections
that are free and fair and free from fear is not only
the bedrock for any democracy but also a condition
and precedent for the sustainable development of the
peoples of all States. Accordingly, CARICOM applauds
the efforts of the Provisional Electoral Council of
Haiti, which is charged with the responsibility for the
administration of elections in our sister member State.
The work of the Provisional Electoral Council
is not without its challenges, one of the main ones
being the availability of adequate financial resources
to do its work. CARICOM wishes to thank all those
States that have made financial contributions to the
fund administered by United Nations Development
Programme to aid the electoral process in Haiti,
including, I might add, the contribution earlier today
from the Government of Trinidad and Tobago of
$1 million.
MINUSTAH,
under
the
leadership
of
Ambassador Honoré, must be commended for its
continued stewardship in Haiti, where it has assisted
the Haitian authorities not only with matters relating to
the conduct of elections but also the strengthening of
15-30429

08/10/2015

The question concerning Haiti

the rule of law, the promotion of justice and the training
of the Haitian National Police, the latter to ensure that
that organization will be in a position to assume total
control of policing activities in that State in the near
future.
Even as we continue to applaud the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH for their efforts to
stabilize Haiti during this transformative period, we
are mindful of the need for the mandate of MINUSTAH
to be renewed with the requisite resources to enable it
to engage in less peacekeeping and more developmental
activities. In closing, we request that members of the
Council act with prudence in this matter so that the
services of MINUSTAH are not curtailed abruptly,
and that there be a smooth transition period that would
prevent any possible reversal of the hard-won gains that
Haiti has made during this transformational period.
The President (spoke in Spanish): If there no other
members wish to take the floor, I now give the floor to
Special Representative, Sandra Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I wish to express thanks to all the
members of the Security Council for their observations
on the situation in Haiti and on the work of the the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) at
this critical juncture of Haiti’s history, in keeping with
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/667).

S/PV.7530

I have noted the emphasis that they have placed on
the need for continued forecasts on the key areas of the
Mission’s mandate, including the rule of law and human
rights, police development and the strengthening of
State institutions and good offices, in addition to
the work of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in the fields of humanitarian assistance
and development. I have also taken careful note of their
comments regarding the transition of the Mission and
planning to that end with the Government of Haiti and
the United Nations country team. My gratitude is also
extended to the other States members of the Group of
Friends, to Haiti and to the multilateral organizations
that have also proffered comments during this debate.
On behalf of the personnel of MINUSTAH — military,
police, civilians, both international and Haitian — as
well as United Nations Volunteers, I express our deep
appreciation for the Council’s support for the work of
the Mission as we contribute to the important electoral
process in train, and in the interest of continued
stabilization for the benefit of the people of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

15-3042933/33
