S/PV.7813

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7813th meeting

Thursday, 17 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Ms. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation: “Enhancing the strategic partnership in the area of countering
extremist ideology”
Letter dated 11 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/965)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-38956 (E)
*1638956*

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation:
“Enhancing the strategic partnership in the
area of countering extremist ideology”
Letter dated 11 November 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/965)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following to participate in this
meeting: His Excellency, Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru,
Assistant Secretary General for Economic Affairs of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation; Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; and Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne, Professor
and Chair of the Department of French and Romance
Philology at Columbia University.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/965, which contains a letter dated
11 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Opeloyeru.
Mr. Opeloyeru: At the outset, I would like to
express our thanks and appreciation to the Government
of Senegal for having taken the initiative of organizing
this timely meeting. The fact that the Security Council
has agreed to convene today’s meeting on cooperation
between the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the United Nations shows clearly the importance
it rightly attaches to this event. I would like to also
underscore the significance of the excellent ideas
contained in the concept note prepared by the delegation
2/24

17/11/2016

of Senegal (see S/2016/965), which further develops
this vital issue.
Allow me to avail myself of the opportunity to
congratulate Senegal on its outstanding performance
during its tenure as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council and the presidency of the Council for
this month. I wish to also convey my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for the tireless efforts he has exerted to strengthen the
cooperation, which has now reached a strategic level,
between the United Nations and OIC. We share his
vision of the strategic cooperative relationship between
our two organizations. I would like to also congratulate,
on behalf of the Organization, Mr. António Guterres,
for his election to become the next Secretary-General.
The goals and objectives of OIC and the United
Nations are broadly similar. Both organizations are
devoted to the cause of international peace, security
and development, and share common challenges in
all domains of human endeavour. The OIC vision,
which puts people first, aims to develop human capital
and achieve inclusive growth. It envisions its role as
an effective partner for peace and development in
the world.
Entrusted with a mission to defend the collective
interests and just causes of its member States, OIC,
based on its Charter, was established on the noble
principles of peace, harmony, tolerance, brotherhood
and equality of all human beings. The preamble of
its Charter reaffirms the commitment of its Member
States, which are all United Nations Members, to the
Charter of the United Nations. It has therefore, since
its establishment, set for itself as a primary task the
realization of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, and has strived consistently to contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is why OIC continues address on a regular basis
many issues that also top the agenda of the Security
Council, such as the Middle East, Syria, Somalia, Mali,
Libya, Afghanistan and the Central African Republic.
OIC and the United Nations have engaged in
successful bilateral coordination and exchanges,
which have been organized in Geneva and Jeddah, and
thereby enhanced our levels of cooperation and sharing
of best practices. In his recent statement, in September
before the annual coordination meeting of OIC Foreign
Ministers on the sidelines of the current General
Assembly session, the United Nations Secretary16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

General highlighted the successful partnership that has
been developed by the two organizations in all areas
of mutual concern and interest. On our part, we attach
great importance to that relationship and are determined
to even further enhance it with the aim of promoting
peace, justice, human rights and development.
Based on our firm belief in the critical role that
international organizations play, OIC has deployed
tremendous efforts to build and sustain a network of
close cooperative relationships, not only with United
Nations but with other regional and subregional
organizations, in order to secure a broad and inclusive
platform for the benefit of global peace, security and
socioeconomic development.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is a natural
partner of the United Nations in countering terrorism
and preventing violent extremism, the two of which
are increasingly threatening every society, as well as
international peace and security. OIC has consistently
been at the forefront in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. Cooperation with key international
and regional partners in combating terrorism is among
the key objectives of the OIC Charter. Adopting its code
of conduct, as well as the Convention on Combating
International Terrorism, in 1994 and 1999, respectively,
OIC was among the first to formulate a clear and
principled position against terrorism.

S/PV.7813

talks with CTED to see how we can benefit from its
legal expertise as the OIC undertakes a revision of the
OIC Convention on Combating International Terrorism.
Similarly, we are discussing with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force how we can
cooperate towards promoting the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism. In that sense, one of the concrete
projects under consideration is a high-level event on the
prevention of youth radicalization in the Middle East.
OIC believes that the first step in countering
radicalization and preventing violent extremism should
be to deprive terrorist groups of legitimacy in the
eyes of the people they exploit by repudiating the very
arguments they use to justify their criminal acts. On its
part and based on its commitment to fighting terrorism
and countering violent extremism, OIC works to
delegitimize terrorist ideologies by developing counternarratives to such extremist ideologies and propaganda,
and by elevating credible and authentic religious voices
that support tolerance and non-violence.

Fully committed to cooperating with the United
Nations Secretariat and its relevant agencies, the
OIC Secretary General welcomed the United Nations
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism right after its release. Similarly, the OIC
Member States expressed their support to the Plan
of Action during the OIC Summit, held in Istanbul
in April.

Earlier this month, in partnership with the Islamic,
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(1SESCO) and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
OIC organized a workshop at ISESCO headquarters in
Rabat as part of its efforts to combat extremism and
promote a moderate Islamic narrative. The workshop
discussed the role of religious education in promoting
peace and combating violence. More specifically,
it discussed ways in which religious schools and
institutions can contribute to the broader education
experience in promoting a proper interpretation of
Islam and preventing children and youth from falling
into trap of extremists.

OIC views the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy as a viable guideline for the
Member States to counter terrorism, and the Plan of
Action as a meaningful contribution to the effective
implementation of pillars I and IV of the Strategy. As
far as measures to eliminate the spread of terrorism are
concerned, OIC organized, jointly with the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), a workshop
back in 2013, to promote the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). Currently, we are in talks with
CTED to organize a second workshop with a broader
scope, including the implementation of both resolution
1624 (2005) and resolution 2178 (2014). We are also in

Moreover, on 3 October, the OIC established a
Centre for Dialogue, Peace and Understanding within its
General Secretariat, and officially launched its website
during the forty-third session of the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers, held in Tashkent later in the month.
The Centre’s primary mission is to counter incitement
to all forms of terrorism, violence and extremism,
particularly incitement through social networking
platforms, media and cyberspace. Accordingly, the
new OIC Centre aims to debunk extremist narratives
through counter-messaging over social media outlets,
as well as messaging on ideological subjects targeting
Muslim youth, and to produce videos and animations

16-389563/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

exposing the reality of terrorist groups claiming to
be Islamic.
The OIC Programme of Action for 2016-2025,
entitled OIC 2025, is anchored in the provisions of
the OIC Charter, while the directions emanating
from the OIC forums provide the conceptual
framework for its development paradigm. It focuses
on 17 priority areas, which include peace and security;
poverty alleviation; trade, investment and finance;
employment, infrastructure and industrialization;
science, technology and innovation; climate change
and sustainability; moderation, culture and interfaith
harmony; the advancement and empowerment of women;
human rights, good governance and accountability;
information and communication technology and digital
structure, among others.
The OIC Programme of Action has also given
prominence to development programmes, including
physical and human capital development, poverty
eradication, the provision of social safety nets and
youth empowerment. It is therefore our strong belief
that OIC-2025 will serve to our member States as a
solid basis for the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Accordingly, in its capacity as one
of the leading intergovernmental organizations in the
area of South-South cooperation, OIC has developed
strong partnerships with the relevant institutions of the
United Nations for the implementation of its various
socioeconomic programmes aimed at promoting
peacebuilding and conflict prevention among its
57 member States.
As international peace and development are now
faced with many difficulties and challenges, it is
imperative to respond to them collectively at the national,
regional and international levels. In a rapidly changing
world, strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC will both promote multilateralism and
boost the international collective security mechanism.
To that end, OIC has continued to play an important
role in the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, promoting post-conflict reconstruction and
defusing humanitarian crises in its member States. It
has also been active in combating violent extremism
and terrorism, as well as in promoting socioeconomic
development, as important contributions to the global
efforts in the enhancement of international peace
and security.
4/24

17/11/2016

In that regard, OIC has expressed on many occasions
that it stands ready to develop effective partnership
with the United Nations to strengthen cooperation in
all areas and to develop early responses to disputes
and emerging crises. Consequently, the OIC General
Secretariat has made sustained efforts to increase the
role of the Organization in the maintenance of peace and
security, conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
In that context, OIC has set up a Peace, Security and
Mediation Unit and a Department for Outreach and
Dialogue. It has just launched its messaging centre to
counter the narratives and discourse of extremists who
seek to disrupt global peace and security.
In that regard, OIC has made valuable contributions
to the work of the United Nations in the areas of
conflict prevention, crisis management, mediation,
humanitarian assistance, the promotion of human
rights, good governance, the rule of law and sustainable
development through the many political, economic
and social instruments and resources available to
it. Accordingly, OIC has hosted at its headquarters
in Jeddah a number of international contact groups,
such as those for Afghanistan and Somalia, as well
as regional organization mediation meetings and
counter-terrorism workshops. The United Nations-OIC
biannual consultation meeting provides an excellent
opportunity for both organizations to identify all areas
of cooperation, with a clear matrix and specific time
frame for implementation.
We look forward to more engagement with the
United Nations to enhance the capacity of OIC on the
basis of its needs and strategic priorities so as to enable
it to act as an effective partner to the United Nations
in addressing the immediate and future challenges that
face the Muslim world. The example of partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the areas of peace, security and development is a good
example to be followed in that regard.
In conclusion, I should like to renew the commitment
of OIC to remaining a strong and active partner of the
United Nations in addressing issues of mutual interest
and concern, as well as current and future challenges,
in defence and promotion of global peace, security and
development. We have achieved a great deal together,
but I believe that more remains to be done. And it is only
through close and coherent cooperation, collaboration
and coordination that both organizations can make our
world a more prosperous and secure environment for
all our peoples.
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Opeloyeru for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: I thank Senegal for organizing this
briefing on the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
The holding of this meeting clearly demonstrates
that the two organizations are more than ever willing to
work together to address global and regional challenges.
The magnitude and complexity of those challenges are
simply too big for any country or organization to tackle
alone. To be successful in preventing and resolving
conflicts, we need to join forces with the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to devise joint strategies and
draw on our comparative advantages.
In that regard, the Secretary-General has taken
note of OIC Programme of Action 2016-2025, adopted
by the Islamic Summit Conference in Istanbul in
April, and its Ten-Year Programme of Action, which
identified conflict situations as a major challenge
facing the Islamic Ummah in the twenty-first century.
The Secretary-General welcomes the communiqué
of the thirteenth Islamic Summit Conference and
its support for the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and his Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.
The United Nations has been working closely with
OIC for more than 20 years to promote a culture of
peace, tolerance and understanding. In the past years,
the United Nations, particularly through the Department
of Political Affairs, has stepped up its cooperation with
the regional organization and has engaged with it to
promote a deeper political dialogue. There is no doubt
that our cooperation has not been without challenges;
resources, capabilities and mandates vary, and our
memberships, although overlapping, are different.
The best approach to those challenges is to deepen
our strategic dialogue to forge common approaches to
emerging crises.
In that sense, cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC is reinforced through direct contact
between the secretariats of the two organizations, as
well as the specialized agencies and bodies of the United
Nations system and OIC. The United Nations SecretaryGeneral and the OIC Secretary General meet during
General Assembly sessions and on many other occasions.
The United Nations supports the OIC call to strengthen

S/PV.7813

its role in conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in Member States, as well as in conflict
situations involving Muslim communities.
The United Nations has taken a number of steps
to institutionalize its relationship with OIC by helping
to strengthen its capacity through mediation and
electoral assistance, and by holding desk-to-desk talks
with OIC on areas of mutual concern, such as peace
and security, economic cooperation and humanitarian
issues. The secretariats of the United Nations and the
OIC hold general cooperation meetings every two
years, as mandated by the General Assembly. Those
meetings are attended by a large number of agencies
from organizations, and set objectives and metrics
for implementing joint projects and activities. The
thirteenth General Cooperation Meeting took place in
May at the United Nations Office in Geneva.
The United Nations and OIC share common
objectives in promoting and facilitating the Middle
East peace process and the question of Palestine.
The Extraordinary OIC Summit on Palestine
and Al-Quds Al-Sharif held in Jakarta adopted a
resolution entitled “United for a Just Solution”, which
reaffirmed the positions of Member States, as well
as the Jakarta declaration to pursue concrete steps in
support of Palestine and the protection of holy sites in
East Jerusalem. In addition, at the latest Security Council
open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.7792), OIC
reiterated the need to preserve the two-State solution
and for the Council to act on the settlement.
On Yemen, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Kingdom Department for International Development and
OIC co-chaired a high-level event on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The meeting generated more than
$100 million in additional funding for the 2016 Yemen
humanitarian response plan.
The United Nations appreciates OIC support for a
peace process in Afghanistan, the realization of which
is crucial to the long-term growth and stability of the
country. Despite some delays, the planned international
OIC Ulema Conference on Afghanistan is a positive step
towards constructive dialogue aimed at strengthening
the foundations of peace and national reconciliation
in Afghanistan.
In the Sudan, the partnership between the United
Nations and OIC remains an indispensable part of the

16-389565/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

collective efforts of the international community to
bring peace, security and development to the country.
In Darfur, the core of the partnership has been OIC
support, under the leadership of Qatar, for the signing
and the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. We need to continue this level of
engagement to achieve an all-inclusive peace process
that addresses the root causes of the conflict and
ensures durable solutions.
In Somalia, the United Nations and OIC maintain a
critical partnership in State-building and in promoting
comprehensive peace and security. The challenge now
is for the international community to harmonize its
support to achieve comprehensive progress towards
common objectives that include coordinated support
to the security sector, preventing violent extremism,
community recovery, and the extension of basic
services at the local level.
In Mali, OIC was a member of the international
mediation team during the 2014-2015 inter-Malian
dialogue, and remains a committed member of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee to this day. During
the electoral process in the Central African Republic
at the end of 2015, OIC played an instrumental role in
defusing tensions among rival political parties in the
country. In agreement with Chad, OIC successfully
called on the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique to cease hostilities in the Central African
Republic and allow the elections to take place in areas
that were under its influence.
The United Nations appreciates OIC support for the
political dialogue process in Libya. We would welcome
a greater role of OIC in supporting the United Nations
mediation efforts in the country and in encouraging OIC
member States to use their leverage with Libyan parties
to make the compromise needed to fully implement the
Libyan Political Agreement.
OIC has played a key role in Sierra Leone’s
recovery efforts since the civil war there, and more
recently in the aftermath of the Ebola outbreak. It is
worth mentioning that the last meeting of the OIC
Contact Group on Sierra Leone, which was held in New
York at the ministerial level on 19 September, focused,
inter alia, on progress made in the Ebola recovery. I
would also like to note the continued importance
of the still-active OIC Trust Fund for Sierra Leone,
which was established in 2002 to assist the process of
reconciliation and rehabilitation. The United Nations is
6/24

17/11/2016

thankful to OIC members for their ongoing economic
cooperation with Sierra Leone, particularly in the areas
of agriculture, natural resources and energy.
The United Nations continues to collaborate and
strengthen its electoral engagement with OIC. That
involves the training of electoral staff and observers and
support towards the establishment of the database and
institutional memory of the organization. In addition,
the Electoral Assistance Division of the United Nations
Development Programme provides technical electoral
assistance to a number of OIC member States.
Let us use this valuable Security Council meeting
to reaffirm and deepen our common commitment to
promoting peace and respect for human rights and
to offer a better opportunity for all peoples of those
regions and the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jеnča
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Diagne.
Mr. Diagne (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to say what an immense honour it is for me to be
able to address the Council in a meeting dedicated to
a topic of such importance. For that honour, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having once again
expressed your confidence in me.
I would also like to clarify that my contribution to
this meeting is from an academic perspective. I am a
philosopher who has long been engaged in the study,
among other things, of the intellectual and spiritual
traditions of Islam. Islamic philosophy is one of my
specialities. I say this by way of an apology in advance,
as I may not speak the language of international
institutions, but I hope Council members will forgive
me for that.
I would like to highlight the phrase “intellectual
and spiritual traditions of Islam” that I used earlier.
I think that such language needs to be underscored,
because in the sound and fury of the violence being
perpetrated today in the name of religion, we may lose
sight of the fact that these religions have long and deeprooted traditions that ultimately express humankind’s
aspiration to achieving its full potential. I believe that
is a point we need to insist upon.
In my capacity as a philosopher and an academic, I
would therefore like to share some of my own thoughts,
which are focused on the third question in the concept
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

note before us (S/2016/965, annex), concerning the
promotion of interfaith and intercultural dialogue. The
other reason for this choose, beyond my interest in it as
a philosopher, is that such promotion of interfaith and
intercultural dialogue is and always has been a major
policy direction of my country, Senegal.
The question raised by this issue, I believe, is
twofold. Its first aspect is what needs to be promoted
within and interfaith and intercultural dialogue. The
second aspect, is how can that be done?
On the first, it is not merely an abstract exercise
of comparative religions, whatever the philosophical
interest of such a dialogue might be. It will be agreed
that such a dialogue must be focused on the universal
affirmation of values that enable coexistence on our
shared planet, which is now more united than ever before
in the history of humankind. Respect for universal
human rights — and these human rights are universal
because they can be translated into all languages,
in all cultures and all spiritual and philosophical
traditions — is certainly one of those values to be
promoted in the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). I would like to further underscore
two values that I think need to serve as the cornerstone
of this will to live together.
The first is pluralism. I stress that notion because
it seems to me that pluralism is the authentic response
to extremist violence, to all forms of violence based
on tribalism and all murderous identities, which,
unfortunately, we are seeing propagate and spread
everywhere in our world. The second great value on
which this cooperation should be based is what I will
call ecological awareness.
It seems to me that fruitful cooperation between
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations must seek to promote pluralism. That
requires all spiritual traditions, including Islam, to be
aware of their capacity to be open to differences and
to oppose exclusivism. Let there be several sects, let
there be many interpretations. That is not a problem.
The problem arises when one interpretation declares
itself to be exclusive, when a sect declares itself to be
the only way. That is where the promotion of pluralism
is important.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations share a belief in the ongoing mission of
advocating the unity of a human community in respect

S/PV.7813

for diversity, which is one of its constituent features.
Pluralism is evoked in the sacred text of Muslims when
it says that, rather making of humankind a single and
homogeneous community, God has confronted people
with the tests of difference by enjoining people to
respond with competition in good works, because,
ultimately, says the text, only God knows what he wants
to see in the nature of our variety.
It seems to me that this states clearly that plurality,
differences, are natural things, that differences are in
the natural order of things and that it is right and proper
that it is so. In addition to the reference in the texts, a
rich intellectual and spiritual tradition supports what I
have just said, in the sense of promoting pluralism. It
is pressing that in the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Islamic Cooperation,
promotion of pluralism should be at the very heart of
dialogue and exchanges.
I also think that interreligious and intercultural
dialogue organized in cooperation between the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation and the United
Nations must focus on — and here I move to the second
value that I mentioned — the promotion of what I call
ecological awareness. That is an urgent and pressing
need in our times, when the concept of climate change
has become tangibly clear, in spite of all the denials that
we can unfortunately hear here and there.
The reason why I refer to the value of ecological
awareness is because religions have a natural role to
play in this task. It will be for the cooperation between
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the United
Nations to show that this is the case for Islam. The reason
for bringing this up in a conversation on, especially, the
fight against extremism and violence is because it is
necessary to draw attention to the nameless violence that
is carried out against our common human security, and
that is ecological violence. This is underscored because
of the significance of that central notion in Islam, that
the human is the Lieutenant of God on Earth. In a word,
he is the Caliph. Now this lieutenancy, this Caliphate,
confers on the human the responsibility to care for the
integrity of creation and its ongoing renewal.
To quickly evoke Islam’s philosophic tradition
on that point, I recall one element of the Islamic
intellectual philosophical tradition. a philosophical
novel of a twelfth century Andalusian author, Abou
Bakr Ibnou Tufail, who wrote a philosophical novel,
entitled “Hayy Ibn Yaqzan”. It is a proper name. One

16-389567/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

of the many lessons that can be drawn from this novel
is that for the individual, achieving full awareness
of what he or she is, what he or she can become, and
what is his or her duty towards the Creator — that is to
reach an understanding of the responsibility to protect
the environment and all beings with which we share
our Earth.
That is why I evoked the second value as being
at least as important as that of pluralism in building
cooperation that will truly promote human security.
In conclusion, I direct attention to one word — “how”,
which is one of the questions I had asked. The answer
to the “how” is single word — education. For human
security there are immediate measures that must be
taken to respond to violence. This point was underscored
by the Assistant Secretary General of the OIC. But
the true, lasting response is education. The preamble
to the UNESCO Constitution reminds us that acts of
violence begin in the minds of men, and therefore it is
in the minds of men that barriers to extremism must be
built. That is why it is vital that cooperation between
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the United
Nations should be firmly founded on education. They
must pursue joint efforts to develop together education
in pluralism and education in ecological awareness, the
two values on which I focused my statement.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for your
trust, and I also thank the Council members for
their attention.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Souleymane Baсhir Diagne for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I shall begin by stating the obvious: the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is a fundamental actor for
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is a fundamental actor in the relations of the Security
Council with other organizations. I also underscore that
the role of the OIC arises from the fact that societies
with Muslim majorities are those that are paying a
very high price for terrorism — which, I stress, has no
roots, no justification of a religious nature. I say that
again and again. Therefore the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation can play — and does play — a fundamental
role in all those Islamic societies that are threatened.
8/24

17/11/2016

We engaged in some reflection in preparation
for today’s discussion, and we have identified four
important areas in which I think it is possible to forge
better connectivity between the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the United Nations in general.
First is the area of preventive action. Then, in a very
simple and straightforward analysis, I will look at how
we can cooperate better in the short, medium, and long
terms. If Council members will indulge, I will provide
a brief summary of my written statement on what we
think can be done in the area of preventive diplomacy.
The first measure under preventive diplomacy that
we have identified is the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). In
that regard, the role of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is fundamental. While there is an
array of measures that can be developed, I shall
highlight only one. I believe that the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation could contribute to a broader
dissemination of the ideas and spirit of the Plan of
Action throughout the societies of its member States.
In the area of preventative diplomacy, I would like to
underscore women. In general, they play a key role in
preventing violent extremism. As we are all aware, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and UN-Women are already working jointly on a
number of interesting initiatives in that regard. And,
with regard to preventive diplomacy, we in Spain have
worked with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
in particular in the context of a seminar we hosted in
Alicante, where together we came up with a set of ideas
on mediation that, frankly, are very interesting.
Secondly, with regard to how we can work better
in the short-term, I would mention Spain’s proposal
to establish a task force of religious leaders for crisis
situations, which would be under the aegis of the
Secretary-General. As Spain proposed, the task force
would be a rapid-reaction force that would be deployed
immediately in reaction to any emerging crisis involving
interreligious issues or violent extremism. Also in the
short-term, I believe we must accord a louder and more
powerful voice to the victims of terrorism. Spain did
that here through an Arria Formula meeting during
which, for the first time, victims of terrorism in Spain
participated. I believe that victims of terrorism — and
I am sorry to say it, for they are victims — can be key
allies in combating violent extremism. Lastly in terms
of short-term action, we believe that we must continue
to make an effort to provide a counternarrative to
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

terrorists’ narratives, as Mr. Diagne stated in his
briefing. In that regard, as one of the co-sponsors of
the Alliance of Civilizations, Spain has proposed the
idea of establishing a supra-national, public/ private
committee on tolerance that would contribute to the
dissemination of positive messages and the development
of a counternarrative to debunk extremist narratives on
the Internet and social networks.
Turning to the medium-term, we have proposed
the deployment of experts ion interreligious and
intercultural areas as part of peacekeeping operations.
For a deep-rooted understanding of cultural and
religious sensitivities is vital if our peacekeeping
operations are to be more effective. We are also
promoting the establishment of platforms for peace
for religious leaders in areas of conflict, such as Syria,
Iraq, Israel and Palestine, among others.
With regard to long-term efforts, what do I intend
by that term? The answer is simple. I believe that the
long-term involves youth. Only 20 per cent of young
people claim that religious reasons are behind their
radicalization and recruitment by armed or terrorist
groups. “Long-term” means talking to and about
the 1.8 billion young people throughout the world. It
means taking every possible precaution to ensure that
they have a proper education, which is a necessary, but
not exclusive, condition to prevent them from being
attracted to extremist and violent ideologies.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
carried out by Egypt’s Al-Azhar University, which has
set up a centre to analyse all the decrees and identify
those that could most likely to attract young people into
joining or participating in extremist groups.
I have greatly shortened my statement so as to
make the best use of time. Those who wish to can
read the entire text, which will be made available on
the webiste of the Permanent Mission of Spain to the
United Nations.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank today’s briefers for their contributions to our
debate. I am also grateful to you, Mr. President, for
focusing our deliberations on this particular subject. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is active in
various fields, and today we are discussing cooperation
between our two organizations in countering extremist
ideology, which has become a topical issue for Member
States of both our organizations.

S/PV.7813

Preventing violent extremism has become one of the
most pressing priorities for the international community.
This evil and its gravest form — terrorism — threaten
our core values and principles, including democracy,
human rights, the rule of law, equal opportunities and
freedom. The threat now has a global character, and
therefore requires the full consolidation of the efforts
of all international actors and the utilization of their
comparative advantages. Therefore, cooperation
between the United Nations and OIC in countering
terrorist and violent extremist ideologies advocated by
such terrorist entities as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and their affiliates has never been
more important.
Why is that so important? It is because terrorism
does not begin with guns and bombs, but words. Those
who want to plant hatred and intolerance in people’s
minds should be stopped before the seeds of evil sprout
and their disciples turn into merciless tools for killing.
Our efforts should not be limited to a media-driven
campaign. What we need is a comprehensive approach
with long-term actions to address violent extremism
and its root causes, based on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
Such a strategy should involve not only countering
extremist ideology disseminated through the media
and the Internet, but also developing persuasive
context-specific counternarratives and messages to
neutralize terrorists’ influence on persons belonging
to the target audience, while eliminating terrorist focal
points of radicalization. While addressing the need to
intensify our common work on preventing the spread
of malevolent ideologies, we should explore ways to
engage young people, who are the most vulnerable to
violent extremist narratives.
The United Nations and OIC can benefit from
developing joint projects aimed at strengthening our
collective capacity to effectively respond to the spread
of such phenomena. The focus should be placed on
several priority areas.
First, we should focus on consolidating international
political will and expertise to reveal drivers of violent
extremism, including gross human rights violations,
corrupt institutions and poor governance, as emphasized
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Secondly, in order to reduce the appeal of and
support for terrorist groups, our joint efforts should

16-389569/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

combine counter and prevention measures that address
shortcomings in governance and promote social
development, dialogue, respect for the rule of law and
human rights.
Thirdly, the United Nations and OIC can jointly
foster a global dialogue for the promotion of tolerance
and peace, as well as for a better understanding across
societies and cultures, including in the framework of
the Alliance of Civilizations.
Fourthly, relevant international assistance should be
provided to Members States in adopting more effective
policies and approaches to prevent and counter the spread
of violent extremist ideology, inter alia, by developing
robust national counter-narrative campaigns.
Finally, a more active role should be given to
empowering locally credible voices that can help prevent
and reverse the spread of violent extremist ideology
among the population. That is where OIC’s expertise in
engaging civil society, and in particular representatives
of local communities and religious leaders, as well
as women and youth, could play crucial role. That
relates in particular to raising public awareness by
revealing the truth about would-be jihadis in order
to delegitimize their activities, thereby enhancing
resistance against them. The victims of terrorism
should also play an important role in that kind of
comprehensive preventive campaign. The achievement
of those objectives will require the consolidation of all
existing efforts and strengthening cooperation among
all stakeholders, including Governments, civil society
and the private sector. Ukraine is fully committed to
this joint endeavor and is ready to contribute its share,
including through the observer status that we hope OIC
will grant us.

17/11/2016

the Council know only too well, that threat affects
Muslim-majority States in a truly disproportionate
way, including Iraq, Syria, Libya and many other
places. Put simply and starkly, far more Muslim men,
women and children have lost their lives at the hands of
groups like Al-Shabaab and Da’esh than people of any
other faith or religion. The fact that those evil groups
claim to represent Islam only makes that reality even
more sickening. The United Kingdom is clear that we
must tackle violent extremism in all its forms, whether
it be radical Islam or neo-Nazism. OIC States are
key partners in that fight, and I want to set out today
three ways in which our cooperation can help counter
those ideologies.
First, it is no coincidence that 18 members of OIC
are also members of the Global Coalition Against
Da’esh. Among them are our colleagues from Egypt.
I want to pay tribute to the work of those two great
Egyptian institutions, Al-Azhar and Dar Al-Ifta. Those
beacons of Islamic thinking help provide a narrative
of tolerance that counters the hate preached by the
likes of Da’esh. The United Kingdom is committed to
helping spread that narrative and showing the reality
of the lies of Da’esh. That is why we are hosting the
Coalition’s Strategic Communication Cell in London. It
draws on the expertise of Coalition members, including
our partners from the United Arab Emirates, to help
counter the misrepresentation of Islam and its values
by Da’esh.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Senegalese delegation for convening this important
debate. I join others in thanking the briefers. I warmly
congratulate Mr. Yousef bin Ahmad Al-Othaimeen on
his election as Secretary General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). The United Kingdom looks
forward to working with him and with OIC.

Countering the ideology is partly about offering
a competing narrative, but it is also about delivering
consequences to those who join Da’esh and supporting
survivors of their crimes by giving them a voice and
ending impunity. That is why the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom launched a campaign to bring
Da’esh to justice, with the Foreign Ministers of Iraq
and Belgium on 13 September, the opening date of the
new session of the General Assembly. Holding Da’esh
accountable is a top priority for the United Kingdom
and we are seeking United Nations action to preserve
evidence of the crimes of Da’esh as a first step to
that end.

As the representative body of 57 Muslim-majority
States, OIC speaks with a unique authority on the issues
facing the Islamic world, so I am glad that OIC’s voice
is being heard in the Chamber today. One such issue
facing OIC’s members — indeed, all Members of the
United Nations — is the growing threat of extremist
ideologies and violent extremism. Sadly, as we in

My second point is that OIC States have a valuable
role to play in building an even stronger consensus
around the work of the United Nations to prevent violent
extremism. Together, we can make the United Nations
system better at understanding and tackling the root
causes of terrorism, including by addressing violent
extremism narratives. The United Nations is stepping

10/24

16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

up in that regard. Last June, the General Assembly
directed the United Nations system to implement the
relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and
encouraged States to do the same. We all now need to
work to turn those concepts into action. That means
mobilizing the correct resources and expertise in order
to enable United Nations entities to devise a strategic
approach. It also means Member States developing
national action plans on preventing violent extremism
and helping other Member States do the same.
Thirdly and finally, we need to recognize that
countering extremist ideologies is not always about the
United Nations or about fighting Da’esh. Sometimes it
is about working together to create opportunities that
provide an alternative to false ideologies. For example,
the Islamic Development Bank serves the economic
development needs of the 57 OIC countries, with
annual commitments totaling well over $10 billion. All
OIC States can use those funds to finance projects that
help improve the lives of people living in OIC States.
The United Kingdom is proud to be helping that effort.
Our collaboration can be seen in the $25-million Arab
Women’s Enterprise Fund, which will create more jobs
for women. It is also seen in the $9 billion that the Bank
committed at the London Conference on Syria.
In closing, we look forward to our collaboration
with OIC strengthening further. Whether it be through
the United Nations, the Coalition against Da’esh or the
Islamic Development Bank, it is clear that OIC has a
vital role to play in countering the dangerous ideologies
that threaten international peace and security.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to start by
thanking the Senegalese delegation for convening this
meeting. We are equally grateful to the briefers for
their insightful presentations.
Considering the importance that we place on
strengthening United Nations cooperation with regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations in
order to more effectively address current conflicts and
humanitarian crises, we welcome this timely gathering,
which we hope will contribute to improving cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
As the OIC Assistant Secretary General highlighted
in his statement, the goals and objectives of OIC and the
United Nations are broadly similar. Both organizations
are devoted to the cause of international peace, security

S/PV.7813

and development and share common challenges in all
domains of human endeavours. The interactions between
the United Nations, its organs and specialized agencies
with OIC, as portrayed by the United Nations Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, reveal great potential for development. We
think further efforts should be undertaken in order to
strengthen those interactions.
Unfortunately, in the past decade we have witnessed
the exponential rise of terrorist attacks around the world,
which have been perpetrated by a growing number
of violent extremist groups that advocate a brand of
radical extremism that, contrary to their claims, has
nothing to do with Islam, which is a religion that
preaches peace and understanding among humankind.
As a fundamental part of the efforts to reverse that
trend, it is vital first and foremost to end the conflicts
in Palestine, Syria, Libya, Iraq, Somalia, Afghanistan,
Yemen and elsewhere, which are examples of how
foreign interference, oppressive Governments and
disenfranchised segments of the population strengthen
groups like Da’esh, Al-Qaeda and others, which are at
the forefront of international radical extremism.
In order to effectively fight and defeat terrorism
and its radical extremist ideology, political processes
must be based on inclusivity, including with respect
to ethnic and religious groups. In the aforementioned
conflicts, one of the main sources of discontent and
infighting has been the disenfranchisement of certain
social or religious groups, which has created a space
and platform for radicalism and extremism. In that
regard, we praise the work of OIC in delegitimizing
terrorist ideologies by developing counter-narratives
to extremist ideologies and propaganda by elevating
religious voices that support tolerance and non-violence.
The Republic of Angola, which is constitutionally
consecrated as a secular State, separates church and State
while also recognizing and respecting different religious
values, protecting all creeds and places of worship as
long as they act in accordance with the Constitution and
the laws of the Republic. Currently, we are witnessing
in certain quarters a tendency to politicize religion
and use it to justify war and subjugation. As such, we
strongly encourage OIC and other organizations to
focus more attention on developing strategies to undo
this dangerous intertwining of religion and politics, play
a more decisive role in countering the deep fracture that
the Islamic world is now experiencing, in particular
between Sunnis and Shi’as, and protecting religious

16-3895611/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

minorities. Given multicultural and multiconfessional
composition of many Muslim countries, it is crucial to
promote interfaith dialogue, tolerance and pluralism,
allow all segments of society to practice their faith as
they wish, and avoid the use of religious ideas as a tool
for power struggles.
In conclusion, we would like to commend OIC
and the League of Arab States for their efforts aimed
at implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and at mediating ongoing conflicts
in the Middle East. We believe that due to ethnic
and religious differences, as well as regional power
struggles, OIC and the League of Arab States must
seek to address the root causes of discontent and curb
radical and extremist groups such as Da’esh from
spreading hatred, fear and destruction. We further
encourage OIC to continue working with the United
Nations in addressing the factors that lead to radical
extremism and the spread of terrorism in the Islamic
world and beyond.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Senegalese presidency
to convene today’s meeting. China attentively listened
to the statements of Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča; the Assistant Secretary General for Economic
Affairs of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), Mr. Opeloyeru; and professor Diagne of
Columbia University.
OIC is a major organization of Islamic States
designed to promote unity, cooperation and selfimprovement. By making use of its religious, historical
and cultural advantages, it has played a positive role
in promoting the settlement of regional hotspot issues
and in facilitating post-conflict reconstruction. Since
it attained United Nations observer status, OIC has
strengthened cooperation with the United Nations
in such areas as dispute prevention and mediation,
intercultural dialogue and humanitarian assistance.
It has also actively pushed for political settlements in
Somalia, Afghanistan, Mali, Libya and the Central
African Republic, which has earned it international
recognition and appreciation.
China supports the strengthening of cooperation
between OIC and the United Nations, consolidating
collective security mechanisms in a joint effort to
maintain international peace and security. Terrorism
is posing a grave threat to international peace and
security and is therefore a common challenge for all of
12/24

17/11/2016

humankind. Terrorists and extremist forces propagate
terrorist ideology and violent extremism. In certain
countries, some people, especially young people, have
been hoodwinked into violent extremist and terrorist
activities, causing serious harm.
Counter-terrorism is an important area where the
United Nations and OIC have conducted significant
cooperation. China supports the United Nations and the
Security Council in pushing forward their cooperation
with OIC in fighting terrorist ideology. Accordingly,
China would now like to offer the following comments.
First, we must stick to a unified criteria and
forge a sophisticated counter-terrorism network. Acts
of terrorism — whenever, wherever, by whomever
committed and in whatever forms and manifestations
they arise — need to be fought resolutely. Counterterrorism should not be linked to any specific nationality
or religion. The United Nations and the Security
Council need to play a leading and coordinating
role in international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Parties need to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions in a comprehensive manner, strengthen
exchange of information, border-control and lawenforcement cooperation, combat cross-border training
by terrorist organizations, and cut off the transborder
flow of terrorists, all of which will serve to put strong
international pressure on terrorists.
Secondly, we must give priority to cyber counterterrorism and cut off the channels for spreading
terrorist ideology. The Internet and social media
and other high-tech applications have become major
platforms for terrorists to spread their ideology and
violent extremist ideas. The international community
should adopt vigorous measures to strengthen the
monitoring of the Internet and crack down on terrorist
organizations that are using the Internet to publish
incendiary violent videos to spread terrorist ideologies
and extremist ideas, recruit operatives, raise funds and
plan or implement acts of terrorism.
Thirdly, dialogue among different civilizations to
achieve peaceful coexistence and harmony needs to be
supported. Dialogue and exchanges are effective tools
for enhancing mutual understanding among different
civilizations, different religions and different cultures
and facilitating inclusion. The international community
needs to vigorously promote mutual respect, openness
and inclusiveness in a spirit of civilized dialogue
and facilitate mutual learning about the diversity of
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

civilizations, in order to foster a social atmosphere
where different nationalities, cultures and religions
can treat each other as equals and coexist in harmony
and promote civil exchanges aimed at peace while
respecting differences and achieving harmony through
openness and inclusiveness.
China enjoys deep, friendly and cooperative
relations with Islamic States. China attaches great
importance to the unique role of OIC, appreciates the
significant contribution OIC has made in promoting
cooperation among Islamic States, supports OIC in its
ongoing efforts to maintain international peace and
security and regional peace and security, engage in
counter-terrorism and promote common development.
Over the past four decades, China has conducted
friendly exchanges with Islamic States and identified
the ways for different civilizations, religions and
social systems to live together. China is ready to
deepen integration of interests under the framework
of the One Belt, One Road initiative, strengthen ties,
expand dialogue between the Chinese civilization and
the Islamic civilization and commit iteself to forging
a new type of international relations predicated upon
win-win cooperation, all with a view to building a
shared community of destiny and creating a safer and
better future for humankind.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting, and Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru, Mr. Miroslav
Jenča and Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne, for their
valuable briefings.
For Venezuela, it is of extreme importance to
recognize the role played by regional and subregional
organization in the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
conflict prevention and the establishment of coordinated
strategies for the maintenance and building of peace. We
believe that, in these regional and subregional forums,
the Security Council has important allies in meeting all
the challenges to peace and security around the world.
The United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) have maintained close cooperation
over the last 40 years, particularly in the areas of peace
and security, humanitarian assistance to refugees
and the promotion of dialogue among civilizations.
The strategic cooperation that has contributed to
the promotion of the purposes and principles of the
foundational charters of both multilateral institutions

S/PV.7813

has undoubtedly been mutually beneficial, in the light
of their shared vision, interests and objectives. In that
regard, we would note that OIC is a strategic ally of
the United Nations, particularly in the fight against
terrorism and the spread of violent extremism, including
terrorism ideologies and narratives, as the organization
regards that scourge as one of the greatest threats to
international security in the world today.
In that connection, we once again emphatically
condemn all terrorist acts in all of its forms and
manifestations, whatever their motivation, wherever
they occur, and whosoever commits them. We also
affirm that terrorism must not be linked to any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Venezuela believes that effectively combatting
terrorism and violent extremism requires the joint,
resolute and coordinated efforts of the international
community and the full, non-selective implementation
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions prohibiting, inter alia, financing, training,
harbouring or transferring weapons to terrorist groups.
That battle should be waged in the framework of
international cooperation under applicable existing
international and regional instruments, including the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nation and international law, in full respect for human
rights, fundamental liberties and the rule of law.
In that regard, we believe that a preventive approach
is always the most appropriate way to combat the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism in a comprehensive
manner. We must neutralize the strategies of extremist
groups and ideologies that have taken it upon
themselves to promote violence and intolerance. We
once again highlight the importance of adopting and
implementing coordinated initiatives — adapted to
each situation and national reality — in order to address
the root causes that fuel this despicable phenomenon,
to develop effective and innovative strategies to
counter extremist and terrorist narratives and to
encourage critical thinking within the society with a
view to preventing radicalization, recruitment and the
mobilization of resources, including the inappropriate
use of information and communication technologies.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation has
clearly shown that it is committed and attaches great
importance to the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, as a great many of its member States have
been victims of terrorist attacks. In that regard, we

16-3895613/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

call for action, including the adoption of a convention
on that issue. Recently, our country, in our capacity
of president of Non-Aligned Movement countries,
participated in OIC’s forty-third session of the Council
of Foreign Ministers, held October in Tashkent,
Uzbekistan. We witnessed the launching of an OIC
message centre and the Centre for Dialogue, Peace
and Understanding. We are sure they will contribute
to the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
including radicalization and incitement, particularly
online and in social networks.
Such initiatives, which seek to promote respect
for religious, social and cultural diversity, as well as
for a culture of peace, tolerance and respect among
different nations and societies, complement the efforts
of the United Nations to combat terrorism and violent
extremism and contribute to using good practices
and past successes in drafting a broad international
framework to effectively combat terrorist narratives
and developing a strategy that counters the propaganda
used to encourage, motivate and recruit others to commit
terrorist acts, including through distorting religion to
justify violence. That proposal will be reviewed by the
Council in April 2017.
In conclusion, Venezuela believes that we should
continue to strengthen cooperation and strategic
alliances between OIC and the United Nations,
particularly through bodies such as the CounterTerrorism Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. In our view, that
is the most effective way to face common challenges
and to jointly and collaboratively address the spread
of terrorism, violent extremism, the migrant problem
and transnational organized crime, and reach peaceful
settlements to conflicts, particularly in those areas
where OIC has a competitive advantage — its
relationship with the Islamic world.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the delegation of Senegal
for convening this important briefing on the issue of
improving the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
for confronting the violent extremist ideologies leading
to terrorism. I should like to thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions.
Egypt believes that the international community,
represented by the United Nations, should have a
comprehensive, coordinated and practical strategy
14/24

17/11/2016

to confront the ideology of terrorism — one that
relies fundamentally on a partnership with States,
regional organizations and, indeed, the actual efforts
at that level, in an international legal framework that
takes into consideration the fact that confronting the
ideologies of terrorism is a very long-term endeavour.
The efforts of Islamic States are at the forefront of
combatting terrorism. Many of those States have taken
many steps through OIC. By way of example, rather
than as an exhaustive list, the 1999 Convention on
Combatting International Terrorism has been signed by
the membership of the organization; a number of very
important documents and resolutions on countering
terrorism and extremism that leads to terrorism have
been adopted; OIC has adopted an Action Plan for 2025
containing priorities that include combatting terrorism
and extremism, and their use of social media and the
media, in general; and OIC has established the Centre
for Dialogue, Peace and Understanding, which uses the
Internet and social networks to combat the messages of
extremism leading to terrorism.
As everyone knows, strengthening the strategic
partnership and cooperation between the United Nations
and OIC is necessary, indeed ineluctable, particularly
given that OIC is the second largest international
organization after the United Nations. Its membership
comprises 57 States, spread over four continents. It is
an organization with a great deal of experience over
many years of fighting terrorism and its consequences,
and thus, it is best equipped to combat its ideology.
In that context, we should like to stress the following
points, which we believe are necessary to promoting the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in confronting
extremist ideologies leading to terrorism. First of all
and, most importantly, cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and OIC must be promoted
and more effective, and current links between United
Nations bodies pertaining to counter-terrorism must be
elevated to the highest possible level.
Secondly, there must be a comprehensive strategy
for confronting terrorist ideologies. Let me stress in
this regard the need to involve OIC in the drafting and
implementation of the comprehensive international
framework for confronting the messages of terrorist
groups, which was called for in S/PRST/2016/6.
Thirdly, institutional cooperation among the bodies
of the United Nations and OIC — in particular the
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

OIC secretariat and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive
Directorate,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre — is important in order to
set priorities for identifying challenges and finding
the best means to cooperate and confront terrorist
ideologies, including by providing technical assistance
to Islamic States and strengthening their capacities in
this regard. Those States must be made more capable
of completely and effectively implementing relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, as
well as those of OIC.
Fourthly, this cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and OIC must be promoted
in confronting all types of violent extremism leading
to terrorism, in particular Islamophobia and other
political, economic and social factors that lead to
terrorism, including foreign occupation.
Fifthly, it is necessary to promote cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation in order to put an end to any
incitement to terrorism. Confronting the narrative of
terrorist groups, in particular on social media and the
Internet, all while respecting international law and
the principle of freedom of expression, human rights
and considering the possibility of launching a joint
campaign to confront all the erroneous messages used
by terrorist organizations to promote themselves for
recruitment purposes, while using religious symbols
and personalities that enjoy society’s trust.
Sixthly and finally, the two organizations must
have an exchange of views to increase and diversify
their sources of financing and to implement their
various projects and programmes to confront
terrorist ideologies.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank and commend Senegal for having
taken the initiative to facilitate this briefing on the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), focused on
the area of countering extremist ideologies. We are also
very grateful to you, Mr. President, for your concept
note (S/2016/965, annex). We also thank Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenča; Assistant Secretary General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru; and
Columbia University Professor, Mr. Souleymane Bachir
Diagne, for their presentations.

S/PV.7813

My own statement will primarily build upon the
reflections shared with us by Professor Souleymane
Bachir Diagne. I would like to particularly latch onto
the emphasis he lent to the issues of pluralism, diversity
and the role of education. We cherish the deeply held
belief that extremist ideologies are combatted with
freedom and tolerance. I hail from a country where
people are born and live free and where the freedom
of the individual is the cornerstone of society. We, men
and women, are free to choose in absolute conditions of
equality with no restrictions placed upon us. We, men
and women, choose our lifestyles and our education. We
elect our Governments, which enjoy legitimacy purely
through the exercise of the free voting of the citizens.
We choose our religions or we choose to not to have a
religion. In that regard, the Constitution of Uruguay, in
article 5, provides that all religious beliefs in Uruguay
are to be freely enjoyed. The State does not support any
religion. The places of worship of the various religions
are free of taxes. That is why in my country one often
finds churches, mosques, synagogues and syncretistic
temples next to each other. People are free to choose
their place of worship and does not require Government
permission. Religious practice is the personal choice of
an individual and the State does not and cannot meddle
in any way.
Even in this environment of religious tolerance,
we run the risk of intolerance rearing its ugly head. In
preventing such an outcome, education, in which boys
and girls, men and women, have equal access, plays
a crucial role. Education is vital in order to foster an
understanding of pluralism, diversity and tolerance.
The defence against extremist ideologies begins within
our individual societies by combating intolerance and
promoting freedom. There can be no doubt that at the
international level, the cooperation between States and
institutions also has a key role to play in the broader fight
against terrorism in this era of complete globalization.
As part of this cooperation, coordinating the
efforts of the United Nations and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation is of vital importance. We
welcome with great satisfaction the fact that in the final
communication of the thirteenth OIC summit, which
was held in Istanbul on 14 and 15 April, OIC hailed
its own growing cooperation with various international
and regional organizations, including, inter alia, the
United Nations. On that occasion, OIC also reiterated
its full support for the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and for the Secretary-General’s

16-3895615/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which we
see as a very positive sign.
By the same token, the determination of its
members to remain united in the fight against terrorism
and the reaffirmation of the importance of addressing
the causes of violent extremism in holistic way are
evidence of a joint and comprehensive work, which
we commend, and we encourage the protagonists to
maintain a steady course along these lines. The battle
of ideas must be won by underscoring the values of
peaceful coexistence, pluralism, social inclusion and
freedom of opinion.
Ms. Sison (United States): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Miroslav Jenča; Assistant Secretary
General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru; and Mr. Souleymane
Bachir Diagne for joining us.
Our discussion today is a timely one. Over the past
two years, States Members of the United Nations have
shown an unprecedented willingness to collaborate
on preventing violent extremism. In December 2014,
resolution 2178 (2014) called on States to engage local
communities and non-governmental actors to counter
violent extremism. That was a major step forward. For
the first time, the need to counter violent extremism
was recognized in a Security Council resolution and
an essential element of the solution was identified.
Then, in January of this year, the Secretary-General
presented his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism to the General Assembly, which included
wise recommendations well worth implementing, such
as the call for the development of national and regional
action plans to prevent violent extremism. This past
July, in its fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the General Assembly
urged States to unite against violent extremism, as and
when conducive to terrorism.
The United States welcomes the steps taken by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to partner with
the United Nations on that agenda, together with other
organizations. We are appreciative of OIC’s support of
statements on 16 January and 8 April for the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
I would highlight in particular the fruitfulness of the
cooperation between OIC and the Global CounterTerrorism forum in bringing together a diverse group
of religious scholars, academics, Government officials
and experts in the field of education and preventing
16/24

17/11/2016

violent extremism to discuss best practices and the role
of religious education in promoting peace. So how can
we build on that recent work by the United Nations and
OIC to create an even stronger strategic partnership?
One way would be to create a high-level
coordinator for the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Such a coordinator would improve
communication between the United Nations and OIC on
counter-terrorism issues, speaking authoritatively from
the United Nations side with a single voice on behalf
of the multitude of United Nations entities engaged in
countering violent extremism. The coordinator could
be a more effective liaison between the United Nations
and OIC than is possible under the current framework,
which could benefit both organizations. In addition, the
coordinator could harness the potential of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to provide
technical and other assistance to Member States and
international organizations. Accordingly, we urge all
States, in particular OIC members, to express support
for such a coordinator to the incoming SecretaryGeneral and his transition team. There is no single
step that would do more to strengthen the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and OIC.
A second way to enhance the strategic partnership is
to recommit ourselves to upholding human rights in all
of our activities to counter violent extremism. It is easy
for all of us to say that we respect and promote human
rights in our countering violent extremism efforts but
what matters is whether we actually protect such rights
in practice: the right to freedom of expression, freedom
of association and peaceful assembly. It is vital for the
United Nations and OIC to enshrine human rights in
their countering violent extremism strategies and act
when States fail to do so.
Of course, such rights are intrinsically important
because our people — all people — are entitled to
them. But such rights are also practically important,
indeed essential, to successfully counter violent
extremism. Voices from outside Governments, civil
society, community activists, youth leaders, often have
more credibility with their peers, fellow citizens, than
we as Government officials do on that topic. Generally
speaking, they are better advocates for moderation,
understanding and peace than we are. We need to
ensure that such voices have the freedom, space and
confidence to speak.
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

Thirdly, we must rededicate ourselves to working
to counter intolerance and discrimination against any
religious group, including Muslims, in each of our
countries. Here at the United Nations, we all often
emphasize and re-emphasize that terrorism cannot
and should not be associated with any religion or
nationality but we are not the audience we need to
convince. We must continue to do all that we can to
convey that message within our own societies. In the
2015 White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism, President Obama noted that inexcusable
acts of violence have been committed in the United
States and around the world by people of different faiths
and that it is not unique to any one group, geography or
period of time. That principle is a fundamental part of
the United States national strategy to counter violent
extremism. We must not lose the momentum we have
built here at the United Nations in partnership with OIC
and other groups and in our own States and societies in
countering violent extremism.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the delegation of Senegal for
convening today’s very important meeting. Russia
strongly advocates building and deepening cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the basis of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
OIC members are countries whose people profess
common spiritual and moral values. Such a uniting factor
should play a fundamentally important role in resolving
the many complex tasks the international community
faces. First and foremost are conflict prevention,
mediation and political diplomatic settlement, where the
Organization’s potential is absolutely needed. Today,
the Islamic and Arab worlds are traversing a period of
major upheaval, often accompanied by bloody conflict.
Helping the people of the region emerge from this dark
period is not only the responsibility of the Security
Council but a general duty in which OIC, along with
other regional and subregional organizations, is called
upon to play a unique role. Our common goal, both in
the Council and in OIC, should be to pool our efforts to
counteract terrorism. In his statement at the seventieth
anniversary session of the General Assembly, the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Putin, called
for establishing a broad counter-terrorism coalition (see
A/70/PV.13). It is an urgent task to be addressed.
We are convinced that violence cannot be justified
by any religious pretext and that the actions of terrorists,

S/PV.7813

wherever or by whomever, should be condemned. Any
form of support for terrorist activity should be strongly
counteracted. We should not try to distinguish between
good terrorists and bad terrorists — between one
country’s terrorists and another country’s terrorists.
The growing threat from extremist and terrorist groups
like the Islamic State poses a direct challenge to the
entire international community, above all our partners
in OIC.
Recently, the counter-terrorism context has changed
considerably. On one hand, there is continued growth
in the global terrorist threat. Therefore, now more than
ever, we need to clearly and unambiguously define this
threat in important United Nations documents, such as
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. On
the other hand, the term “violent extremism” — which
we see as an integral focus of international counterterrorist cooperation — has been introduced. It is part
of the counter-terrorism prevention efforts — that
is, the prevention radical and terrorist phenomena.
Misconception is unacceptable, as we could end up
disorienting the international community and steering
it away from its main task of eliminating terrorism.
It is now important to recognize the vital role of
States and their competent authorities in countering
terrorism in their own territories and as part of
international cooperation efforts. In that regard, I
should remind the Council that we have made important
comments regarding the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Removing
international terrorism from the international legal
framework is unacceptable. That undermines the global
counter-terrorism architecture and sometimes leads
to interference in States’ internal affairs. Russia has
submitted a draft resolution to the Security Council on
countering terrorist ideology, with the goal of achieving
real and effective opposition to the promotion of
terrorist ideas, including through the Internet.
The pseudo-ideological content under the cover
of Islam spread by terrorists is dangerous for Muslim
countries first and foremost. We hope that the Islamic
world shares the view of Russia on the urgent need
to implement and strengthen the approach of the
Security Council, and the United Nations as a whole,
to curbing terrorism, the spread of its ideologies and its
radicalization of populations, especially young people.
We hope that our partners will ponder our proposed
draft resolution and adopt Russia’s initiative.

16-3895617/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

Russia supports consolidating international efforts
to combat the threat that is common to all of us. We
firmly believe that the fight against terrorism and the
violent extremism that leads to it should be built on
a solid foundation of international law under United
Nations auspices. We have been providing constant
support to the Governments of Iraq, Syria, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon and other countries of the region in
their opposition to terrorists. In order to succeed in the
fight against terrorism, it is essential that we prioritize
attention not only to the military threat posed by jihadist
groups, but also to the root causes that have given rise
to it. The only way we can deal with the accumulated
contradictions is through the united efforts of the entire
international community, by deepening our dialogue
and our partnerships, while respecting people’s right
to preserve their cultural, religious and civilizational
identity. That requires comprehensive analysis, in
which it is essential to consider the interrelationships
between all the most acute problems, old and new,
afflicting the region. We would like to recall that
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, speaking in a Security Council
meeting on the Middle East (see S/PV.7774), called
for the convening of a comprehensive review of the
situation in the Middle East.
We proceed from the assumption that no conflict,
whether in Syria, Libya, Iraq, Yemen, the Sahara and
Sahel regions or other long-suffering parts of the world,
can be resolved through a military solution. Only a
broad national dialogue with the participation of every
ethnic, religious and political group and their unity
in combating terrorism can produce the agreement,
stability and conditions that are critical to the successful
socioeconomic development of the countries in areas
of conflict. We should particularly emphasize that the
crises that have flared more recently should not push
the task of settling the Palestinian-Israeli conflict into
the background. That should be based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and, of course, the concept of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace.
The relationship between Russia and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation is built on dialogue
and mutual respect. Our country, which is home to more
than 20 million Muslim citizens, is an observer in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and committed
to the progressive development of cooperation with
18/24

17/11/2016

the Organization’s member States with the goal of
achieving security and stability in the world.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia commends
Senegal’s initiative in convening today’s briefing.
We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča, Mr. Hameed Opeleyeru, Assistant
Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), and Mr. Souleymayne Bachir
Diagne of Columbia University for their participation
and presentations.
We believe that the initiatives on preventing and
countering extremist ideology anchored by both OIC and
the United Nations require a streamlined partnership in
order to make a more positive and effective contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
In enhancing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and OIC for curbing extremist ideology,
it is important to dissociate terrorism from any religion.
The advent of Islamophobia has created a convenient
false truth supporting terrorists’ agendas, enabling
a misleading mindset to prevail as people surrender
to irrational responses to terrorism and associate
terrorism with religion. The international community
should therefore address the increase in Islamophobic
sentiments that has led to the marginalization and
alienation of Muslims and to discrimination against
them on the basis of their religion. Muslims should
not be victimized twice — first, by terror attacks, and
subsequently by the policy responses to such attacks.
The international community’s efforts to counter
extremist ideology must be founded on internalizing
a culture of peace, tolerance and understanding in
the psyche of people who are vulnerable to terrorist
groups and targeted by them, especially young people.
Those efforts require consistent commitment, resolute
effort and unwavering focus on our part. Addressing
the root causes of terrorism is vital to an effective
strategy and central to the OIC’s positions on the
issue. Those underlying causes may arise from issues
such as the protracted illegal occupation of Palestine,
non-inclusive governance, dysfunctional institutions
and gross violations of human rights, all of which
breed anger, frustration and despair and have proved
a powerful tool for recruiting foreign terrorist fighters.
In order, therefore, in seeking complementarities
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
OIC on a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy,
we should consider more policies based on dialogue,
socioeconomic inclusion and non-discrimination in
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

support of minority groups. Malaysia believes that
exploring synergies on such policies will bring longterm and sustainable benefits to pluralistic societies.
Both OIC and the United Nations have provided
the international community with an exhaustive list of
instruments, plans of action and documents as guiding
principles for playing an effective role in combating
terrorism and countering extremist ideology. We see
value in streamlining the shared goals and agendas
of OIC and the United Nations in order to address
the many dimensions of extremist ideology. The
recommendations made, which include technical
assistance for capacity-building, developing a regional
contact list of focal points and establishing early
warning centres for exchanging information on violent
extremist activities, could be effective when undertaken
within a framework of constructive cooperation with
States and international and regional organizations. It
would undermine our agenda to belabour the issues and
ponder what we should do; rather, we should act now
and implement those measures as quickly as possible.
We are also pleased to see the continuing synergy
between the United Nations and OIC through the
continuing cooperation that has been expressed this
year, as evidenced this year in the support shown for
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism in OIC’s communiqué on the 13th
Islamic Summit.
Malaysia looks forward to the efforts that have been
launched by the OIC General Secretariat to establish
a messaging centre aimed at countering terrorist
narratives through counter-messaging on social media
sites, juxtaposing true interpretations of the Koran
and Hadith on ideological subjects and exposing the
machinations of the deviant extremist groups that
propagate hate, terror and violence. As far as possible,
the OIC messaging centre should coordinate its activities
and messages with other, similar centres, including the
Abu Dhabi-based Sawab Centre and the Kuala Lumpurbased Regional Digital Counter Messaging Centre for
Southeast Asia, established in July. It is essential that
information and clarification on the core Islamic values
of peace, tolerance and moderation, among others, be
disseminated to the widest possible audience.
In addition, close cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force would

S/PV.7813

assist in crafting relevant messages on effective counterterrorism and counter-violent extremism policies and
implementation measures for a broader audience.
As such, the newly established OIC Peace, Security
and Conflict Resolution Unit could also benefit from
closer interaction with the United Nations Department
of Political Affairs’ Mediation Support Unit and the
lessons learned from their experiences through ongoing
dialogue and exchanges.
Before concluding, Malaysia wishes also to pay
tribute to the OIC secretariat and the United Nations for
its initiatives to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As a member of OIC, we reiterate our
utmost support to OIC for ensuring the success of those
initiatives. We continue to call on the full support of
all OIC member States to continue working effectively
with the United Nations so as to ensure the success of
these initiatives.
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by thanking our briefers for their
enlightening statements. I also thank Senegal for
taking the initiative to convene this meeting with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on a matter
of such mutual concern — the fight against violent
extremism. That is an issue at the crux of our shared
concerns and affects all of our societies, irrespective
of their cultural identity or geographical location.
That being said, we need to understand the issue and
react appropriately, as highlighted by our briefers.
Cooperation between the United Nations and OIC is
important on all fronts but particularly in terms of the
need for pluralism and environmental awareness.
I would like to begin with the positive by
highlighting the significant successes seen this
year in the fight against Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Syria. The Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities indicated in a recent report
that the total volume of online propaganda spread by
the group has decreased. That represents steps forward
that deserve to be highlighted.
Nevertheless, reality forces us to acknowledge
that ISIL continues to exercise significant appeal over
a number of individuals, particularly young people, in
many countries — my own country being no exception.
More needs to be done to counter that phenomenon.

16-3895619/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

Terrorist group propaganda, and particularly that of
ISIL, seeks to entice future recruits by playing on
political, economic and social motivations, as well as
psychological ones, which are dangerously powerful.
Specialists who have studied the subject have clearly
demonstrated that there is no unique profile of a
potential recruit nor any simple explanation as to why
individuals decide, sometimes incredibly rapidly, to
join a terrorist group. The reasons are multiple and
complex, combining collective mindsets and individual
trajectories, the broad sweep of history, personal
experiences and security, geopolitics, justice and
mental health issues.
Recruiters attract young people by playing on their
feelings of injustice and marginalization. They appeal
to their need for money and recognition, promising
them an ideal and a cause to defend, when in fact
they find nothing but tyranny, brutality and death.
They use the fascinating power of images to stun and
manipulate their targets’ minds and even, if necessary,
known brainwashing techniques to lead their subjects
to reject their academic, professional and even familial
environments. They are particularly effective in two
environments: on the Internet and in prisons. Their
ideology of chaos is at the heart of terrorist propaganda
and has the dual purpose of spreading terror throughout
the majority and recruiting new fighters from a
restricted minority.
I would now like to turn to a second broad point.
Faced with such a large threat, each and every State
and regional organization has a role to play to shatter
that large-scale recruitment exercise. Against the
current backdrop, strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and OIC is more crucial than ever.
Earlier, the Ambassador of Spain offered many, very
interesting proposals along those lines, explaining how
we might enhance such cooperation, which could help
us to better understand the factors that lead to violent
radicalization and terrorism, as well as improve our
collective action in the fight against the terrorist threat.
Naturally, we must — and this is essential — take care
so as not to create false conflations. Muslims are by far
the principal victims of terrorism.
Our two institutions share common goals. The
OIC Programme of Action 2025, adopted at the OOIC
Summit in Istanbul in April, and an earlier 10-year
action plan called for the strengthening of the role of OIC
in matters of conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
20/24

17/11/2016

rehabilitation in its member States, as well as in conflict
situations involving Muslim communities.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism provide an excellent
framework for cooperation with OIC. As was
highlighted by the General Assembly in June, priority
must henceforth be given to the implementation of the
principal recommendations of the Plan of Action. That
responsibility falls, first and foremost, on member States
and regional organizations, but the United Nations
will be there to assist them in establishing normative
frameworks or enhanced operational capacity building
activities. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre can also take on some of the burden of that
strengthened cooperation.
Finally, while strengthening cooperation between
States and between organizations, we must pursue
efforts to counter terrorist propaganda with the help
of the private sector, civil society organizations and
grassroots actors, all of whom contribute to forging
trusting civil societies that are diverse and democratic
and can generate employment for their young people.
France is greatly attached to the freedom of thought
and speech and recognizes the deep extent to which they
are intertwined with the freedom of belief and other
fundamental freedoms that pave the way for respect for
pluralism and the views of others. Those principles must
be the driving force behind our teachings, actions and
practices. I fully endorse what Mr. Diagne had to say
along those lines regarding the pressing need to increase
our understanding and attachment to pluralism.
We must fight terrorism and its propaganda
of hatred with unrelenting determination and with
the necessary and proportionate means and the full
arsenal of the law, while fully respecting fundamental
freedoms. Those are the same human rights that the
terrorists wish to destroy, as they are the very bedrock
of our democracies. France will continue to contribute
fully to such endeavours.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Senegal for organizing this debate and the briefers
for their important statements. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/16 of October 2013, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) provided long overdue
recognition of OIC’s growing role in preventing
and resolving conflict, as well as of the potential for
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

enhanced collaboration with the United Nations in
those efforts.
Three years on, the need for a strong partnership
between the United Nations and OIC has never been
greater. The past few years have been traumatic ones
for communities across the Islamic world. Many
countries with significant Muslim populations are
experiencing instability and, in some cases, violent
internal conflicts. In many settings that instability has
unleashed sectarian tensions that have been exploited by
violent extremist groups to stir up hatred and division.
Ethnic and religious communities, which in many cases
have lived peacefully together for centuries, have been
turned against one another. That is tearing at the social
fabric of much of the Middle East and North Africa, in
particular. It is contributing to population movements
that have disturbing implications for the future stability
and cohesion of many States. Echoes of those strains
and intolerances are also being heard in countries far
removed from the centres of Islamic faith.
OIC has an important role to play in countering
those messages of hate, in tamping down the embers
of conflict and in promoting healing, reconciliation
and understanding. OIC’s standing in the Islamic world
and its deep understanding of the religious and cultural
context of Islamic communities make it uniquely placed
to promote peace and reconciliation by amplifying the
voices of tolerance and moderation. I wish to highlight
three areas in which enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC can reinforce their
respective abilities to support international peace
and security.
First, we welcome OIC’s efforts over the past
decade to strengthen its capacity to contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution. New Zealand has
been a consistent advocate for a sharper United Nations
focus on conflict prevention and for strengthened
cooperation with regional and other partners in support
of such efforts. OIC is a natural partner in that regard.
Through its Peace, Security and Mediation Unit,
OIC has supported mediation efforts in Afghanistan,
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia, as
well as in Thailand and the Philippines in my own
region — to name but a few examples. OIC brings to
those efforts a unique authority and an ability to reach,
work with and mobilize communities and religious
leaders in the cause of peace. We encourage OIC to
continue and expand that important work.

S/PV.7813

Nowhere is that need greater than in the efforts
to halt the fighting and reconcile and heal divisions
between Islamic communities in Syria, Iraq, Yemen
and the occupied Palestinian territories. The political,
military and religious leaders of those countries need
to be encouraged and supported in their efforts to
bring the suffering of their peoples to an end, including
by showing leadership and making the hard political
decisions needed to help bring those conflicts to a
peaceful resolution. And affected communities will
need help in finding ways to live peacefully with each
other once more. In close cooperation with the United
Nations and other international mediators, OIC has a
potentially significant role to play in supporting those
efforts. We welcome its participation in the work of the
International Syria Support Group and its mediation
efforts in Iraq.
Secondly, we acknowledge the tremendous
contribution made by many OIC countries in managing
the unprecedented global refugee flows that the
international community currently faces. Five of the
six countries hosting the largest refugee populations
are OIC members, collectively hosting more than
6 million people. OIC members are also among the
largest humanitarian donors. We also acknowledge the
role played by OIC itself in supporting humanitarian
work in settings such as Somalia and Darfur, as well
as in some of our near neighbours in South-East Asia.
But it is perhaps in preventing and combating
violent extremism that we see the greatest potential
and need for OIC to contribute in the years ahead.
Many communities around the world currently face
severe challenges from extremist forces that manifest
themselves in many ways, from terrorism and violent
extremism, through to aggressively intolerant and
exclusionary political and religious movements. Those
battles can be fought and won only by way of dialogue
and voices within the affected cultures and communities
speaking up for peace.
We commend OIC’s long-standing commitment
to promote understanding among different faiths and
communities and to reject all forms of intolerance. All
of those in the international community who support
moderation and the maintenance of peaceful, inclusive
societies must also do their part to support those
efforts. That means cooperating with communities
so as to prevent the radicalization of our youth and to
re-educate and rehabilitate those who fall victim to
extremist narratives. It means confronting and defeating

16-3895621/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

the politics of hatred and exclusion in our communities.
And it means working together internationally to
amplify the voices of tolerance and moderation.
That is why New Zealand has been a regular
partner to OIC and its members in supporting initiatives
that promote dialogue and understanding, such as
interfaith dialogue and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations. And that is why we have been a strong
supporter of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. The Plan of Action provides
an important blueprint and a useful practical resource
for other international actors in that space, including
OIC. We encourage OIC to deepen its cooperation with
the United Nations in that area.
In the light of the many challenges, New Zealand
welcomes the OIC 2025 Programme of Action, adopted
in April of this year, which sets out a range of actions
to strengthen OIC’s role in conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding. The
actions agreed at the biennial United Nations-OIC
consultations in May provide a useful framework for
further strengthening OIC’s strategic partnership with
the United Nations system in pursuing those goals.
New Zealand is confident that the partnership can make
a practical difference in restoring peace and security
to Muslim and non-Muslim communities alike in the
years ahead.
Mr. Akahori (Japan) (spoke in French): I also
would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Jenča and
Mr. Opeloyeru for their briefings, and especially to
Mr. Diagne for his informative intervention.
The international community today faces a wide
range of challenges, such as terrorism, social unrest,
political turmoil and prolonged conflict. The Muslim
world in particular faces serious issues, including the
spread of violent extremism. It is therefore encouraging
that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
is dedicated to preventing and countering extremist
ideology through its strategic partnership with the
United Nations and other efforts.
Japan believes that conflict and violent extremism
are rooted in, and exacerbated by, weak governance. In
our view, the key factors necessary for stable societies
in the Muslim world, a region of remarkable diversity,
are inclusiveness and coexistence. Efforts towards
national reconciliation, administrative reform and
fiscal consolidation are fundamentally important in
creating well-governed and inclusive societies.
22/24

17/11/2016

It is very encouraging that OIC shares that view
and is undertaking an inclusive and comprehensive
approach in tackling extremism. OIC’s efforts towards
fostering global dialogue and cooperation by addressing
the root causes of terrorism can lead to enhanced social
stability and human capital, thereby alleviating the risk
of marginalization.
We believe that OIC can play a more prominent
role in dealing with the imminent challenges facing
the Muslim world today. Actions aimed at meeting
urgent humanitarian needs on the ground and at
supporting the return and reintegration of refugees
and internally displaced persons are in line with OIC’s
stated objectives.
OIC’s contributions to humanitarian efforts in
Yemen are commendable. It can do more on Syria, both
in the humanitarian and in the political domains. Efforts
aimed at supporting the Israel-Palestine peace process
and improving relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia
also offer opportunities for OIC to achieve its longstanding goals, which would, in turn, be of benefit to
the entire international community.
The presidential statement of 28 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/16) on cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC includes many insights that remain
useful and relevant today. We welcome the reference
made by the representative of New Zealand to
that document.
Japan is confident that OIC will play an active
role in overcoming challenges and resolving conflict,
thereby enhancing its confidence-building role.
I thank the President of the Council for convening
today’s meeting, which offers an excellent opportunity
for encouraging OIC in its endeavours and for enhancing
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and OIC.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Senegal.
I wish to thank today’s briefers for their
presentations of outstanding quality and clarity. Given
the remarks that have been delivered, I will not revisit
the framework of mechanisms and modalities of the
multidimensional cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). Our meeting this morning has established that
such cooperation, seen from the point of view of the
16-38956

17/11/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

S/PV.7813

fight against extremist ideology, shows the vitality of
the relations between the two organizations, which
share the same ideals of peace, security and security
and development, to name a few.

refutes, in this very Chamber, any attempt to attribute
terrorism to any religion, culture or civilization, just as
it denounces the desire to manipulate some groups of
misled people with a view to turning them Islamophobic.

The convergence of objectives forms the basis of the
dynamic framework of cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC, marked in particular by the holding of
biannual coordination meetings for more than 25 years,
the last of which took place in May 2016 in Geneva,
leading to the adoption of a framework defining all
areas of cooperation, as well as the modalities and
mechanisms of implementation.

Meanwhile, we welcome the significant progress
made on the ground in the fight against Da’esh, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Iraq,
Syria, the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the Sahel,
but we must agree that security alone is no longer a
suitable solution in efforts to address the scourge of
terrorism. For however many terrorists are physically
eliminated, the ideology that underpins their actions
remains alive, as long as that ideology is not destroyed.
Furthermore, ulemas, scholars, intellectuals and other
educators around the world have a significant role
to play in deconstructing that ideology, a task that
requires dynamic interaction with youth, women and
all vulnerable groups, in order to pass on the message
of peace and moderation of the sacred book of Muslims
the Koran, and the teachings of the Prophet Mohammed.
That preventive strategy seems quite appropriate and
fortunately occupies an important place on the agenda
of our two organizations, which have made intercultural
dialogue an essential component.

The vitality of the cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC is also evident on the ground, where
those great institutions have had a very positive impact
working closely on the restoration of peace and security
around the world, including in Palestine, Afghanistan,
Yemen, in Europe in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also
in Africa in Sierra Leone, Mali, the Central African
Republic, Somalia, Libya and Darfur, among others. The
joint efforts of OIC and the United Nations in all areas
of international cooperation, including institutions such
as the World Health Organization, not only in the fight
against major pandemics, but also in the framework of
intercultural dialogue and fighting violent extremism
and terrorism, have been most important.
With regard to terrorism and violent extremism,
the delegation of Senegal welcomes the effective
collaboration between OIC and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, especially in support of
capacity-building aimed at preventing the phenomena
of extremism and terrorism. The discourse and,
unfortunately, the actions of terrorism and extremism
continue to deeply destabilize our societies by
corrupting some of our young people and women,
leading the future of our nations towards a dead end. We
must recognize that the current scope and new forms of
terrorism make the fight against it even more complex.
States, international organizations and civil society
must adapt and coordinate strategies and methods for
addressing it.
The Muslim world, which includes the countries that
are paying the highest price occasioned by terrorism,
needs more than ever for OIC to be its voice. Indeed, the
unjustifiable acts of terrorism hurt Muslims and lead
unfairly to mistrust or even fear of the religion of Islam.
Senegal, which solemnly reiterates its condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, also

The close collaboration between OIC and the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations is evidence of
that relationship. We align ourselves with the strategy
that stresses education for youth and women, and the
importance of better media in the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism. It would indeed be most
effective to educate youth and women with the relevant
information. Senegal therefore calls for broader
participation of young people and women in the design
and implementation of any future strategies dealing
with the scourge of terrorism, because they, the youth
and women, are the main targets and also the main
victims of it.
President Macky Sall of Senegal, in his added
capacity as Chair of the Standing Committee for
Information and Cultural Affairs of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, announced, at the thirteenth
Islamic Summit held in Istanbul in April, the launch of
an international award to recognize the media and the
women and men of the media who exemplify tolerance
and intercultural harmony by fostering dialogue. I call
on all States members of OIC and the United Nations
to support that award, which will surely encourage the
press to work towards peace and stability.

16-3895623/24

S/PV.7813

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

If extremism has been able to thrive to such a
worrying extent, it is because the conditions of its
propagation are ripe within the vulnerable factions of
our populations that are strongly impacted by poverty
and underemployment, thereby leading to a breeding
ground for terrorism. It is in all of our interests to
strengthen our strategy in the fight against poverty and
underemployment. The new OIC Ten-Year Programme
of Action 2016-2025 gives an important place to
the eradication of extreme poverty in the member
countries. That goal is shared by the United Nations and
therefore requires our coordinated action for greater
effectiveness.
In closing, I would like to thank the contributors,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, who are aware of the magnitude
and complexity of the challenges, which is why
they have been working for years to strengthen
organized and productive cooperation between the
two organizations. We urge António Guterres, the
Secretary-General-designate of the United Nations,
and Dr. Yusuf Al-Othaimeen to persevere in carrying
out that duty. We should also build upon what was
said by Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne, namely,
to use education, enhance pluralism and promote
environmental awareness everywhere and at all levels.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Opeloyeru to make
observations on the statements delivered.
Mr. Opeloyeru: Mine is just a vote of appreciation.
Let me express, at the close of this very important
meeting, and also on behalf of the new OIC Secretary
General Yusuf Al-Othaimeen, who was just sworn in a

24/24

17/11/2016

few hours ago by the Council of Foreign Ministers of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, our sincere
appreciation and gratitude for the briefers’ profound
contribution and constructive and meaningful insights,
suggestions and advisory opinions on the ways and
means of widening and reaching strategic cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC in all spheres,
especially on the topical issue of combatting terrorism
and violent extremism internationally.
I also wish to thank United Nations Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Miroslav Jenča
and Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne for the input and
insight that they have added to this debate. The various
suggestions put forward at this meeting will certainly
be taken on board as we update the United NationsOIC joint inventory of activities and the matrix of our
joint actions for the current biennium, as well as the
actions to be taken by our generous secretariat and the
respective intervention programmes being undertaken
by our member States. Undoubtedly, we remain
committed to consolidating and expanding the excellent
and flourishing relations between the United Nations
and OIC, in the interest of a peaceful and secure world.
Finally, we have also considered the value of the
fruitful exchanges that we have in the Council, and
for that purpose we fervently look forward to another
briefing session on agreed topical issues of mutual
interest on a sustained and regular basis, perhaps
biannually. That will align with the priorities of the
United Nations-OIC Coordination Meeting, held
alternately every two years at the headquarters of both
organizations, so that we can also benefit from the
traditional and collective wisdom that emanates from
this Chamber.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

16-38956
