United Nations

A/RES/70/153

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 72 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.2)]

70/153. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as
well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 1 for enhancing
genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on
8 September 2000, 2 its resolution 69/179 of 18 December 2014, Human Rights
Council resolution 28/2 of 26 March 2015 3 and the resolutions of the Commission
on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights,
Recalling also the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August
to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to
24 April 2009, and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, 4 and their role in the enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be
based on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at

_______________
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 55/2.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
4
Resolution 66/3.
2

15-16907 (E)

*1516907*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/153

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights

strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Stressing the importance of international cooperation for improving the living
conditions of all in every country, including, in particular, in developing countries,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the
field of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international
cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and
encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter
alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all activities for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the
promotion of dialogue on human rights issues, by the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session, 5
1.
Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2.
Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their
individual societies, States have a collective responsibility to uphold the principles
of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3.
Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the
promotion of a culture of tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this
regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the national, regional and
international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4.
Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual
understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal
human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
5.
Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international
cooperation for the promotion and protection of human rights a nd for the
achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
6.
Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in
conformity with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, should make an effective and practical contribution to
the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7.
Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality,

_______________
5

2/3

See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights

A/RES/70/153

non-selectivity, cooperation and genuine dialogue, objectivity and transparency, in a
manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
8.
Emphasizes the need for a cooperative approach on the part of all
stakeholders to resolving human rights issues in international forums;
9.
Also emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of
national efforts and in increasing the capacities of Member States in the field of
human rights through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation with human
rights mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the
request of and in accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
10. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and
consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages
non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
11. Urges States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional
and international cooperation aimed at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive
and compounded global crises, such as financial and economic crises, food crises,
climate change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
12. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
13. Recalls the seminar on the enhancement of international cooperation in
the field of human rights held in 2013, with the participation of States, relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other stakeholder s, including
academic experts and civil society;
14. Also recalls the high-level panel discussion on the theme “Enhancement
of international cooperation in the field of human rights” held during the twenty eighth session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2015;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as well as on obstacles and
challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of
international cooperation and genuine dialogue in the United Nations human rights
machinery, including the Human Rights Council;
16.
session.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-first
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

3/3
