United Nations

S/PV.4242

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4242

nd meeting
Wednesday, 6 December 2000, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ward
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Kassé
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Kuchynski
Mr. Grainger
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-78328 (E)

*0078328*

S/PV.4242

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hans Corell, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, the Legal Counsel.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Corell to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting today in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hans Corell, Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, the Legal Counsel. I give him the
floor.
Mr. Corell: Thank you for inviting me to brief
the Security Council on this very important topic,
international terrorism. A couple of days ago I provided
a briefing note in which I have elaborated together with
my collaborators, in the Office of Legal Affairs, on this
topic.
The briefing note examines the role of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat of the United Nations as regards the
significant developments in international law
pertaining to terrorism that took place in the 1990s.
Particular attention is given both to the application of
sanctions in specific cases and to the strides made in
the development of a legal framework of conventions
dealing with international terrorism where a number of
innovative measures have been taken. As it appears,
the note attempts to give a general overview of the
situation, while at the same time it describes in more
detail, under separate headings, salient parts of the
documents discussed in order to provide more in-depth
information to the interested reader.

2

Allow me first to focus on the actions taken by
the Security Council in this field. The Council has
dealt with the matter both in general terms and in more
specific cases.
First, members of the Security Council will recall
that the Council addressed the matter of international
terrorism in general in January 1992. In a statement
issued on the occasion of the Security Council Summit
of 31 January 1992, the members of the Council
expressed their deep concern over acts of international
terrorism and emphasized the need for the international
community to deal effectively with all such acts.
The most prominent individual cases in which the
Council has dealt with the issue of international
terrorism are those involving Libya, Afghanistan and
the Sudan. I am, of course, prepared to present these
cases to the members of the Council if this is deemed
useful. However, since these are matters with which
the Council is familiar, I do not otherwise intend to
dwell upon them in this presentation. For the
convenience of the members of the Council, the details
are included in the briefing material.
I should instead like to focus on the very
important Security Council resolution 1269 (1999) of
19 October 1999. In this resolution, the Council, inter
alia, unequivocally condemned
“all acts, methods and practices of terrorism as
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, in all their forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomever committed, in
particular
those
which
could
threaten
international peace and security”. (resolution
1269 (1999), para. 1)
The Council called upon States to implement
fully the anti-terrorism conventions to which they are
parties and to consider adhering to those to which they
are not parties. It encouraged the speedy adoption of
pending conventions; emphasized the need for
enhanced cooperation among States and regional and
international organizations; and called upon States to
take a series of steps in order to prevent the
preparation, financing and commission of terrorist acts
and to bring to justice the perpetrators of such acts.
Furthermore, the Council expressed its readiness
“to take necessary steps in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United

S/PV.4242

Nations in order to counter terrorist threats to
international peace and security”. (ibid., para. 6)
In the resolution, the Security Council also
requests the Secretary-General, in his reports to the
General Assembly — in particular those reports
submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 50/53 on measures to eliminate international
terrorism — to pay special attention to the need to
prevent and fight the threat to international peace and
security as a result of such terrorist activities. I will
revert to this issue in a few moments.
I should now like to focus on actions taken by the
General Assembly. The first element in this context is
the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism. During the 1990s, the principal
trend to emerge from discussions in the Sixth
Committee on the topic of international terrorism was
an emphasis on international cooperation between
States as the primary means to prevent and eliminate
international terrorism. To this end, Member States
elaborated a draft declaration on measures to eliminate
international terrorism. The General Assembly adopted
the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism in resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994.
The preambular paragraphs of the 1994
Declaration refer to the desirability for closer
coordination and cooperation among States in
combating crimes closely connected with terrorism,
including drug trafficking, unlawful arms trade, money
laundering and the smuggling of nuclear materials; the
“determination of the Assembly to eliminate
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations”; and the desirability of keeping under
review the scope of existing international legal
provisions in order to ensure a comprehensive legal
framework for the elimination of terrorism.
In the Declaration, the Member States solemnly
reaffirmed their unequivocal condemnation of all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever and by whomever committed,
including those which jeopardize the friendly relations
among States and peoples and threaten the territorial
integrity and security of States. Furthermore, it is
declared that criminal acts intended or calculated to
provoke a state of terror in the general public, a group
of persons or particular persons for political purposes
are in any circumstances unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,

racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature that may be
invoked to justify them. More detailed information
appears in my briefing note.
In 1996, the General Assembly adopted the
Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism. This
was done in resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996.
In the Declaration, the General Assembly reaffirmed
that States should take appropriate measures in
conformity with the relevant provisions of national and
international law, including international standards of
human rights, before granting refugee status, for the
purpose of ensuring that the asylum-seeker has not
participated in terrorist acts. In this regard, relevant
information as to whether the asylum-seeker is subject
to investigation for or is charged with or has been
convicted of offences connected with terrorism should
be considered. The General Assembly says that the
same should apply, after granting refugee status, for the
purpose of ensuring that that status is not used for the
purpose of preparing or organizing terrorist acts
intended to be committed against other States or their
citizens. Further details are given in the briefing note.
Allow me now to focus on the 1997 International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
In 1996, the Secretary-General prepared a report
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/53 in
relation to the implementation of the 1994 Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism. In
this report, the Secretary-General conducted an
analytical review of existing international legal
instruments relating to international terrorism and
concluded that there was a need to elaborate
international treaties or other kinds of instruments in
areas or with respect to subjects not covered by
existing treaties. Possible subjects suggested by the
Secretary-General included terrorist bombings, terrorist
fund-raising, traffic in arms, money laundering and
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists and the use of modern information
technology for terrorist purposes. The goal was to
develop a comprehensive legal framework of
conventions for dealing with international terrorism.
In resolution 51/210, the General Assembly
decided to establish an Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate
an international convention for the suppression of
terrorist bombings and, subsequently, an international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear

3

S/PV.4242

terrorism, to supplement related existing international
instruments. The General Assembly also decided that
the Ad Hoc Committee would at a later stage address
means of further developing a comprehensive legal
framework of conventions dealing with international
terrorism.
The Ad Hoc Committee, whose mandate has been
renewed on a yearly basis since 1997, was instrumental
in preparing, in the latter half of the 1990s, some of the
most important international conventions against
international terrorism. The Committee is composed of
all States and has met for an average of two weeks in
the first half of each year, while a Working Group of
the Sixth Committee has continued the elaboration of
the respective conventions during an additional period
of two weeks in the second semester of each year.
The first task entrusted to the Ad Hoc Committee
was the elaboration of an international convention for
the suppression of terrorist bombings. France, on
behalf of the Group of Seven and the Russian
Federation, submitted
a preliminary
working
document, which constituted the basis of the
negotiations.
The International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings was adopted in General
Assembly resolution 52/164 of 15 December 1997 and
constitutes one of the main achievements of the Ad
Hoc Committee. The provisions of the terrorist
bombings Convention have been used in the
subsequent negotiations of other anti-terrorism
conventions. The details appear in the briefing note.
The terrorist bombings Convention was opened
for signature on 12 January 1998 and, as of 1
December 2000, had 58 signatories and 16
ratifications. The Convention requires 22 ratifications
to enter into force.
The next achievement in this context is the 1999
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.
As early as 1996, the Secretary-General
considered that there was a need to elaborate an
international treaty dealing with terrorist fund-raising.
This convention would contribute to the General
Assembly’s stated goal of developing a comprehensive
legal framework of conventions for dealing with
international terrorism. Such a convention would not
only punish those financing terrorist acts, but would

4

also prevent such financing through mutual legal
assistance and cooperation. It would also serve as a
means of alerting donors who intended to contribute to
charitable, humanitarian or other legal causes that their
funds could be used to finance terrorist activities.
In 1998, the General Assembly decided that the
Ad Hoc Committee should elaborate a draft
international convention for the suppression of terrorist
financing. The basis for the discussions in the Ad Hoc
Committee was a draft convention prepared by France.
Many of the provisions in the draft convention closely
follow the corresponding provisions of the terrorist
bombing Convention.
The International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism was adopted without a
vote in General Assembly resolution 54/109 of 9
December 1999. With respect to the details, I refer
again to the briefing note.
The Convention was opened for signature on 10
January 2000. As of 1 December 2000 it had 35
signatories and 2 ratifications. This Convention
represents a further step in the consolidation of legal
norms pertaining to the elimination of international
terrorism. It not only reaffirms certain principles
included in the terrorist bombings Convention but also
extends the reach of the international legal regime to
acts ancillary to terrorist acts. By targeting the
financial activities that are necessary for the
commission of a terrorist offence, the Convention
constitutes a valuable part of the overall framework of
counter-terrorism treaties.
A matter that the Ad Hoc Committee is still
discussing is a draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. When it
established the Ad Hoc Committee, in 1996, the
General Assembly entrusted the Committee with the
elaboration of an international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, a task that the
Committee began in 1998 immediately upon
completion of the terrorist bombings Convention.
The Russian Federation had proposed a
convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism in order
to fill the lacunae left by the 1980 Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, which is
referred to as the 1980 Convention. The proposal
comprises the extension of the definition of nuclear
material to include objects and materials for military
use, as well as the provision of a clearer definition of

S/PV.4242

the crime of illegal acquisition of nuclear materials for
terrorist purposes and the inclusion of terrorist acts
against nuclear power plants, vessels with nuclear
power sources and the use of automatic nuclear
devices. In that regard, the new convention would
cover to the broadest extent the possible targets, forms
and manifestations of acts of nuclear terrorism.
Furthermore, unlike the 1980 Convention, the proposed
convention would draw a distinction between acts of
nuclear terrorism and other criminal acts involving the
use of nuclear material by referring to the purpose of
such acts. Further details with respect to the draft
appear in the briefing note.
Negotiations to finalize the draft international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism, as proposed by the “Friends of the
Chairman”, have been stalled due to the concern by
some delegations about certain provisions, most
notably its scope of application. One particular concern
is the inclusion of draft article 4, which excludes the
activities of the armed forces of a State from the scope
of the draft convention. Divergent views were also
expressed on extending the scope of the draft
convention to cover acts of State terrorism and on the
inclusion of provisions dealing with the dumping of
radioactive waste.
Since October 1998 repeated attempts have been
made, so far without success, to find a compromise that
would allow the adoption of the draft convention
without a vote. The draft resolution on the measures to
eliminate international terrorism recently adopted by
the Sixth Committee once again entrusts the Ad Hoc
Committee with attempting to complete the instrument.
That brings me to the mandate of the Ad Hoc
Committee.
In resolution 54/110, the Assembly renewed the
mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee, entrusting it with,
in addition to finalizing the draft convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, addressing the
question of convening a high-level conference under
the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint
organized response of the international community to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and to
begin consideration of, with a view to the elaboration
of, a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism.
With regard to the question of convening a highlevel conference on terrorism, the Ad Hoc Committee

held discussions on the matter in February this year.
Some delegations expressed support for holding such a
conference, which could, inter alia, focus on concrete
measures to strengthen the existing framework of
international cooperation; focus on preventive
measures such as the promotion of cooperation among
the law-enforcement authorities of States; elaborate a
definition of terrorism, and so forth. On the other hand,
other delegations had doubts about the practical
benefits of holding a conference on terrorism and the
likelihood of concrete results arising therefrom. The
Ad Hoc Committee, as a result of its deliberations at its
fourth session, formulated no recommendation on the
matter. The views of delegations were repeated during
the recent consideration in the Sixth Committee of the
item entitled “Measures to eliminate international
terrorism”. Bilateral consultations on the issue
continue.
A Working Group of the Sixth Committee
embarked on the elaboration of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism from 25
September to 6 October 2000. The basis for the
negotiations was a draft text prepared by India, and the
progress made is reflected in the report of the Working
Group.
During the recent consideration of the item in the
Sixth Committee, delegations expressed support for the
work begun. Some delegations were of the view that
the instrument should be truly comprehensive in scope,
containing a definition of terrorism that clearly
distinguishes between terrorist acts and the legitimate
struggle of peoples for national liberation from
colonial and other forms of alien domination and
foreign occupation, as well as covering all aspects of
the problem, including State terrorism and certain
activities of armed forces. Other delegations, however,
were of the view that the future convention should
complement and complete the existing sectoral antiterrorism conventions rather than replace them.
The draft resolution adopted by the Sixth
Committee on the item, which is scheduled for
consideration by the General Assembly on 12
December 2000, renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc
Committee. It is proposed that the Committee should
meet from 12 to 23 February 2001, in order to continue
the elaboration of a draft comprehensive convention
against international terrorism, but also to consider the
outstanding issues on the draft international convention
for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism and to

5

S/PV.4242

keep on its agenda the question of convening a highlevel conference on terrorism.
In this context, I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the 2000 United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, even if that Convention does not focus
expressly on terrorism. That Convention was adopted
by the General Assembly on 15 November 2000. The
Convention will be opened for signature at the Highlevel Political Signing Conference to be held in
Palermo from 12 to 15 December 2000, that is to say,
next week.
The Convention focuses on crimes of a financial
nature, money-laundering and corruption, and contains
extensive provisions on international cooperation. Of
particular interest in this context is that the General
Assembly, in its resolution adopting the Convention,
recommended that
“the Ad Hoc Committee established by the
General Assembly in its resolution 51/210 of 17
December 1996, which is beginning its
deliberations with a view to developing a
comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, pursuant to Assembly resolution
54/110 of 9 December 1999, should take into
consideration the provisions of the United
Nations
Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime”. (General Assembly resolution
55/25, para. 7)
In this context, I would also like to refer to the
Vienna Declaration on crime and justice, meeting the
challenges of the Twenty-first Century, endorsed by the
General Assembly on Monday, 4 December. In that
Declaration, which is an outflow of the Tenth United
Nations Congress on the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders held in Vienna 2000, there is a
passage that reads as follows:
“We note that acts of violence and terrorism
continue to be of grave concern. In conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and
taking into account all the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, we shall together, in
conjunction with our other efforts to prevent and
to combat terrorism, take effective, resolute and
speedy measures with respect to preventing and
combating criminal activities carried out for the
purpose of furthering terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. With this in view, we

6

undertake to do our utmost to foster universal
adherence to the international instruments
concerned with the fight against terrorism.”
(resolution 55/59, annex, para. 19)
Allow me now to focus towards the end of my
intervention on the role of the United Nations
Secretariat.
Paragraph 10 of the 1994 Declaration on
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism called
upon the Secretary-General to assist in its
implementation by taking a series of practical
measures.
The principal means of doing so has been an
annual report by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly on the topic, containing data on the status
and the implementation of existing multilateral,
regional and bilateral agreements relating to
international terrorism, as well as information on
relevant incidents and criminal prosecutions. Pursuant
to the Declaration, the material contained in the report
is based on information received from the depositaries
of the respective anti-terrorism conventions and from
Member States. In the future, a specific reference will
be made to operative paragraph 5 in Security Council
resolution 1269 (1999) of 19 October 1999, to which I
referred a few moments ago. The purpose is, of course,
that Member States submitting information for the
report of the Secretary-General may pay special
attention to the terms of this resolution by the Security
Council.
An analytical review of relevant existing
international legal instruments was included in the
1996 report of the Secretary-General, and the General
Assembly has taken action on some of the observations
and conclusions contained in that review. It should be
noted that there are currently 19 global or regional
treaties pertaining to international terrorism. The
Secretary-General presented their status with respect to
signature, ratification, accession or succession to the
General Assembly in a report (A/55/179) on 26 July
2000.
Another measure entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral by the Declaration was the preparation of a
compendium of national laws and regulations
regarding the prevention and suppression of
international terrorism. Since the Declaration was
adopted, the Secretariat has been compiling the
pertinent information submitted by States. The

S/PV.4242

Secretariat has received information from 50 States.
The respective volume of the Legislative Series is
currently being prepared and should be finalized before
the end of the year.
The Office of Legal Affairs has also prepared a
compilation of the global and regional conventions on
international terrorism, which will be submitted for
publication by the end of the year.
An important contribution to combating
international terrorism is also made by the United
Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
(ODCCP) in Vienna. The Terrorism Prevention Branch
at ODCCP came into existence in mid-April 1999 and
is linked to the Centre for International Crime
Prevention. Its mandate derives from General
Assembly resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997,
which endorsed the proposal of the Secretary-General
to strengthen the capacity of the newly created Centre.
The Branch has, in the field of preventing and
combating terrorism, a division of labour with the
Office of Legal Affairs. While the Office of Legal
Affairs focuses mainly on legal and normative matters,
including
Conventions
and
Protocols
against
Terrorism, the Branch concentrates more on research
and technical cooperation. In the field of technical
cooperation several manuals are planned, with titles
such as: Assisting Victims of Terrorism: A Manual for
Helpers; Responsible Media Coverage of Terrorism: A
Guide for Journalists and Law Enforcement Officers;
Bomb Threat Analysis and Response; and Hostage
Situations and Rescue Operations.
The Terrorism Prevention Branch organized a
meeting on “Terrorism Victimization: Prevention,
Control, and Recovery”, on 12 April 2000, during the
Tenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and the Treatment of Offenders, in Vienna, and,
together with the International Scientific and
Professional Advisory Council (ISPAC) of the United
Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme,
an
international
conference
on
“Countering Terrorism through Enhanced International
Cooperation”, in Courmayeur, Italy, in September
2000. I had the privilege of participating in that
conference myself.
Furthermore, reports have been written on the
role of terrorism in the Chechen crisis and the Kosovo
crisis. United Nations Member States have been
approached with a questionnaire on “Best Practices”

and “Lessons Learned” in the field of combating
terrorism. Two major databases, on terrorist incidents
and counter-terrorist measures respectively, are
maintained and updated on a daily basis. A “Toolbox of
Counter-terrorism Measures” is being developed, and a
“Roster of Experts” has been created by the Branch.
Results of these efforts will be incorporated in a
biennial “Global Terrorism Survey”, the first edition of
which is scheduled for late 2001.
With permission, I should now like to sum up
with a few concluding remarks.
The effectiveness of any legal regime in the
international field is limited by the amount of support
it attains. In the case of the conventions against
international terrorism, this support can be measured
by the number of signatures and ratifications of the
relevant international instruments, as well as the
development and promotion of national laws to
implement them. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General
on
measures
to
eliminate
international terrorism lists global or regional treaties
pertaining to the subject. The latest list includes recent
regional agreements by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
During the Millennium Summit, both the terrorist
bombings Convention and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
received additional signatures and ratifications that
constitute a renewed commitment from the
international community to unite around the common
goal of putting an end to the scourge of international
terrorism.
The fight against terrorism requires better
international cooperation. However, there are several
obstacles standing in the way of enhanced international
cooperation. The definition problem, the political
element, the links between terrorist groups and
organized crime groups and the perceived relationship
between religion and terrorism in some parts of the
world make terrorism a difficult issue to handle. One
can only express the hope that practical cooperation is
extended whenever possible, and that States realize
that cooperation is indispensable if they are to succeed
in countering terrorism and eliminating this cowardly
form of indiscriminate violence against innocent
people for purposes of propaganda, blackmail or
intimidation.

7

S/PV.4242

I stand ready to answer any questions that
members of the Council may wish to put to me. I thank
you for your attention.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr.
Corell for his detailed briefing.
Mr. Grainger (United Kingdom): My delegation
is very grateful to the Legal Counsel for his briefing
and for the very thorough briefing notes which he
circulated previously. We commend the continuing
efforts of the Organization, through the efforts of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat, to address the threat of international
terrorism.
Terrorists continue to kill, injure and intimidate
innocent people around the world. Terrorist acts not
only constitute a challenge to the authority of those
States on whose territory they are committed, but in a
number of cases also constitute a threat to international
peace and security. That link has been recognized by
the Security Council, including in resolution 1269
(1999), adopted under your presidency, Sir, October
1999. It is therefore vital that the United Nations
continue to act resolutely in response to this threat and
to sent a strong message that the international
community will not tolerate the use of terrorist
methods.
The United Kingdom fully supports the measures
taken by the Organization to address terrorist threats,
including, in appropriate cases, the imposition of
measures by the Council against those who fail to bring
to justice those responsible for terrorist acts.
The United Kingdom commends the latest United
Nations conventions, to which Mr. Corell referred
today: the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. We urge States which have not
signed them, or other conventions aimed at combating
terrorism, to do so at the earliest opportunity. The
United Kingdom expects to ratify both of these
conventions early next year.
The United Kingdom also supports the work
proposed by India to draft a comprehensive convention
on terrorism and the ongoing efforts to complete a draft
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism, which was proposed by your own
delegation, Mr. President. We hope that both of those

8

proposals can be brought to completion as soon as
possible.
The United Kingdom knows only too well the
grim effects of terrorism, the need to be resolute in
condemning it and the importance of finding practical
ways to combat the continuing threats it represents. We
are determined to continue our support of international
efforts to fight terrorism, while upholding the United
Nations Charter and other rules of international law,
including those principles that defend human rights.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Hans Corell for his briefing. I wish also to
thank the Russian Federation for its proposal to devote
today’s meeting to consideration of the implementation
of resolution 1269 (1999), adopted more than a year
ago. That resolution unequivocally condemned all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable. Its adoption was the culmination of a
process of evolution in the treatment of terrorism by
the Security Council, which long refrained from
tackling the question of terrorist practices in an
appropriate manner. Early in the 1990s, as a result of
changes in the international situation, we saw the
adoption of the first decisions viewing such practices
as a threat to international peace and security.
The adoption of resolution 1269 (1999) also
marked the conclusion of a process of clarifying the
Security Council’s competence in this sphere. Above
and beyond the fact that these are unjustifiable crimes,
irrespective of their motivation, it is undeniable today
that certain terrorist acts pose a direct threat to
international peace and security, which means that the
Council may consider them and adopt measures on
them. The Security Council’s adoption of such
measures, combined with the endeavours of other
United Nations organs in this field, contributes to the
Organization’s fight against terrorism.
Argentina has always been well aware of the
urgent need for the Council to address this matter,
because my country was the victim of two grave
terrorist attacks, the first in 1992 against the Israeli
Embassy in Buenos Aires and the second in 1994
against my country’s main Jewish organization, the
Asociación Mutual Israelita Argentina. Speaking
before the Security Council, my delegation indicated
that it had turned to the Council after that attack,
although the Council agreed to consider it only in an
informal meeting. We said at the time that we were

S/PV.4242

convinced that the fight against terrorism had to be as
intense as the fight against other serious crimes; we
called for such an item to be included on the Council
agenda. We are therefore grateful to the Russian
Federation for its 1999 initiative and for its constant
concern with respect to dealing with this crime.
It is disturbing to note the increasingly close
relationship between terrorism and new forms of
organized crime, drug trafficking and other criminal
activities; this poses a growing threat to world peace
because it uses state-of-the-art technology and crosses
State borders to become a global problem. We welcome
the recent adoption of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its two protocols,
and look forward to the adoption of a third draft
protocol. Argentina worked actively for the adoption of
those instruments and expresses its great satisfaction at
this recent advance in the fight against international
organized crime.
The international community has responded
firmly to terrorism by formulating conventions to
prosecute and punish its specific manifestations. Those
instruments address the problem pragmatically and
effectively. We hope that it will very soon be possible
to overcome remaining difficulties in the negotiation of
a draft international convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, which was proposed by the
Russian Federation. We will lend our full support to the
achievement of a positive result. We urge all States to
accede to these conventions and to play an active part
in their implementation. We are also grateful to India
for introducing a draft comprehensive convention on
terrorism, which the General Assembly has begun to
study carefully; the advanced thinking behind it has
aroused great interest.
Terrorism is an unjustifiable crime. Some terrorist
acts indeed pose a threat to international peace and
security and therefore, in accordance with the Charter,
fall within the competence of the Security Council. My
country believes that the Council must continue to be
involved in addressing this problem by strengthening
the practical implementation of international law. We
reaffirm our gratitude for the convening of today’s
meeting, and believe that, like last year’s meeting, it
will reiterate the unambiguous political message that
we must send in respect of this crime.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Argentina for the kind words he
addressed to my country.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I wish first of all, Mr. President, to thank you and your
delegation for the initiative to include the question of
international terrorism on the December agenda of the
Security Council. I wish also to thank Mr. Hans Corell
for his comprehensive briefing on the roles of United
Nations organs in the fight against that scourge.
We are witnessing today the emergence of new
transborder threats in the face of which the
international community remains relatively powerless.
With its dangerous and constantly evolving methods
and its growing links to drug and arms trafficking and
money-laundering, terrorism has become one of the
major scourges of our day, as it obstructs the economic
and social development of countries and destabilizes
international peace and security.
Because no country in the world has any
guarantee that it will be spared this scourge, the
international community’s response must be joint,
coordinated and comprehensive. Because of its
universality, the United Nations is an ideal framework
in this respect. The Security Council, given its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be able to identify those
situations involving acts of terrorism which represent
threats to international peace and security and react
firmly, as has been the case on a number of occasions.
The Council, which took a stand on this question
as early as 1970, has since then adopted several
resolutions that have addressed fields as varied as the
hijacking of aircraft, the taking of hostages, illicit acts
against the safety of civil aviation, and kidnappings.
For its part, the General Assembly has a pivotal
role in the elaboration of appropriate and effective
legal instruments in the fight against terrorism. Thus in
1994 it adopted the Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, supplemented by a
second Declaration condemning all acts and practices
of terrorism, regardless of political, philosophical,
ideological, ethnic or religious considerations.
These
Declarations
were
subsequently
consolidated through a whole arsenal of sectoral or
special conventions addressing specific areas. Out of
three recent drafts, two were successful. Thus the

9

S/PV.4242

Convention on the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
and the Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism were adopted in 1997 and
1999, respectively. Tunisia, which is gratified at these
important achievements, hopes that the draft on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism will meet with
the same success, on the basis of a consensus.
My delegation believes, however, that in order to
achieve that objective, it will be necessary to take into
consideration the concerns of all the parties, inter alia,
those expressed by the Non-Aligned Movement.
The elaboration of a comprehensive draft
convention on terrorism as well as the convening,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of a highlevel conference will represent a good opportunity to
further strengthen the dialogue in the fight against
international terrorism and will send a strong signal of
our collective determination to combat all acts of
terrorism in all its forms.
In this framework, Tunisia fully supports the
position adopted in the Durban Declaration by the
Non-Aligned Movement, and we emphasize the need
for international cooperation to combat terrorism, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the relevant
international conventions. It is therefore vital that these
international norms be respectful of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States.
The role of the United Nations Secretariat is of
equal importance. We are awaiting with great interest
the publication of documents that will provide a
compilation of national laws and regulations
concerning the prevention of, and the fight against,
international terrorism, as well as a compilation of
related regional conventions.
The elaboration of international instruments is
not the only area of joint effort. States and international
organizations must also cooperate in implementing
these texts in the broadest possible way. Tunisia
believes that the fact that it has signed a large number
of international legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism and its accession to various Arab, Islamic,
African and Mediterranean regional initiatives reflect
its firm resolve to make a significant contribution to
the efforts of the international community to confront
this scourge.

10

Aware that individual action cannot suffice in this
field, Tunisia has developed a close and fruitful
cooperation with other States at the regional and
bilateral levels, based on a continuing exchange of
expertise and information with our partners.
While Tunisia categorically and unreservedly
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
my delegation wishes to take this opportunity to recall
the Declaration published on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations and to
emphasize our deep commitment to the need to
distinguish between terrorism and the legitimate
struggle of peoples subjected to occupation, whose
goal it is to achieve their inalienable right to selfdetermination.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Tunisia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is very grateful to the UnderSecretary-General and to the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans
Corell, for his briefing just now, which has provided us
with some very helpful information on United Nations
activities in combating international terrorism.
Acts of terrorism represent an enormous threat to
international peace and security. That threat is looming
even larger in view of terrorism’s increasingly
transborder nature and its growing use of hightechnology methods. The Chinese delegation has
always opposed and condemned terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, by any state, organization,
group or individual, irrespective of motive.
We would like to express our appreciation for the
progress that the United Nations has made in the last
10 years in promoting international cooperation and
elaborating legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism. Resolution 1269 (1999), adopted last year,
has already become a very important guideline for the
Security Council in addressing the question of
international terrorism.
On the other hand, we also believe that in our
approach to individual terrorist activities, the Security
Council should endeavour to avoid or minimize resort
to sanctions, because sometimes sanctions, while
failing to satisfactorily resolve the problem, can bring
about very serious humanitarian consequences.

S/PV.4242

Since 1994, when the General Assembly adopted
the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism, anti-terrorist legislation in the United
Nations system has registered considerable progress. In
1996, the General Assembly adopted the Declaration to
Supplement the 1994 Declaration and established the
Ad Hoc Committee to strengthen legal measures to
combat terrorism. In the four years since then, the
Committee’s efforts have led to the adoption of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and
we have reached consensus on most of the text of the
draft international convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism. This year the Ad Hoc
Committee
began
work
on
formulating
a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
All of these efforts will contribute to the further
implementation and consolidation of the existing antiterrorist legal system.
China has already acceded to all international
anti-terrorism Conventions that are in force.
Cooperation between the Chinese Government
and other States to combat terrorism has been
increasing day by day. In July this year China, together
with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation
and Tajikistan, issued the Dushanbe Declaration within
the framework of the Shanghai Five, in which those
countries reaffirmed their determination to jointly
combat acts of terrorism, which constitute a major
threat to regional security, stability and development.
They also committed themselves never to allow their
territories to be used for activities aimed at harming
State sovereignty, security and social order in any of
the five countries. We believe that this regional
mechanism of international cooperation will play a
very positive role in combating international terrorism.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
start by conveying our heartiest congratulations to you
on your assumption of the Council presidency. I would
also like to pay tribute to Ambassador van Walsum for
his distinguished leadership of the Council in
November.
We appreciate the comprehensive briefing given
by the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, on the work
done by the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat on international terrorism. The

comprehensive briefing note provided by him in
advance has been very useful.
It is indeed a timely initiative to take up the
question of follow-up to resolution 1269 (1999), on
international terrorism in the context of Council
responsibility, a year after its adoption. Information on
progress in different areas, as required in paragraphs 2,
3 and 4 of that resolution is, as we expected, found in
the latest report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/55/179 of 26 July and its addendum of 9
October. The scope of our deliberations is therefore
somewhat delineated by the debate in the Sixth
Committee, which had the report of the SecretaryGeneral before it. Our purpose here is also to express
support for the work of other organs of the United
Nations, Member States and regional and international
organizations.
In the context of the Council’s responsibility in
the matter, we shall briefly comment on the follow-up
of some of the provisions of resolution 1269 (1999).
Let us first take up paragraph 2. Three things are
required of all States: full implementation of
international anti-terrorist conventions to which they
are parties, adhering to remaining conventions and
speedy adoption of the pending conventions.
It is encouraging to note the increase in the
number of States parties to the anti-terrorism
conventions. The Government of Bangladesh is now
engaged in examining the relevant international
instruments with a view to early signature, ratification
and accession, as the case may be. Simultaneously, we
are undertaking an examination of the need for and
forms of implementing domestic legislation.
We recognize some progress in the adoption of
pending instruments since adoption of the resolution.
The General Assembly adopted the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism on 9 December 1999. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was adopted on 15 November 2000. Bangladesh
expects to sign that Convention at an early date, upon
completion of the examination process by the
Government.
Two draft conventions have been under
negotiation in the General Assembly’s Ad Hoc
Committee. The initiative taken by the Russian
Federation in proposing the draft convention on the

11

S/PV.4242

suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism has been
highly appreciated. Mr. Corell’s briefing has provided
an update and a very pertinent analysis of the state of
negotiations. We regret the impasse over the questions
of activities of national armed forces, State terrorism
and dumping of radioactive waste.
Bangladesh has welcomed the initiative taken by
India in preparing a draft comprehensive convention.
There is a need for an overarching instrument to
provide a possible basis for global consensus for
dealing with terrorism and underpinning effective
international cooperation. We have also expressed
support for holding an international conference and
hope the Ad Hoc Committee will be able to agree on
the agenda of the conference when it meets next
February.
We welcome the progress made over the year in
strengthening international cooperation, as called for in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1269 (1999). We appreciate
the initiative taken by the Secretariat.
Paragraph 4 requires a series of measures by all
States, ranging from prevention and suppression of
terrorist acts and prosecution or extradition to refusal
of asylum to terrorists and exchange of information. A
more substantive and regular review of the
implementation of these and other provisions of the
resolution could be undertaken on the basis of a report
from the Secretariat.
We have noted that the Secretariat intends to
make specific mention of paragraph 5 of the Council’s
resolution in the future reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject. For a regular follow-up by the
Council in the areas under its responsibility, we wonder
whether it would be a good idea to have the report of
the Secretary-General issued as a document of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council in view of
the implications of terrorism for international peace
and security recognized by the Council in the
resolution.
Let me conclude by reiterating that, as a matter of
principle, Bangladesh condemns all acts of terrorism,
irrespective of motive, wherever and by whomever
committed, as they violate the norms of international
law, respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights and affect international peace and
security. We shall continue to contribute to the efforts
aimed at combating international terrorism in all its
forms.

12

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Bangladesh for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We join other
delegations in thanking the Russian presidency for its
initiative to discuss in the Council measures to
eliminate international terrorism. We also thank the
Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, for his comprehensive
briefing on the significant developments in
international law that have occurred over the past few
years.
In this connection, an important contribution was
made by the Security Council during the previous
Russian presidency, when it adopted resolution 1269
(1999), in which it unequivocally condemned all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, in all their
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
committed, in particular those which could threaten
international peace and security.
It is our view that the General Assembly must
remain the principal United Nations platform for
initiating efforts to combat international terrorism. The
12 United Nations terrorism conventions elaborated in
the General Assembly represent a major achievement
of that body. On the other hand, the Security Council
has its role to play in special cases. The Security
Council’s involvement in the Lockerbie affair is a case
in point.
The Netherlands is currently in the process of
ratifying the last two of the 12 United Nations
terrorism conventions: the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
The sectoral approach in negotiating terrorism
conventions has proved to be an effective track to
achieving a legal framework. The Indian draft
comprehensive convention that is currently under
consideration in the Sixth Committee should, in our
view, complement rather than replace the existing
instruments so as to ensure that every single act of
terrorism is adequately criminalized.
The existing Conventions have already attracted a
large number of signatories and ratifications, and this
possible new instrument should therefore not imperil
the support these Conventions have already obtained.

S/PV.4242

International legal instruments alone do not
suffice. Enhanced cooperation among States, both at
the United Nations level and regionally, is essential for
effective combating of terrorism.

terrorist acts demand that we support practical efforts
aimed at addressing the causes and sources of
terrorism. The international community must act to
create disincentives for those who support terrorism.

The Netherlands continues to stand ready to fight
terrorists. We acknowledge that the struggle against
increasingly sophisticated terrorists may require
increasingly harsher means. We wish to reiterate,
however, that in cases where official use of violence is
necessary, the response must be proportionate and
limited to the requirements of the maintenance of
public order. States have a special responsibility to
observe international humanitarian and human rights
law.

Jamaica condemns all acts of terrorism, and we
believe that the most effective response to these acts
continues to be full cooperation at the international
level. It is in this context that the development of a
more comprehensive legal framework to combat
terrorism becomes a key factor in developing an
organized response to this scourge. In this regard, it
also remains a matter of primary importance that States
strive to ensure that those responsible for terrorist acts
are brought to justice.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the Netherlands for the kind words he
addressed to my delegation.

We welcome the work done by the General
Assembly to elaborate the convention on measures to
eliminate international terrorism. We hope that the
elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, which will complement the
existing network of various crime-specific counterterrorism treaties, will also be concluded in good time.
These legal instruments create the foundation for
addressing terrorism through appropriate cooperation
and information exchange.

Mr. Ward (Jamaica): The issue of terrorism
demands our attention, and for that reason we thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. We
thank Mr. Hans Corell for his briefing, which
enumerated the actions taken to combat terrorism and
detailed further action needed by the international
community in this regard.
Jamaica welcomes this opportunity to discuss the
issue of terrorism, which continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
wish to express our appreciation for the initiative to
hold this debate.
The fight against terrorism has intensified
significantly since the General Assembly first
considered the issue in 1972. Since that time,
numerous lives have been lost as a result of
indiscriminate terrorist attacks on civilian populations.
It is regrettable that despite the efforts of the
international community over the past 10 years, the
world is witnessing even more serious manifestations
of terrorism, as terrorists are increasingly resorting to
inhumane actions that are designed to result in a
maximum number of casualties and damage to
property.
Terrorism poses a serious threat to the peace and
stability of nations and to the security and well-being
of their citizens, and it therefore requires a serious
response by the international community. The
indiscriminate death and injury and the damage to
essential services and infrastructure that result from

The challenges presented by terrorism have been
compounded by globalization and the revolution in
communications technology. Terrorism has thus
become intricately intertwined with transnational
organized crime, which manifests itself in several
forms of criminal activity, including illicit narcotics
production and trafficking, money-laundering and
illegal arms transfers. In any consideration of
terrorism, focus must be placed concurrently on efforts
to counter the trafficking in small arms, which
undoubtedly contributes to the spread and escalation of
terrorism. The international community is therefore
faced with new challenges in its fight against terrorism
and must develop comprehensive strategies and take all
appropriate action in an expeditious and effective
manner to address new and more complex
manifestations of terrorism.
It is in this context that today’s debate provides
us an opportunity to examine new and innovative
strategies and to consider the Council’s role in
developing systematic and comprehensive approaches
that complement those already being undertaken at the
international level. Though much progress has been
made, much remains to be done by the Council in

13

S/PV.4242

fulfilling its role to counter threats to international
peace precipitated by terrorism.
The Security Council has adopted several
resolutions and issued a number of presidential
statements addressing the issue of terrorism. Every
effort must be made to ensure that the Council’s
rhetoric is followed by effective action to counter
terrorist activities. By adopting resolution 1269 (1999)
the Council signalled its intention to increase its efforts
to counter terrorist threats to international peace and
security. While the General Assembly has the primary
role in defining the juridical framework and principles
for addressing terrorism, the Security Council has an
important role to play in complementing and
contributing to the collective efforts to counter the
threat of terrorism.
It is in this regard that the Council’s resolutions,
including resolution 635 (1989) on illegal acts against
the security of civil aviation and its statement of 31
January 1992, which highlighted the importance of
collective action against terrorism, continue to serve as
important and effective complements to efforts aimed
at addressing this scourge.
Today’s debate undoubtedly serves as an
important opportunity for the Council to reaffirm its
condemnation of terrorism and to reiterate its call on
all States to ensure that they do not engage in activities
aimed at assisting, supporting or facilitating terrorist
activities or at harbouring terrorist organizations or
groups. In this respect, we wish to recall the
resolutions of the Security Council which call on all
States to refuse assistance to terrorist organizations.
Those States acting in contravention of these
resolutions are themselves contributing to the scourge
of terrorism. Our deliberations today must be seen as
another step in expressing the Council’s readiness to
take necessary steps, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter, to counter terrorist
threats and to put pressure on those who would seek,
whether directly or indirectly, to acquiesce in,
encourage or tolerate those terrorist acts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Jamaica for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada)(spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Russian presidency for
providing us with the opportunity to continue the
debate begun last year on international terrorism. We

14

would also like to thank Mr. Hans Corell for his
presentation,
which
was
both
incisive
and
comprehensive.
Terrorism is an ever-present threat to
international peace and security. In addition, it
represents a threat to human security, for the victims of
terrorism are primarily innocent civilians. That is why
this problem deserves inclusion in the expanded
definition of security, which the Security Council is
now developing.
(spoke in English)
As we are all too aware, terrorism knows no
international boundaries. Its perpetrators recognize
neither the rule of law nor international norms of
humanity or decency. They care not at all what
suffering they wreak among the innocent, often for the
sake of political statements whose significance is
apparent only to themselves.
There is no justification for terrorism, and there
can be no concessions made to those who commit
terrorist acts. The presidential statement that we will
adopt today, just like the draft resolution of the Sixth
Committee on elimination of international terrorism, is
perfectly clear on this point. Terrorism is never
justifiable, for whatever purpose committed and by
whomsoever it is committed.
In various regional and multilateral forums,
including the General Assembly, we have agreed on
important principles in the fight against terrorism.
These include the denial of support and sanctuary for
terrorists, the establishment of an ever-widening
network of international conventions against terrorism
and international cooperation and coordination at the
policy and operational levels as well.
No state is immune from the threat of terrorism or
from the threat that its territory could be used to
support terrorist activity elsewhere. For these reasons,
international cooperation is essential in the fight
against terrorism, as noted by Mr. Corell. The
conclusion of negotiations over a year ago on the
International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism now brings to 12
the number of international counter-terrorism
instruments at the disposal of the international
community. Canada has signed all 12 of these
instruments and ratified 11; we are in the process of
ratifying the twelfth. These conventions, along with the

S/PV.4242

ongoing negotiations on other instruments, such
as the Indian draft comprehensive convention to
combat international terrorism, constitute a sound legal
framework to combat terrorism wherever it arises in
the world.
The multiplicity of international efforts to fight
terrorism reflects the importance that the international
community attaches to this issue. Our citizens expect
no less. They also expect that strong action against
terrorism will be consistent with broader commitments
to human rights and the rule of law. By respecting
these principles, the institutions entrusted to fight
terrorism will attract public support and deny terrorists
the sympathy and the support they need.
For its part, the Security Council has and must
continue to play a key role in the fight against
terrorism. It has responded robustly to specific cases of
terrorism, whether it be the Lockerbie case or the
assassination attempt on President Mubarak of Egypt.
It has also imposed sanctions against those who
harbour or support terrorism, as in the case of the
Taliban and Usama bin Laden. These actions, while
showing that there can be no impunity for terrorism,
can also serve as a deterrent to future terrorist acts.
(spoke in French)
The fight against terrorism has many aspects. It
must be part of a broader framework that will address
not the immediate threat alone, but also the underlying
factors supporting terrorism. There is, in particular, a
need to cooperate on the implementation of laws while
tackling issues of human rights, democratic
development, good governance and socio-economic
problems. It is in the context of such a comprehensive
approach to the problem that we will be able to find
viable and enduring solutions to terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Canada for his kind words addressed
to my delegation.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the convening of this meeting, which provides the
Council with an opportunity to continue its
consideration of the threat to international peace and
security posed by international terrorism, which was
first addressed by the Council way back in 1992. We
recall that, following the important initiative taken by
you, Sir, and your delegation, during your presidency
of the Council in October last year, we had a very

useful debate, culminating in the unanimous adoption
of a landmark resolution pertaining to the question of
international terrorism, namely, resolution 1269 (1999)
of 19 October 1999.
We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Hans Corell, the United Nations Legal Counsel, for his
useful briefing on the subject and his comprehensive
briefing paper. Clearly, important efforts have already
been or are being made by the United Nations in
developing relevant international legal instruments to
combat and suppress the terrorist menace. We
commend the efforts of the Secretary-General in
facilitating the work of the relevant United Nations
organs, as outlined by the Legal Counsel.
My delegation has clearly put forward its position
on international terrorism during the Council’s debate
on the issue in October last year and during the
ongoing discussions in the General Assembly and the
relevant Committees. I do not intend to repeat
Malaysia’s position beyond reiterating three main
principles.
First, Malaysia is against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We condemn all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism as unjustifiable criminal acts,
regardless of the motivation of their perpetrators, when
innocent civilians are deliberately targeted as victims.
Terrorism should be condemned wherever it rears its
ugly head and whether committed by individuals,
groups of individuals or state authorities; the latter,
with better means at their disposal, can sometimes be
more devastating and destructive to civil society. In
taking security measures, States must be guided by the
principle of proportionate response and not cross the
threshold beyond which such security measures may
descend to the level of terrorism, which we all abhor.
Whenever such excessive use of force by the State
occurs, resulting in massive loss of life and injury to
the civilian population, it must be roundly condemned,
as we do with respect to other forms of terrorism.
Secondly, there should be a clear and universally
agreed definition of terrorism so that it can be
differentiated from the legitimate struggles of peoples
under colonial or alien domination and foreign
occupation for self-determination and national
liberation, as recognized by the relevant resolutions
and declarations that have been adopted by the United
Nations. However, this does not justify the use of

15

S/PV.4242

terrorist methods by any group against the unarmed
civilian population.
Thirdly, the international community must deal
with the terrorist menace with the severity it deserves
in a well-coordinated global strategy that should be
carried out in a fair, objective and non-selective
manner and without politicizing the issue.
The fight against international terrorism is a
global effort involving States Members of this
Organization and other international and regional
organizations. The Non-Aligned Movement, in the
Durban Declaration of 1998, clearly enunciated its
position on the need to promote international
cooperation in combating terrorism, which, inter alia,
should be pursued in accordance with the principles of
international law and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. The Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) has also taken its own
initiative on this matter through its resolution 59/26-P
on the follow-up of the Code of Conduct For
Combating International Terrorism and the Convention
of the OIC on Combating International Terrorism, as
contained in document S/1999/1204 of 29 November
1999. The Legal Counsel has alluded to the OIC
initiative in his briefing paper. Malaysia, as a member
of the two organizations, fully subscribes to these
positions.
Over the past four years, the General Assembly’s
Ad Hoc Committee, in which we participate actively,
has achieved remarkable results in strengthening legal
measures against terrorism, particularly with the
adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings in 1997 and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism in 1999.
We are pleased to note that the Ad Hoc
Committee this year has started its consideration of the
Indian-initiated draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. We are gratified to note, too,
that the draft was well received by Member States,
although a number of issues have yet to be resolved
before it can be adopted. In this regard, we feel that it
is imperative that the question of the definition of
terrorism be addressed in serious fashion so that an
acceptable definition can be included in the draft
convention. A universally agreed definition of
terrorism is important not only to clear up any
ambiguity about the term, but also to facilitate greater

16

and more concrete and coordinated cooperation by
States in combating this menace. In this regard, we
would urge a truly comprehensive approach in the
elaboration of the convention on terrorism in the Sixth
Committee.
Malaysia is also seriously concerned by the everpresent danger of nuclear terrorism. We continue to
believe that, ultimately, the most effective way of
preventing what
would be the catastrophic
consequences of acts of nuclear terrorism is the total
elimination of nuclear weapons; hence, the importance
we have attached and continue to attach to nuclear
disarmament leading to the ultimate elimination of all
nuclear weapons. Notwithstanding this, we commend
the Russian Federation for its initiative and look
forward to the early completion of the work on the
draft convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism and to its eventual adoption, thereby making
the world a little safer, though not entirely safe from
the possible use of nuclear weapons. Finally, my
delegation fully concurs with the observation made by
the Legal Counsel that the fight against terrorism must
ultimately be seen in terms of practical cooperation.
This, undoubtedly, is a fundamental requirement that
should be incorporated into any international legal
instrument concerning terrorism in order to establish
clear guidelines governing States’ cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. We should also recognize the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in addressing the issue, and encourage
and support them in complementing global efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for his kind words
addressed to our delegation.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
commend your leadership, Mr. President, in setting
aside today to discuss an issue of enormous important
not only to every country represented around the table,
but to all the members of the United Nations. I think
the briefing we heard from our Legal Counsel, Hans
Corell, lays out the challenges before us, as well as the
opportunities. I think we should all pause and review
our own priorities in dealing with this very difficult but
crucial and important issue. My country has certainly
been the victim of terrorism, including quite recently at
some of our embassies in Africa. We have all been
awakened by the shocking news of a sudden terrorist
attack on our citizens or a hijacking. I think that taking
some time out of our busy schedule to look at how we

S/PV.4242

can move forward on this problem is a crucial priority.
We commend the Russian presidency for doing so.

given effect, and of what remains to be done. Let us all
cooperate to eliminate the scourge of terrorism.

As resolution 1269 (1999) makes clear, the
suppression of acts of terrorism is essential if
international peace and security are to be maintained,
which is one of the priorities of the Security Council’s
mission. The suppression of terrorism is crucial to our
own mandate to maintain international peace and
security.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the United States for her kind words
addressed to us.

Mr. Corell has provided us with a crystal-clear
analysis of the roles of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Secretariat, as well as of
their respective responsibilities and of the need for
continued action by all concerned to cope with the
scourge of terrorism. Whether it be the very real threat
from groups that provide safe-haven and comfort to
those who attack embassies, or other groups that
harbour individuals who attack civilian aviation, we
must all stand ready to cooperate and make use of the
opportunities provided by the United Nations to
eliminate the threat of terrorism.
The tools we have to combat terrorism must have
the strong support of all members of this body. Our
primary tool against terrorism is that of sanctions. We
have imposed sanctions against those who have carried
out acts of terror and against those who provide haven
to terrorists. We must recommit ourselves to supporting
such measures and ensuring that Member States follow
through on the commitments imposed on them by the
Security Council. In addition to this, we have various
conventions against terrorism. Those States that have
not ratified the existing conventions should consider
doing so urgently. Those States that are parties to the
conventions must seek to cooperate to give them full
force and effect.
Unrelated issues must not be allowed to prevent
progress on key conventions. For instance, the work on
the draft conventions currently before the Ad Hoc
Committee must be carried forward, and not be taken
as an opportunity to attempt to resolve issues more
properly considered in the First Committee as a kind of
quid pro quo for agreement on the all-important
convention on nuclear terrorism.
No one can justify terrorism. We must all make
the fight against terrorism a priority. We welcome the
opportunity for us all to be reminded of what has been
accomplished, of how our accomplishments must be

Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the issue of international terrorism, which
has become a subject of growing concern to the world
community. My delegation also wishes to commend the
Russian Federation for the continuous attention it has
given to this problem and for its important contribution
to the cause of eliminating the scourge of international
terrorism. In recent years, your country, Mr. President,
has suffered enormously from the most brutal sorts of
terrorist attacks directed primarily against innocent
civilians. As a result of those attacks hundreds of
people have died or received severe injuries. We mourn
with you the victims of those barbarous acts and share
your pain and indignation.
I would also like thank Under-Secretary-General
Hans Corell for his informative briefing and for his
comprehensive note on follow-up measures to
resolution 1269 (1999).
The increasing attention given by various United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, to the
phenomenon of international terrorism is not
surprising. During the last decade we have witnessed
an unprecedented outbreak of terrorist acts in different
parts of the world. No State — be it big or small, rich
or poor — can feel safe against the threat of terrorism,
which knows no boundaries and makes no distinction
between children and military targets or between
diplomatic and humanitarian missions. Not only does
terrorism cause civilian deaths, it also threatens the
territorial integrity and security of States and
undermines confidence in relationships between
nations, thereby endangering international peace and
security. In that connection, I wish to underline the
particularly close connection that exists between
terrorism and aggressive separatism, ethnic intolerance
and religious extremism.
Conflict situations create favourable conditions
for the activities of terrorist groups. Of particular
concern is the fact that the activities of terrorist
organizations are financed through other criminal
activities, including arms smuggling and the
production of, and trafficking in, drugs. Nowadays,

17

S/PV.4242

terrorists use new and more sophisticated means of
terror. They have increasingly profited from the
benefits of the information revolution. In an era in
which there is growing importance of, and dependence
on, information and communications systems, there is
an increasing risk of the use of computer technologies
by potential terrorists to destroy essential infrastructure
and undermine the security and well-being of nations
and countries.
We are convinced that the intensification of
international efforts to combat terrorism needs a more
concentrated focus on the underlying causes of this
extremely complicated international phenomenon and
its deep socio-economic roots and conditions. The
roots of terrorism are very similar to those of
international conflicts, namely, poverty, inequality and
oppression. Their virtual elimination would therefore
ultimately be conducive to a decrease in terrorist
activity.
I would also like to underscore another important
aspect of the concerted efforts by the international
community to fight terrorism. Terrorist attacks
constitute a clear violation of recognized norms of
international law. The main purpose of most of them is
to undermine international stability and to provoke
another cycle of violence in international or interethnic relations. The international community should
not, under any circumstances, give in to such
provocations. All actions taken at international,
regional or national levels must be in full conformity
with the existing rules of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
not run counter to the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter.
Ukraine has repeatedly condemned, in the
strongest possible terms, international terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, no matter what
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,
racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature might be
invoked to justify terrorist acts. We have consistently
supported the concerted efforts of the international
community in combating this scourge. My country has
ratified most of the instruments of a universal character
in this field. Earlier this year, Ukraine signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. The International Convention
for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings is to be
ratified in the near future. We consider adherence to
and full implementation of the relevant international

18

instruments by Member States to be an essential
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. At the same time, we realize that legal
instruments alone are not sufficient; there is a need for
a strong commitment by States and genuine
cooperation between Governments and their law
enforcement agencies in fighting terrorism.
My delegation would also like to reaffirm the
central role of the General Assembly in addressing the
issue of international terrorism. Its work in this area is
fully commendable and represents an example of how
the efforts of individual States can successfully be
pooled to achieve tangible results. We hope that this
spirit of cooperation will continue to prevail in the
activities of the Assembly, in particular in its work on
the draft convention on nuclear terrorism and draft
comprehensive
anti-terrorism
convention.
We
recognize the important contribution made by the
Security Council to the collective efforts to combat
terrorism, in particular where it represents a challenge
to international peace and security. We underline the
need to preserve the established balance of
responsibilities between these two bodies, as provided
for by the United Nations Charter.
Finally, I wish to also mention the need to further
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations in
preventing and combating terrorism. As noted by the
Legal Counsel, the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention engages
in research activities on terrorism and carries out other
important work to promote international cooperation in
this field. In this context, the initiative regarding the
establishment — after reviewing existing possibilities
within the United Nations system — of an international
anti-terrorism centre deserves further attention. This
initiative was supported during the Millennium Summit
by the Presidents of the GUUAM — Georgia,
Uzbekistan, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova — Group of
States.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Ukraine for his kind words expressed
to my country.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, for
his very clear account of the actions undertaken by the
United Nations to combat international terrorism.
The French delegation, like many that have
already spoken, would like first to reaffirm its absolute

S/PV.4242

and unconditional condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of the cause
invoked or the perpetrators. Terrorist acts always
contribute to unravelling the very fabric of society and
to jeopardizing the bases of democracy and human
rights.
To fight international terrorism we must equip
ourselves with instruments for effective cooperation,
while respecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and at the same time combat the political
and human tragedies that contribute to instability,
which in turn nourishes terrorist groups. In this regard,
the United Nations plays a critical role.
The French delegation would like in particular to
emphasize the importance of the work being carried
out in the General Assembly on measures to eliminate
international terrorism. We recall the importance of the
various sectoral conventions that have been drawn up
in this framework. The entry into force of all these
international instruments will be decisive for
international cooperation against terrorism. The French
delegation calls upon the States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings, as well as the Convention on
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The
latter Convention, the result of a draft introduced by
France, tackles the pivotal issue raised by the question
of financing for terrorist groups. It establishes effective
means, relying in particular on cooperation from
financial institutions. Moreover, we favour the rapid
conclusion of the draft convention on the suppression
of acts of nuclear terrorism, which would complement
the existing conventions in a useful manner.
The significant concrete results achieved within
the framework of the United Nations are linked to the
chosen approach, which gives pride of place to
pragmatism, the search for consensus and a sectoral
consideration of problems. We remain dedicated to that
approach. We think, however, that the elaboration of a
comprehensive
convention
on
international
terrorism — as foreseen in General Assembly
resolution 54/110, which was based on a draft
introduced by India — is desirable. Such a convention,
which would not replace the existing sectoral
conventions, would make it possible to fill the
remaining gaps, while preserving the gains of these
conventions.

Beyond the drawing up of legal instruments,
international cooperation must be based on an intensive
exchange of information. For its part, France is
actively participating in the work of Europol, which
since 1 July 1999 has been charged with making use of
information collected in the fight against terrorism.
The French delegation also recalls that the European
Union has established in-depth cooperation with other
States in order to combat terrorism, in particular within
the framework of the Barcelona process, with the
coastal countries of the Mediterranean.
As regards the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
the Centre for International Crime Prevention, in
Vienna, we believe it would be useful to increase
information exchanges between it and United Nations
Member States. In this context, the French delegation
recalls that, to be effective, the fight against terrorism
must take into account the specific nature of terrorist
acts. In particular, there is a need to distinguish
between the fight against terrorism and the fight
against organized crime. If there are links between
these two phenomena, they must be addressed in
different ways.
The 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, annexed to General Assembly
resolution 49/60, and more recently Security Council
resolution 1269 (1999) have reaffirmed that terrorist
acts could constitute a threat to international peace and
security. That threat justifies the Security Council
taking a position on the question of terrorism, as in the
cases referred to in the Legal Counsel’s statement. In
so doing, the Council is not acting as a substitute for
the General Assembly, which maintains its role of
defining the principles guiding the fight against
terrorism. To the contrary, in its resolution 1269, the
Security Council has endorsed the principles so
forcefully put forward by the General Assembly in its
1994 Declaration.
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): Let me
begin by thank you, Mr. President, for once again
holding a meeting on the subject of international
terrorism as a follow-up to Security Council resolution
1269 of October 1999, adopted under your presidency.
This resolution condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation. In the same vein, let me
take this opportunity to extend our appreciation and
thanks to the Legal Counsel for his introductory
remarks.

19

S/PV.4242

We appreciate your country’s commitment, Mr.
President, to fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As one of the most heinous crimes
threatening
international
peace
and
security,
international terrorism knows no boundaries and is not
targeted at any particular region or ethnic group. It is
indiscriminate and brings human tragedy of
unparalleled magnitude. In a bid to contain terrorism,
Governments are forced to impose harsh security
measures to stamp out terrorism and to protect their
citizens. Terrorists bury themselves within the
surrounding community, indistinguishable from
ordinary law-abiding citizens, and at the appropriate
moment, they emerge from the shadows to strike
before disappearing back into anonymity, thus
undermining confidence in the Government’s ability to
maintain law and order by sowing fear among the
citizens.
Therefore, the inherent problems of fighting
against terrorism warrant cooperation among States.
The work being done by the United Nations to combat
this scourge are welcome by my delegation. Let me
stress, as we have on numerous occasions, that as the
Organization continues to work to put in place
measures to fight terrorism, a distinction continue to be
made between terrorism and the legitimate rights of
people under foreign occupation and domination,
fighting for their inalienable rights to selfdetermination and freedom. Namibia supports the 1994
United Nations Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, and we join the community of
nations to stand together in relentless pursuit, using all
necessary means to combat terrorism in all its
manifestations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Hans
Corell for his substantive report regarding United
Nations anti-terrorism efforts. This question has a
direct bearing on the Security Council’s mandate.
Terrorism has become one of the most dangerous
threats to international peace and security and a
catalyst of conflicts. No single State can allow itself to
ignore the problem of terrorism or to seriously expect
to resolve it on its own.
In a number of cases, international terrorists have
already outstripped the international community’s

20

efforts to counteract them and have established a broad
network of transborder interaction to implement their
unsavoury objectives. Of particular concern is the
emergence of a new arc of terrorist activity: the
Balkans, the Middle East, the Caucasus, Central Asia
and Afghanistan. An adequate rebuff to a danger on
such a scale is impossible without the unity of all
States, without exception.
The main source of the threat of international
terrorism is Afghanistan, which is under the control of
the Taliban. Despite the international community’s
urgent appeals, the Taliban movement is not carrying
out the demands by the Security Council that it cease
harbouring and training international terrorists and ban
the use of territory under Taliban control for the
establishment of terrorist camps or the preparation of
terrorist acts against other States.
We are witnessing the metastases of this terrorist
tumour that is striking States on all continents. During
the Millennium Summit and the Millennium Assembly,
the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, and the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Igor Ivanov, once again reaffirmed our country’s
position of principle that in circumstances of growing
consolidation of terrorist structures throughout the
world, increasing responsibility is being placed on the
United Nations to mobilize international potential to
counteract terrorism. That work must, inter alia,
promote the implementation of the principles enshrined
in Security Council resolution 1269 (1999); that is, no
support or havens must be offered to terrorists and
punishment for all terrorist acts must be irreversible.
It is also important to establish an effective
system of interaction within United Nations organs in
resolving the terrorism problem, particularly within the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Secretariat, which must work together, complementing
each other on the basis of their relevant jurisdictions
under the Charter, and through cooperation with
regional mechanisms.
A very important condition for effective antiterrorism cooperation among States is the existence of
a broad and reliable international legal basis. Like my
colleagues have done, I associate myself with the
appeals made to all countries to adhere to the existing
universal anti-terrorist conventions and to ensure the
speedy conclusion of work on the necessary additional
instruments designed to fill the existing legal gaps in

S/PV.4242

anti-terrorism cooperation. In that connection, we
attach particular importance to the draft convention to
suppress acts of nuclear terrorism and we welcome the
start of practical discussion on the draft, submitted by
India, of a comprehensive convention on the
suppression of international terrorism.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

taking the floor. In conclusion, I would like to thank
Mr. Corell for his statement and for his participation in
our meeting.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council will continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

Since there were no specific questions addressed
to Mr. Corell in the discussion, Mr. Corell will not be

21
