TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 28 MARCH 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1469) , . . . . . , . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tribute to the memory of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, former President of the
United States of America . , . . . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , .
Adoption of the Agenda . . , , . . . . . . . . , .. ., . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 13) . . , . . . . . . . . .

4

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 14) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

s/W. 1469

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 28 March 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Kgroly CSATORDAY (Hungary).

paid tribute to the memory of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, former President and great war-time leader of the
United States. On behalf of Security Council wish to
extend deepest sympathy to the Government and people
of the United States upon their great loss. Kindly convey
expressions of deepest sympathy to Mrs. Eisenhower and
her family. Highest consideration.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

(Signed) Kkoly Csatorday
President of the Security Couhcil”

Provisional agenda(WAgendall469)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

5. In the absence of objection, it is so decided and I shall
proceed accordingly.

2, The situation

in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9 113).

6, The YRESIDENT:
Secretary-General.

7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: As soon as I received
the sad news of the passing of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, I sent the following messageto Mrs. Eisenhower:

3. The situation

in the Middle East:
’ Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addrqssed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 14).

“I have learned with deep sorrow of your husband’s
death and I extend to you my deep sympathy in your
great loss.

Tribute to the memory of General Dwight D. Eisenhower,
former President of the United States of America

“I first met President Eisenhower in Washington in July
1955, and my subsequent contacts with him strengthened
the very high personal regard in which I had always held
him. He wasone of the great leaders of our times, both in
war and in peace. I admired him particularly for his
concern for the welfare of people everywhere in the
world, for his moderation and for his wisdom. He was a
strong and practical supporter of the United Nations,
where he is remembered especially for his initiative in
promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses
of atomic energy.

1, The PRESIDENT:
It is with deep sadness that we have
learned of the death this morning of General Dwight
D, Eisenhower, the former President of the United States of
America, an eminent wqrld statesman and war-time leader
whose gallant struggle for life has been followed by all with
concern and admiration.
2. I should like to ask the members of the Council to rise
with me and observe a minute of silence in tribute to his
memory.
The members

I now call on our distinguished

of the Council stood and observed a

“Please accept my condolences at the passing of this
great man.”

3, The PRESIDENT:
It is my intention, if the Council
agrees, to send a telegram on its behalf to the Secretary of
State of the United States expressing the Council’s tribute
to General Eisenhower and asking him to convey our
condolences to the Government of the United States and to
the famiIy of the former President,

8. With your permission, Mr. President, I wish to elaborate
on that message.

minute’s silence.

9. I have learned with profound sorrow of the death of
President Eisenhower. President Eisenhower had a central
and unique role in the history of our times, both in war and
in peace. To his world renown as one of the great military
leaders of World War II he added, in two terms as President
of the United States, a new and glorious chapter as a
statesman of peace.

4. The text of the telegram reads as follows:
“Excellency,
“Have honour
Nations Security

inform you that at meeting United
Council held this afternoon, members

10. Both in war and in peace Dwight Eisenhower showed a
broad humanitarianism and a persistent desire for reason1

diplomacy
which marked his outstanding success as the
leader of the Allied forces made him a natural choice for
the h@est,post in his country. Having made his name in
war, he is nevertheless remembered above all as a man of
peace. He was a true and well-loved friend of my country.
The British people will not forget “Ike”.

able and humane solutions of the world’s problems. To put
it in the simplest terms, he wasa good man whose goodness
was evident to all.
11. Throughout his two terms in the White House,
President Eisenhower was a consistent and enlightened
supporter of the United Nations. This support was
expressed not only in statements and policies but also, as in
1956, in courageous support of action through the United
Nations, and in an active personal interest which was
manifested particularly in visits, both formal and informal,
to the Headquarters of the United Nations.

16. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated frow
Spanish): I should like to add a few words to those spoken
by you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Council at the
beginning of this afternoon’s meeting and to the contents
of the telegram which you have sent.

12. Certainly President Eisenhower’s most unique contribution to the work of the United Nations was the basic idea
elaborated in his electrifying address to the General
Assembly on 8 December 19531 in which he appealed for
international action to harness the newly developing power
of the atom for peaceful uses. This far-sighted proposal,
coming as it did from the Head of State of a major atomic
Power, gave the concept of international co-operation a
new direction and dimension. Nor was it merely a highminded proposal contained in a historic speech. The United
Nations, by its action in following up President Eisenbower’s initiative, embarked upon one of the most successful enterprises in its history. One of the highlights of this
enterprise was the series of great international conferences
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, at the first of which,
in 1955, the nuclear scientists of the world met freely, for
the first time since World War II, to exchange and discuss
the mysteries of their craft. Another wasthe setting-up of
the International Atomic Energy Agency.

17. The death today of General Dwight D. Eisenhower is a
sad loss to his great country, the United States of Americ,a,
and to all men who love freedom, peace and justice. His
personality as a statesman and a soldier of universal stature
is irrevocably linked to contemporary history, and, in
particular, to the great victory which only two decades ago
freed the world from the dangerous evil of nazism. All
peoples of the world are indebted to him for his greatness
and for all that he did.
18. At this hour of universal grief, and within the
necessarily narrow limits of an improvised statement, it is
not for me to eulogize him. All I shall say, therefore, is that
we bow our heads in respectful memory of this great soldier
and leader who has left us. On behalf of the people and
Government of the Republic of Paraguay, we ask the
delegation of the United States of America in this Council
to accept this humble testimony of our most sincere
feelings of sorrow.

13. In mourning the passing of President Eisenhower, I
remember with inspiration his many achievements and his
great influence for good in the world.

19. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): On behalf of the delegation of
Pakistan I join my colleagues in conveying our most
profound sympathy to Mr. Yost and the members of tffie
United States delegation on the passing away of that great
American, General Dwight D. Eisenhower. We will cherish
his memory not only as a distinguished soldier and architect
of peace, but also as a great friend of Pakistan.

14. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from Freach): On
behalf of my delegation, my Government and the entire
French people, I should like to tell our United States
colleague with what deep emotion my country shares the
sorrow of the United States. It is at such times of trial that
the friendship which has united France and the United
States for two centuries shows itself in the most striking
and sincere way. We mourn with the people of the United
States the loss of their former President, the illustrious
statesman, the great American who presided over the
liberation of Western Europe and led our democracies to
victory, our democracies united not only in the struggle and
in the sacrifices but also in hope, and our democracies
inspired and sustained by the pursuit of a common ideal.

20. It would be impossible in a short statement to pay
tribute to his manifold achievements. I shall confine my,self
to two personal recollections of his greatness and his.
unswerving dedication to principle.
21. In 1956, on the occasion of the inauguration of the
Islamic
Cultural
Center in Washington, President
Eisenhower looked at his largely Muslim audience and,
departing from his written text, said that the United States
was dedicated to freedom of worship and that, as its
President, it was a great pleasure for him to see that ri&t
assured to the followers of the Islamic faith in the Capita‘l
of the United States. As he spoke these words, one could
see the deeply felt satisfaction in his face.

1.5. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): When I express
the grief of my delegation at the death of General
Eisenhower, when I express the sympathy of my country
with his family and with the sorrowing American people,
we have a clear picture in our minds. We remember a great,
good and simple man. We in Britain remember partictilarly
the great soldier who, as Supreme Commander, launched
the Allied forces from the West in the liberation of Europe
from the Nazi grasp. The qualities of leadership and

22. On the second occasion, during the Suez crisis, when
the United States took a courageous stand on principle,
regardless of other considerations, he declared: “We cannot
have one law for our opponents and another for our
friends.”

1 See OffLial Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session,
Plertary Meetings, 470th meeting.

23. These two remarks speak volumes for Dwight
D. Eisenhower as a man and a statesman, His life’s work
2

was done and he departs from the world full of years and
honours. His deeds will continue to inspire many of his
fellow men not only in the United States but throughout
the world. In the words of the Koranic verse, which it is
appropriate to recite on this sacred day of the Muslim
calendar, the Ashura of Moharram,

Dwight D. Eisenhower, the former President of the United
States.
31. On behalf of the delegation of Algeria, I ask the
United States delegation to be good enough to convey to
Mrs. Eisenhower and her family our most sincere condolences and our deepest sympathy.

“All things shall pass away;
There will remain nought but the radiance of thy Lord.”

32. Mr, KHATRI (Nepal): It is with a most profound
sense of grief and sorrow that we learned of the passing of
General Eisenhower after a prolonged and painful illness.

24. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): May I, on beh,alf of the
delegation of the Soviet Union to the United Nations,
express our condolences on the occasion of the decease of
an outstanding United States statesman and soldier, the
former President of the United States, General Dwight
D. Eisenhower?

33. In paying our respectful tribute to his memory on
behalf of my Government, I. associate myself with you
Mr. President, and with the Secretary-General, as well as
with those representatives who have conveyed condolences
and sympathy to the American Government, the United
States Mission here, the American people and to Mrs. Eisenhower and the family.

25. During the Second World War, Dwight Eisenhower was
well known and respected in the Soviet Union as a capable
military
leader who made a valuable contribution in
commanding the troops which, together with armed forces
of the Soviet Union and other freedom-loving countries,
overthrew Hitlerite Germany, thus ridding Europe and the
world of the Fascist plague and creating conditions for
post-war peace and co-operation and for the creation of the
United Nations.

34. General Eisenhower was a great American. He was a
soldier, a great Commander, a great President and a great
leader of his people. He commanded the greatest army in
history in defence of freedom and liberty and the right of
every nation to live in peace and harmony. He will always
be remembered by a grateful world as a great crusader-the
great man of peace.

26. In mankind’s worst crisis, during the years when the
Soviet Union and the United States fought together with
other allied nations against Hitlerite aggression, General
Eisenhower, as Commander-in-Chief of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in the European theatre of the war, fully
realized how important and essential it was to strengthen
the ties between our countries and their armed forces in
their common and historic struggle.

35. Mr. LIU (China): My delegation is profoundly saddened by the passing of the former President of the United
States, General Dwight D. Eisenhower.
36. He will alwaysbe remembered as the great soldier who
led the armed forces of the democracies to victory in the
Second World War.

27. In the concluding stages of the war, before the capture
of Berlin, the last stronghold of Fascist resistance,
Eisenhower wrote to the Soviet Government about the
great importance of unified planning both in the direction
of efforts and in timing.

37. As the entire world now mourns the passing of this
defender of peace and freedom, we of the Republic of
China particularly feel the loss of a loyal friend whose
memory will for ever be enshrined in the hearts of the
Chinese people.

28, As President of the United States, Eisenhower showed
statesmanlike wisdom in seeking to reduce international
tension and to improve and develop relations between the
Soviet Union and the United States. He took part in the
195.5 Geneva Summit Conference of the heads of Governments of the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom
and France, a conference which I had the honour to attend
and where I met President Eisenhower personally. Unfortunately subsequent events did not turn out as had been
hoped, but we the people of the Soviet Union are by nature
and experience optimists and realists, and we believe that,
in this respect, future events will take the right course.

38. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (translated porn Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its sorrow to the delegation of
the United States on the passing of President Eisenhower,
an illustrious soldier and statesman whom I had the honour
to meet and talk to on several occasioris.His death deprives
‘us of an outstanding figure of our time, a man of great
personality.
39. To the Government and people of the United States of
America and to the family of President Eisenhower, my
delegation extends its most heartfelt sympathy.
40. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia) (translated from
Spanish): The delegation of Colombia shares the grief that

29. I would ask Mr. Yost to convey the condolences of the
Soviet Mission to the United Nations to the Government
and people of the United States and to the family and
friends of the late General Eisenhower. I waive consecutive
interpretation.

the American nation is feeling today.
41. On behalf of the Government of Colombia I ask the
representative of the United States of America to accept
this posthumous tribute to the memory of General Eisenhower, who holds an outstanding place in contemporary
history.

30. Mr, AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): We
were deeply moved to learn of the passing of General
3

50. Here in this Council, which exists to serve that Sam<::
supreme cause, we of the American delegation are particularly moved by the words that have ]seen spoken. They
remind us that we Americans are not alone in’ our feelings
about this illustrious compatriot and about the cause which
he served; for the leader we mourn was a world figure, and
our feelings about him are echoed and shared throughout
the world.

42. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): On behalf of the delegation of Finland I wish to extend to the United States
delegation our profound condolences on the death of
former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, a great American
statesman and soldier who played such a central role not
only in the Second World War but also in the shaping of the
post-war world, and, above all, in the efforts towards
international understanding and co-operation for world
peace.

Adoption of the agenda

43. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from French):
We learned with great sorrow of the loss suffered by the
Government and people of the United States in the passing
of Dwight Eisenhower, a former President of the United
States. On behalf of the Government and the entire people
of Senegal, my delegation would like to pay a tribute to the
memory of that eminent soldier and statesman, who fought
resolutely to ensure the triumph of freedom on earth. On
this occasion, my delegation wishes.to express its deepest
sympathy to the Government of the United States, t6 all
the American people and to Mrs. Eisenhower and her
family.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 13)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/91 14)

44. Mr. MUUKA (Zambia): I wish to extend the condolences of my delegation, my Government and the people of
the Republic of Zambia Dn this occasion. We are. deeply
grieved by the passing of yet another great American
statesman, former President Eisenhower. His valiant struggle during the last War was repeated again against death in
his last months on earth. He was a great man, an intrepid
fighter, but alas, man has yet not been able to thwart death
when it strikes.

51. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisidn
taken at previous meetings of the Security Council, 1:.
propose now, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Jordan, Israel and Saudi Arabia to take
seats at the Council table in order to participate, without.
the right to vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Fawn
(Jordan), Mr, Y. Tekoah (Israel), and Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took places at the Council table.

45. President Eisenhower was clearly one of America’s
greatest leaders both in times of war and in times of peace.
His contribution to mankind indeed went far beyond the
borders of the United States. He helped rid the world of the
scourge of nazism. In paying tribute to this great statesman, let us dedicate ourselves to his ideals of peace and
democracy.

52. Mr. de PINIES (Spain) (translated from Spanish): This
is the first time my delegation has spoken in the Security
Council on the question of the Middle East. I do not,
however, deem it necessary to refer to the general situation.
Nev.ertheless, I think it useful to recall what the Minister fey
Foreign Affairs of Spain said on 16 October 1968,2
’
‘

46. I should Iike humbly to request the Ambassador of the
United States to convey our condolences to Mrs. Eisenhower and her family, and to the Government and the
people of the United States.

“Spain, aware of certain realities of the situation which
has come about in the Near East and anxious that no
people should be denied its right to live, fervently desires
that an end be put to a situation maintained by force of
arms alone, that peace be restored, that justice be
rendered to certain countries and, in short, that this crisis
of immobility and impotence which is inflicting grave
hardship upon great masses of people subjected to the
hazards of war, expatriation and uncertainty, and which
is threatening our Organization, be overcome.”

47. Mr. YOST (United States of America): For the United
States delegation and for my country, permit me to express
profound thanks to those who have just now spoken words
of sympathy and tribute on learning the news of the death
of former President Eisenhower. These tributes will be
conveyed to Mrs. Eisenhower, and I know that she and her
entire family will be particularly grateful for them.
48. As the C0unci.l may have heard, next Monday, 31
March has been declared a day of national mourning for the
late President.

53. Today the Security Council is called upon to consider
the complaint formulated by the representative of Jordan
concerning the attacks by Israel aircraft on civilian centres
in Jordan. Apart from the fact that these attacks constitute
a violation of the cease-fire ordered by the Security Council
@ its resolutions
233 (1967), 234 (1967) and 235 (1967),
---1-------.considers
my &legation
that this state of affairs cannot be

49. The name of Dwight D. Eisenhower holds a unique
place.,of honour in the hearts of the American people. My
countrymen will remember him as an outstanding leader in
the Second World War, as a wise, magnanimous, warm
human being, and-most of all-as a President who for eight
years devoted himself unremittingly, in spite of every
difficulty, to the cause of peace among nations.

2 Ibid., Twenty-third

para. 103.
4

Session, Plenary Meetings, 1697thmeeting,

interest in finding a solution. But it is not possible to apply
the same criterion in judging those wha.accept the decisions
of the Security Council and those who are prepared to
accept only those decisions which suit them, disregarding
the others.

allowed to continue, because it seriously jeopardizes peace
and security, not only in that region but in the whole
world. It is a direct consequence of two facts: firstly, the
aggression of 5 June 1967 and the subsequent occupation
of territory; secondly, the failure to comply with resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

59. I have said on other occasions that it is the United
Nations itself that is on trial at this time. If the Council is
prepared to allow its resolutions or the General Assembly
resolutions to be flouted by Members of the Organization,
we shall be in the sorry situation where this organ, which is
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and
security, will not be discharging its own obligations, having
failed in its most important task, and wilI therefore become
useless.

54. Without prejudice to the fact that this resolution
should be fully implemented, my delegation considers it
obvious that the Charter of the United Nations in no way
permits the occupation of territory by force.
55. The Security Council is now considering the attack by
Israel jet aircraft, which destroyed lest homes and winter
resorts in Ein Hazar. Places frequented by civilians have
been attacked and bombed, and the roads leading to the
villages in the vicinity of Es Salt have been machine-gunned.
This violent attack left eighteen civilians dead and twentyfive wounded, three of them seriously.

60. When in a conflict such as the present one it is
difficult to determine the origin of the passionate feelings
that have inevitably been aroused, this Council has no
alternative but to make a cool and objective study of the
facts submitted to it. And today the concrete facts available’
to us show that a State Member of this Organization has
repeatedly and violently attacked other Member States,
accusing them of being responsible for isolated acts which
are difficult to prove. Recently, the representative of Syria
referred to the incidents which had caused fifteen deaths
and an interminable list of wounded. Can the world of
today accept that in such a situation a Member of the
United Nations may decide on its own initiative, without
previously complying with the obligations imposed upon it
by the Charter, when it is entitled to attack another
Member which has not taken direct action against it?

56. We trust that the object of such action at this time is
not to interfere with the efforts that are being made to find
a solution. But the fact that these acts of violence, which
are real violations of a whole series of resolutions, are
taking place at this time cannot fall to arouse suspicion.
. ?7. My delegation hopes that the attention of the Council
will not be diverted by other events. We are the first to
regret the casualties that occur on either side. The loss of
human life is’deplorable and intolerable. It is inadmissible
that the occupation of territory by force should continue,
for it is precisely in that territory that the repeated and
continued incidents reported to the Council are taking
pIace. In this connexion, my delegation wishes to refer to
document S/9114, in which reference is made to “armed
attacks, armed infiltration and acts of murder and violence
by terrorist groups operating
from Jordan territory , . .“. etc. Attacks against whom? Against what
territory? Or is it actually against Jordanian territory
itself? Is it because Jordanian territory is occupied by
Tsrael that it is now claimed as Israel’s territory?
. 4
. ; 58. My delegation has always considered that if this grave
’ conflict is to be settled, political solutions must be worked
out; but in the face of so many denunciations by Israel of
the attacks which it alleges are being committed by the
Arab States, my delegation wonders whether Israel has
failed to realize that all these acts could be avoided if Israel
were to withdraw immediately from the territories which it
occupies. Had this withdrawal already been carried out, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions, all those victims whom we mourn
today would have been spared or, at least, the legal and
procedural status of Israel before this Council would be far
clearer. My delegation cannot understand why these acts of
violence are periodically denounced before the Council,
when it is within the power of the party which considers
itself wronged-Israel-to settle the conflict. Do away with
the root cause, that is to say, the occupation of the
territories seized by force in violation of the Charter, and
the effects wiIl rapidly disappear. The remaining problems
could then be taken up in a different context and with
greater guarantees of success.My delegation believes that all
the parties to this conflict have, or should have, a definite

61. Yesterday the representative of Israel enumerated for
us the alleged sites, scattered throughout the territory of
Jordan, of fedayeen camps or bases. If what he said is true,
it can only be assumed, in view of the magnitude of the
problem, that these are not terrorists, as he calls them, but
an entire people which, banished from its territory,
deprived of its means of livelihood and repeatedly illtreated, has come to the end of its patience and is reacting
violently to the injustice it is suffering through the
persecution of some and the abandonment and neglect of
others.
‘62. In the view of my delegation, the most serious factor
which has to be taken into account in this specific case is
the time at which the aggression was committed. My
delegation could in no circumstances condone an act of
aggression, even if that act was presented as an act of
reprisal, but although we could not condone it we could
humanly- understand a violent reaction, in proportion to the
damage inflicted, when that reaction is provoked by the
pressure, anger or sorrow of the moment. But what my
delegation cannot even begin to understand is how, at a
time when no act of violence has been committed, and
when the four great Powers are seeking formulae that
contain the promise of a brighter future, a completely
disproportionate and cold-blooded military attack can be
launched, using the most sophisticated modern weapons,
against a centre of population in which, even if it harboured
some fedayeen-a point which has not been proved-there
were certainly many people who had nothing whatsoever to
do with any act of violence and who paid indiscriminately
5

--

with their lives for the cold calculations of the military
chiefs of staff.

69. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

63. Can it seriously be maintained that Israel was at that
time in danger of being attacked by Jordan?

70. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I want to interrupt the
deliberations of the Council to state that we have received
with deep sorrow the news of the passing away of General
Dwight Eisenhower, former President of the United States.
President Eisenhower was a noble and courageous soldier
dedicated to the cause of peace and justice in the world. His
name will always stand as .a landmark not only in the
history of the United States, but also in the history of
mankind, in the common struggle against the forces 01
darkness and oppression in the world.

64. The problem of the Middle East is a complex and
difficult one for which we cannot expect to fmd a solution
overnight. Apart from the general problem, however, this
Organization cannot permit one of its Members repeatedly
and continuously to take justice into its own hands, launch
real wars of aggression, occupy territories that do not
belong to it, and use various means to expel from them
thousands of human beings whose only crime is that they
were born in the land in which their parents and grand
parents have always lived.

I recognize the representative of

71. As an educator and as a great statesman and leader of
one of the super-Powers of the world, his unprecedented
- _
popularity among the great American nation and the ; ’
peoples of the world reflects the deep and inherent values .
that motivated his heart and his mind as a great leader, as a
soldier and, above all, as a man dedicated to the cause of
humanity at large. Indeed, the death of a great man who
made history is the beginning of his life in history.
I
72. We offer our deepest condolences to Mrs. Eisenhower
I
and family, to the American people and to the Government
of the United States of America.
I

65. In the specific case before us there can be no equating
the attitudes of the two parties. This Organization is made
up of States and it is solely the responsibility of States that
we can contemplate and consider. The facts available to us
are basically simple: a territory has been subjected to
military .occupation by a foreign country; acts of violence
occur in that territory; the reaction of the occupying
country against the occupied country is to accusethe latter
of aggression. Anything that may’be added to those basic
facts will be purely subjective criteria.

73. Mr. TURBAY

AYALA (Colombia) (translated fron; ,
in stating that, in our c
opinion, the continued violations of the cease-fire in the
‘Middle East are detrimental to the cause of peace. The
recent bombing of the civilian population of Jordan by the
military forces of Israel undoubtedly constitutes a reprehensible act with which no State can associate itself. That
attack forms part of the policy of reprisals, which runs
counter to the mandates of the Charter.

66. In the light of those facts, the problem before us,is
also straightforward. Has it been proved that the State
whose territory is partly occupied was responsible for the
acts of violence committed against the occupation forces?
In the view of my delegation, it has not. Can the State
whose territory is occupied be considered even indirectly
responsible for the acts of violence which its citizens
commit in ‘the occupied territories? Obviously not, since
apart from the illegitimate occupation, that State does not
exercise jurisdiction over the territories in which the events
,
are taking place.

Spanish): We have no hesitation

74. Far from attempting to evade any responsibility, but
on the contrary expressing our horror at the bombing of
Es Salt, my delegation considers that it is essential to make
every effort within our power to create, before another
armed confrontation takes place, an atmosphere conducive
to the peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle
East.

67. In the light of all these considerations, my delegation
would emphasize the seriousness of the situation, the
responsibility incumbent upon all of us at this time and the
urgent need, independently of our efforts to find a general
solution to the problem, for the Security Council to take
such decisions as it considers most appropriate to try to
prevent a State Member of this Organization from continuing to violate its resolutions and from committing aggression against neighbouring States.

75. It goes without saying that we strongly condemn all
violations of the cease-fire and all acts of terrorism,
whatever their source. Today we mourn the death of
eighteen Jordanian civilians, as in the past we have mourned
the death of no small number of Israelis. Let me state,
however, that in our opinion peace is not achieved through
the mere act of mourning.

68. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (trQnshztt?d from French):
We have already had occasion in this Council to condemn
the bombings of the towns of Irbid and Salt. Today again
we learn with sadness that in the area of the town of Salt
civilians have been victims of bombing attacks by Israel. We
can only deeply deplore this act, which comes at the very
tie when active consultations are being held with a view
to fmding a solution to this painful problem. My Government urges that the weapons be silenced SOthat the efforts
which are now under way may be successful, for this is in
the interests Of alI the parties concerned in the Middle East,
In Particular, we condemn the bombing of civilians. We
have said this here on several occasions,and we shall not
ceaseto repeat it.

76. Often for fear of being unable to find more farreaching solutions, the Security Council prefers the line of
least resistance and gives lengthy consideration to casesthat
conclude with the adoption of a resolution which does
nothing to prevent a repetition of the acts that have been
condemned but, on the other hand, lamentably weakens
the authority of the United Nations.
77, Today we have on our agenda once again the complex
item of the Middle East, a question in which the United
Nations has displayed more doggedness than effectiveness.
6

f

will begin when formal contacts are established between the
representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States,
France and the United Kingdom will be of the greatest
significance. We learned with the deepest satisfaction that,
in the opinion of many of those participating in the
meeting of the super-Powers, not only will there be no
interference with Mr. Jarring’s mission but on the contrary
it will receive all the support that those Powers can give it.

After adopting far-reaching resolutions and after hearing in
the General Assembly and in this Council brilliant speeches
of a fine literary quality, erudite dissertations, Dantean
descriptions, and stark and objective accounts of the
painful events which have occurred in the interminable and
bloody strife between Arabs and Jews, we have been totally
unable to change the situation for the better and we have
not made the slightest progress towards the coveted goal of
a stable peace.

83. We are concerned at the fact that in the discussions in
the Security Council the representatives of the States which
are parties to the conflict seek to persuade us that the right
policy is that of reprisals, terrorist acts, invasion and
resistance, and not a policy of progress along the road to
peace. My delegation would prefer to hear from the lips of
such distinguished and authoritative spokesmen for the
policies of their peoples some statements in favour of the
restoration of harmony among nations which, because of
their proximity to one another,, can prosper only in a
climate of peace, trust and security.

78. Not infrequently, under the pressure of circumstances
and the sorrow caused by tragedy, the Security Council has
considered and judged specific cases that form part of a
series of events which undoubtedly have a disruptive effect
upon international peace. Of course, the Security Council
has also examined the situation as a whole and has stated its
views with the utmost clarity.
,i9. What I have just said underlines the fact that we are
not in the process of establishing a criterion or considering
the adoption of a policy calculated to create an atmosphere
conducive to peace in the Middle East. That criterion and
that policy are established in resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967. As far as we know, no country has sought
to invalidate those principles, but the fact remains that it
fins not yet proved possible to apply them. Naturally, we
can be sure that, until the provisions of that resolution are
fuIIy. implemented, the grave international crises that have
t ;occurred since 1947 in the bitter strife between Israel and
i&‘.neighbours will continue.

84. In the Middle East situation, all events are undeniably
interconnected. Resistance is connected with invasion;
invasion with the state of belligerency; the state of
belligerency with the refugee problem; the refugee problem
with terrorism; terrorism with reprisals-and so we could go
on with this sad, interminable succession of calamities.
85. In the opinion of my delegation, the points which
.were submitted by the Latin American group for consideration at the emergency session of the General Assembly in
June 1967, and which later served as the basis of resolution
242 (1967) adopted by the Security Council on 22 November of that year, are still valid. We feel strongly that there
must be a comprehensive solution to the problem of the
Middle East which will take into account the tragic plight
of the million refugees who wander aimlessly through the
Arab countries. My delegation considers that this question
should be granted the full importance that it warrants on
both political and humanitarian grounds.

86. Events have shown that United Nations action alone
ha; not been sufficient to overcome the critical situation in
the Middle East. Everything remains the same there and
there is nothing to enable us to view the immediate future
with optimism. So far nothing has come of the praiseworthy efforts of Mr. Jarring, who pursues the noble task
of peace-making with apostolic zeal. It is an indisputable
fact that, if the objectives of resolution 242 (1967) are to
be achieved, there must be determined co-operation between Arabs and Jews. It is they who can best co-operate
with the United Nations in order to eliminate international
tension and to create an atmosphere of trust and security
which would bring to an end the longest conflict of modem
times.

86. It is also essential that the Israel forces should he
withdrawn from the Arab territories, for it is true that
might confers no right. But it is no less true that Israel
needs to channel its energies towards goals other than those
of its long-standing battle to defend its existence as a State.
Israel is fully entitled to demand that the pointless refusal
to recognize its sovereignty and integrity should be brought
to an end, In this regard, it is worth pointing out that, in
the opinion of my delegation, the problems of the last
twenty years in the Middle East have arisen, not from the
creation of the State of Israel, but from the continued
refusal to recognize it.

81. We are grieved at the vain sacrifice of hundreds of
innocent lives on both sides, and we realize with horror that
the situation may grow worse and the conflict pursue its
course over a pile of useless Security Council resolutions.
The cease-fire violations, the acts of terrorism and the
whole range of atrocities that are being committed under
cover of the present abnormal state of affairs cannot be
restrained by mere words. All the resources of the
intelligent mind must be applied in order to bring about a
definite step towards peace.

87. The 1967 war must not be repeated, and to that end it
is essential that all the recommendations of resolution
242 (1967) should be carried out. That resolution placed
the withdrawal of the Israel forces from the occupied
territories and the ending of the state of belligerency
between the States of the Middle East in one and the same
category and affirmed the need to guarantee freedom of
navigation through the international waterways of the area,
to achieve a just solution to the refugee problem and to
guarantee the territorial inviolability of the States concerned by establishing demilitarized zones between them.

82. In view of the unquestionable influence which the
four permanent members of the Security Council exercise
over the countries of the Middle East, it might well be that
joint action by the super-Powers would secure the active
co-operation of Israel and its neighbours in removing all the
elements which disturb the peace. The role to be played by
the Arab States and the State of Israel in the stage which
7

and after the June 1967 hostilities. Resistance organizations
and renowned humanitarians have expressed their repug
nance for it. No attempt, as the one made this morning by
two Arab representatives, to suggest that only European
public opinion condemns Arab terror against Israel will
hold ground.

88. I hope I may be forgiven for having gone beyond the
specific case of the bombing of the town of ES Salt by the
Israel air force, but my delegation certainly believes that, if
there is to be any change in the present tense situation in
the Middle East, it is absohrtely essential to consider the
situation as a whole without, of course, disregarding
isolated incidents.

96. Here are a few examples of African, Asian and Latin
American opinion.

89. In keeping with our recognized spiritual independence
and our will to serve the cause of peace, we again appeal
fervently, as we did in June 1967, to our friends from Israel
and the Arab countries to resolve to break the vicious circle
of reprisals which are blocking the path to a peace that will
suffer no postponement.
90. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

97. The East African Standard of Nairobi writes on 21

February 1969 about the policy of the Arab States:
“Just as they lost sympathy before the June war on
account of the virulence of their propaganda, so now they
[the Arab countries] are turning the uncommitted world.
against them by the unbridled activities of extremist
Palestinian organizations.”

I call on the representative of

91. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The delegation of Israel joins
all members of the Security Council in mourning the death
of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, former President of the
United States of America, Supreme Allied Commander-inChief in Western Europe in the Second World War, one of
the planners and leaders in the liberation from the Nazi
scourge, one of the architects of the victory of the
freedom-loving peoples of the anti-fascist coalition twentyfour years ago.

98. The Manila Bulletin of 21 February writes:

‘I . . * Arab terrorist raids are not only senseless bui.
condemnable for the uncivilized brand of aggression they
represent and the hazards to world peace they pose.”
99. And the Bombay Indian Political of 3 February wrote:
“Sin& its inception many years ago, Arab terror has
been characterized by indiscriminate murder. Arab terror
groups set out to fight Jewish civilian targets.”

92. As Supreme Allied Commander-in-Chief, General
Eisenhower was one of the first of the senior Western
military Commanders to see with his own eyes the outrages
of the Nazi concentration camps. This,left an indelible
impression on him. When he was Commander-in-Chief in
Germany in the years immediately following V-E Day and
had direct responsibility for the hundreds and thousands of
Jewish refugees victims of Nazi oppression, General Eisenhower displayed deep understanding and human compassion for a whole people which had been a victim of
genocide, and profound sympathy for the aspiration of the
survivors to achieve a life of freedom and independence in
their own land. His momentous role in history and his
life-long service to his people were crowned by the
contribution which he made to his country in the eight
years in which he wasits President.

100. La Repliblica of Bogota of 21 February stated:
“Our friendship towards all the Arab countries does not
,prevent us from condemning terrorism. On the contrary it
makes us request that the United Nations should do
something for those regions ex.posed to a war which now
stems out of terrorism.”
101. The Turkish newspaper Tasuirwrote on 29 December
1968:
‘69 . . commandos who threw hand grenades in
Jerusalem on innocent civilians at a time when they were
marketing with their wives and children, these commandos who killed children dismissed from school, innocent
and defenceless people coming out of movies and buses,
who raided air-planes, are no commandos at all, but mean
terrorists.”

93. I ask the representative of the United States, Ambassador Yost, to convey our deep sympathies to the Govemmerit and people of the United States, to Mrs. Eisenhower
and the family of the late President.
94. At this stage I should like to exercise my right of reply
and say to the representative of Spain-who has made an
ominous debut in the Council’s deliberations on the Middle
East situation-m the words of Confucius, “A flaw in a
piece of white jade may be ground away but a word spoken
amiss may not be called back.”

102. The Evening News of Manila of 30 December 1968
had the following to say:

“For its refusal to consider the return of the conquered
territories except in the context of an over-all peace
settlement, the Israeli Government is accused of aggres.
sion. The plain, honest, unvarnished truth, however, is
that those territories fell into the hands of Israel in the
course of a war triggered by Arab aggression.

95. There is world-wide recognition that Arab terror
warfare is murder for the sake of murder, pursued in
violation of international law, the United Naticns Charter
and the cease-fire. World opinion’in Europe, in Africa, in
Asia, in Latin America has condemned it. United Nations
jurisprudence has ruled it out as unacceptable. The Secretary-General of the United Nations has branded it before

“The Arab States have never stopped warring on Israel,
They have never ceased laying seige to the Jewish State.
By their own definition, sedulously embroidered upon by
communist propaganda and dialectics, the Arab States are
8

Simon pure. They are not guilty of acts of war. They do
not commit aggression. They are innocent of wrongdoing,

108. On 17 March, King Hussein was reported by the
authoritative AZ-Ahram to have stated: “The terror organizations should be reinforced by regular forces.”

“By the same infernal definition, the Israelis are guilty
of acts of war and commit aggression when they defend
themselves against barbaric and savage attempts at their
annihilation. According to Nasser, his cohorts, and his
communist masters, the Israelis commit an outrage when
they outwit and outfight their mortal enemies.”

109. The Beirut daily En-Nalzar wrote on 2 March 1969:
“King Hussein has suggested that soldiers and commanders
of the Jordanian army would join the fec?ryeen organizations.”
110. Also on 2 March, the King declared: ‘Co-operation
and co-ordination between the fedayeen activity-this is our
main desire,”

103. The Ghana Times of Accra wrote on 24 February
1969:
‘L. . . Of all the organizations that have ever laid claim to
that name anywhere, these groups are the only ones
whose declared purpose is to destroy a sovereign State, a
Member of the United Nations.

111. Governments which openly pride themselves on their
co-operation and co-ordination with terror organizations
cannot be absolved of their responsibility for the nefarious
activities of these organizations, The test of responsibility
for terror attacks is not whether they are carried out by
regular or irregular forces, but whether the Governments
controlling the territory from which they emanate condone
and assist such attacks or take measures to stop them.

“On the human level their aim is murder for its own
sake . . . the terror units were set up as military instruments by different Arab Governments, in most casesto
serve the national interests of one or the other Arab
State. They represent the continued warfare of Arab
States which consider their regular armies incapable of
resuming the fight at this stage . . .

112. Those who try to describe the Israeli action of 26
March as directed against civilians, ignore completely the
factual situation known to all visitors to Jordan.

“Arab terrorism is a danger to an atmosphere conducive
to peace in the region and thus to peace itself.”

113. Eric Mosden, wrltting in the East African Stardard of
19 March 1969 says:

104. In the Sunday Sketch of Nigeria we read on 12
January 1969, in an article written by Mr. Aremu Shodeko,
the following:

“A few weeks ago I travelled the road from Amman to
Jerash, Deraa and Damascus. The El Fatah training camps
were pointed out to us by our driver from the road, some
way out in the desert and not far from the refugee camps
which are their inevitable recruiting ground.”

“The Israeli has a right to live as the Arab. Does the
Koran-of which faith I am an adherent-preach extermination? . . .

114. Alfred Friendly reports from Amman in the Washirzgton Post of 18 February 1969, under the heading “Hussein
yesterday receives commando chief-Royal approval of
guerrilla raids indicated”.

“Why the fight? Is the Arab trying to falsify history?
Is he saying the Israeli is not entitled to the barren patch
that he has now turned into an oasis .of plenty? Is he
saying that the Israeli never owned that part now made
his own? ”

“The announcement and the Press display”-he
writes-“could hardly be read by the Jordanian public as
other than a blessing or legitimization by Hussein of the
commando movement in general and of El Fatah . . . in
particular . . ,“.

105. There is no whitewashing of the Arab terror against
Israel. There can be no attenuation of the responsibility of
Governments from whose territory it is waged. In despair,
and to shirk responsibility for it, Arab spokesmen try
sometimes to draw a distinction between the responsibility
of Arab Governments for terror operations and Israel’s
responsibility for actions undertaken by its regular forces.
Such a distinction is juridically untenable. It has been
rejected by all authorities on international law. It is
contrary to all known definitions of aggression. It is also
untenable in fact. The two decades of Arab war against
Israel have clearly demonstrated that terror warfare is an
instrument in the hands of Arab Governments, used by
them or set aside at will.

115. In the U.S. News and World Report of 24 February
1969 we find an eye-witness repprt by John Low, from
Amman, who writes:
“ . . . To get an idea of how the commando movement is
going about building itself up, I visited two Fatah training
camps. The first camp, hidden in the hills south of
Amman, trained recruits for a civilian reserve.The second
camp I visited was where El Fatah lion cubs’, learned
guerrilla warfare.”
116. The Chicago Sun Times of 20 February 1969 states:
“ . . . The Arab terrorist groups are not merely private
organizations. . , . In Jordan, for example, the terrorists
are officially recognized as a para-military group and are
quasi-official members of the Jordan army. . . . By any
measure the Arab terrorists are military arms of their
respective Governments.”

106. The following will throw additional light on the
direct involvement and responsibility of the Jordanian
Government for terror warfare.
107. On 14 March 1969 the present Prime Minister of
Jordan said: “Political means are not enough to defeat
Israel. There is need to depend on the military effort.”
9

innocent civilians who in no way threatened the security of
the State of Israel.

117. The Teheran Journal of 17 March 1969, published an

interview by Frank Maes in Amman with two Fatah
political officers, referred to as “Ahmed” and “Khaldoun”.
In answer to the question: “On what terms are YOU with
the Jordan Government? ” Ahed replied “There exists a
very good understanding between them and us. This
understanding is based on the agreement we made with
King Hussein after the shooting of last November. I can
assure you that very strong co-operation has developed
between our men and the Jordanian army. . . . Jordan just
happens to be a base for us. Money is far from being a
problem. . . . We receive funds from all Arab Governments,
they all support us.”

124. The second item, which WC are satisfied has, been
submitted by Israel as a matter of formality, is the general
complaint by Israel against the activities of Pales,tinian
guerrillas who, according to Israel, are carrying out these
activities with the co-operation and assistance alf the
neighbouring Governments.
125. While we do not minimize the unfortunate misery
and loss of life and property caused by the actions of the
guerrillas, I am not too sure whether Israel would have at
this point* in time requested a meeting of the Security
Council. There does not seem to me to have been any
particular incident this time to have spurred Israel to call
for a meeting. For that reason, and that ~C~SOII alone,, I will
not enter into arguments for or against the role Iof the
guerrillas in the aggravation of the Middle East situal;ion in
this debate. Suffice it for me to say that we deplore the use
of violence of any kind in the settlement of dispu,tes in
international relations. We very much regret the loss of life
and property in Israel. Unfortunately, Israel’s own methods
of resolving this problem do not seem to us to be conducive
to peace.

118. The Milwaukee Journal of 27 February 1969 reports
from Amman, writing from “somewhere in Jordan”:
“The trip to the training camp started from Amman.
The truck raced through several small villages n&h-West
of Amman before turning off onto a dusty rock-strewn
road. This took us deep into hilly country across two
rushing streams. After abput an hour we arrived at the
camp.
“There are 250 recruits in this camp, one of several in
Jordan. . . .”

126. By acquiring Jordanian territory as if it were terra
nnllius, Israel has weakened its case for self-defence; for in

119. In the Canberra Times of 8 March 1969, we find the
following:

trying to defend its present borders, it is in fact interfering
in alien-that, is Jordanian-territory.

“From the moment one lands in Amman one is in the
thick of the commando mystique. The fedayeen.‘are
everywhere, all dressed in seemingly identical camouflaged fatigues, almost all armed with rifles or sub-’
machine-guns or revolvers. Their training camps and bases
are spread over the country.”
120. Only one thing is omitted in the accounts of the
terror bases and the roads which lead to them-the names
of the camps. And these are not difficult to fill in for those
who kr~ow Jordan. One of the names which appears
repeatedly is Ein Hazar-the base disabled by Israel on 26
March.

127. With regard to specific requests by Jordan, we wish
to associate ourselves with those who believe that the
territory of a State is inviolable and may not be the object,
even‘ temporarily, of military occupation or of other
measures of force taken by another State, on my ground
whatsoever; and that such territorial acquisitions obtained
by force shall not be recognized.
128. There can be no world order if any country thinks it
can, and does, with impunity attack indiscriminately the
territory of another at will. That being the case, we cannot
but condemn this act of premeditated aggression. We would
strongly urge Israel to refrain from acts that would not only
loose it some friends but that would also throw into
disarray the efforts of the big Four. While those efforts are
about to enter a critical stage, it is imperative that nothing
liable to aggravate the situation should bc allowed lo mar
even that small ray of sunshine.

121. One of the main difficulties in the search for peaceful
settlement of the Israel-Arab conflict is that’s0 many
distortions, illusions, myths encumber the situation. Let us
not strengthenthem. Let us see the facts as they are. Let us
not ignore truth; it is all too clear.
122. @. MUUKA (Zambia): After all the many speeches
we have heard from those who have spoken before me, in
particular after the many interventions of the representatives of Israel and Jordan, I intend to be brief and to
confine my observations *,to what I consider the salient
aspect cafthe problem before us.

129. The PRESIDENT: I wish now to address the Council
as the representative of HUNGARY.
130. The Security Council is seized again of a complaint
by Jordan against the latest manifestation af I!srael’s
aWessive actions which took place on the twenty-sixth of
this month in the neighbourhood of the city of Es Sa:lt. The
attack of civilian objectives by Israeli jet fighters, which
took the lives of eighteen civilians and injured a number of
them, contravenes all rules of international law. By ordering
its warplanes to strike objectives in Jordan, the Government
of Israel has once more seriously violated the sovereig,nty of
Jordan, a Member of the United Nations. In so doing,
following the military aggression against its Arab neigh-

123. Our agenda is short, but its brevity is unfortunately
outweighed by the gravity of the issues at stake. The first
substantive item is a specific one; that is the one &ding
with an act of aggression, premeditated and deliberately
executed by the regular forces of the Government of Israel
against the people and territory of Jordan. Its victims, it has
been made abundantly clear, have been unarmed and
10

“135. As I have said, the attacks regularly launched by
Israeli armed forces against its Arab neighbours constitute a
flagrant violation of the cease-fire and the Charter of the
United Nations. But they are especially dangerous in
character if viewed against the background of the present
situation in the Middle East. All members of this Council
are aware that the dangers inherent in that situation rightly
engage the attention of our Organization and, more
particularly, those members which by virtue of the Charter
hold special responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security. This concern has been translated into action
paving the way for meaningful discussions among them,
with a view to contributing to the implementation
of
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council of 22
November 1967.

bours in June 1967, Israel has again also broken the
cease-fire resolutions of the Security Council. It has further
ignored the obligation of a Member State of the United
Nations to come to the Security Council if it feels
aggrieved. It is for this very reason that the Council has
been compelled, repeatedly, to condemn Israel for violating
the basic provisions of the Charter in attempting to place
itself above the law of nations.
13 1. The representative of Israel has argued that these
actions are justified because they are defensive in character
and aimed at the maintenance of Israel’s security. Those
assertions are not corroborated by its actions. Furthermore,
no provision of the Charter entitles a Member State to take
the law into its own hands. Israel’s occupation of large Arab
territories resulting from, its military attack on its neighbours cannot be invoked to demand the submission of the
inhabitants of those territories to Israeli rule. The occupation of those territories is the fruit of an armed aggression,
and it is precisely for this reason that the Security Council
provided for the withdrawal of the occupation forces from
those territories. The cease-fire is not there to help
consolidate territorial conquests. It was put into effect to
stop Israeli aggression and to curtail further territorial
incursions of Israel into the neighbouring Arab countries. It
is there to prepare the ground for the withdrawal of Israeli
forces.
132, From all this it clearly follows that the cease-fire
should in no way serve Israel’s policy of annexations.
History shows~that, so long as there is occupation, there
will be resistance.

136. It may have surprised some observers of the Middle
East situation that the country which has always painted
the apocalyptic picture of impending destruction of the
State of Israel has lately done everything to portray as
excessive the concern felt at the prospect of the renewal of
the hostilities. The Government of Israel, through its
authorized representatives, has been clearly attempting to
stifle the initiative of the permanent members of our
Council. Israeli Government leaders have repeatedly stated
that the real danger comes from such a concerted action to
establish peace in the area by implementing the resolution
of the Security Council.
137. The latest attack against Jordan will certainly not be
conducive to supporting Israel’s contention that direct
contacts between the States of the Middle East should
accomplish what the present and forthcoming talks are
intended to do. The continuing and even larger Israeli
aggressive acts must convince everyone that more determined efforts are needed to reverse the present trend of
Israeli militancy.

133. For the sake of deeper arguments, one cannot fail to
observe that the attacks of Israeli armed forces against
Jordan and other Arab countries violate even the law of
war, not just the law of peace. Even in wartime, no
belligerent is entitled to attack civilian targets. It is even
more repugnant to see a country not at war with its
neighbour utilize weapons of mass destruction, such as y 138. The Hungarian delegation, for its part. will lend its
support to all c&clusions khich- uphold ihe sovereignty of
rockets, and chemici weapons, like napalm. AI1 this is
nations, the inviolability of the provisions of the Charter,
contrary to the laws of war. No reference to the security or
and the validity of previous Council decisions applying
to the defense of the people of Israel can justify such
those principles to the Middle East. Therefore, we cannot
practices. What higher law can be invoked in defending
but resolutely condemn the latest Israeli attack on the
those horrible weapons? Are we to understand that in the
territory of Jordan in general, and on the civilian objectives
name of the alleged insecurity of Israel all means are sacred,
in particular. We shall support every initiative which will
whereas the occupied peoples are forbidden even to further
promote a political settlement in the Middle East by a full
their right to live in their homeland?
implementation of resolution 242 (1967) of the Security
Council as much as we condemn all illegal violations of it.
134. Since such a doubt standard has been invoked again
during the present discussion, I feel compelled to state: it is
139. Now, as PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of
not Israel’s security that is being threatened; it is the
Saudi Arabia.
security of Jordan, of Syria, and of the United Arab
Republic which is seriously endangered. So long as their
140. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I have a few words
territories are occupied by Israel, it is their security-and
to say before I resume my participation in this debate.
their security alone-which is in question. The security of
Israel is affected by the policy of its Government, which,
141. We are all guests in this world. Today we are here,
for certain short-term illusory advantages, is prepared to
tomorrow we are gone. Each creature is like a grain of sand
compromise all chances of peace with its neighbours. It
on the shore of eternity, like the ripple on the surface of
would be high time for the Government of Israel to realize
the sea, the life of man is a short interval in interminable
that the present militaristic stance in which it keeps the
country, and the efforts to conquer territories, to produce
time without beginning and without end. From the invisible
more and more refugees from the population of those
Creator or forces of nature we emanate and to the invisible
territories could in the long run seriously harm the interests
Creator or nature we return, We humbly bow our heads
of the people of Israel.
before death, the death of the known and the death of the
11

146. Having said this, I referred to the %iOniStS wllcl were
frenzied by a cause until it seized them and became a
psychosis
in the 1920s and more so in the latter part of the
1930s. SO frenzied were they with their cause that they
killed’ Count Bernadotte; they killed Lord Moyne; they
hanged,
British Tommies from trees, they killed civilians
-and I must say in fairness to them they h.XtlSdV~S
were in
turn killed in Palestine. There was that psychosis, the
psychosis
of patriotism on the side of the Arabs and there
was the psychosis of a Zionist cause. So it ~0t11d be foolish
to accuse and’intimidate. War is war. This Organisation WAS
formed in order to prevent war, to do away with war. Has it
done so? Not SO far.

unknown, for we are all one and equal in death and we
attain ultimate peace when we are enfolded in the earth.
142. General Eisenhower has been released from his
human suffering. Known as he is, he sought rest, like the
unknown, and he has gained eternal peace. So may I be
permitted to join those who preceded me in expressing the
deep condolences of the Saudi Arabian Mission to the
United Nations for the passing away of that illustrious
General who distinguished himself as a man who fought
against injustice in times of war and peace. He was
particularly noted during the tenure of the Presidency not
only as a man of high principles, aswasmentioned by many
here, but also as a staunch upholder of human rights. Above
all, General Eisenhower should be remembered for his
warm personality which was admirable for its simplicity
and genuine modesty, notwithstanding his glorious
achievements. He was never self-enamoured. Indeed, while
possessing inherent dignity there wasno doubt that General
Eisenhower identified himself with the deep yearnings and
aspirations of the common man. As such he will be sorely
missed. But let us hope that his memory will influence the
conduct of the living in all stations of life, May God rest his
soul in peace. I beg my friend Ambassador Yost to convey
the deep sympathy of my Mission to Mrs. Eisenhower, to
the members of her family and to the American people.

147. So it would be foolish, Mr. Tekoah, to begin to
catalogue’ the civilians whose deaths WC deplore, whether
they be Jews or gentiles. But have you forgotten the Stern
Gangs? Have you forgotten Deir Yassin, hiWe you forgotten the Irgun Zvai Leumi, have you forgotten the
Haganah, the atrocities committed which you probably, 1
am ‘sure as a human being in your innermost heart,
deplore? Whether they killed Arabs or Jews, they killed
human beings because of their frenzy in that C;LUSC called
Zionism, which selected the wrong location, Palestine,
which had an indigenous population,
a p~pln
with a
personality.
148. There is no end to the process of listing the miseries
and tribulations of war. You will get nowhere with that. I
wish there was no war. Everyone of us committed to the
United Nations is trying to find ways and llleWS to prcVer1 t
war. But unfortunately, the United Nations is fullowing in
the path of the League of Nations. The Covenant of the
League of Nations was supposed to transcend all kinds of
arrangements based on the balance of power and power
politics. And what do we find now? We find Powers, large
and small, holding caucuses in a1 rtternpt to determine the
fate of a people without asking those pooplc what they
want, setting aside the principle of self-dctenninatbn, as I
have said, enunciated by President Wilson and elaborated
here in the United Nations and enshrined in pnragrtlplh 2 of
Article 1 of the IJnited Nations Charter.

143. I will now have to correct certain misconceptions
which may be entertained here in this Council on account
of the diatribes that we have heard time and again from
Mr. Tekoah, and I must say to you all, including of course,
Mr. Tekoah, that war is war. If there was mercy in any
conflict which is called war, it would not be known as war.
It is something deplorable that man should settle his
differences by violence. It seems that we have not attained
sufficient maturity as homo sapiens-and here homo sapiens
is a misnomer-to
try to separate the innocent from the
guilty in the course of our conflicts. May I remind those of
you who were old enough in the Second World War that
civilians died by the millions in the name of freedom and
liberation, and I refer to the victims of the victors and the
defeated. Have we forgotten how Coventry wasbombed by
the Germans? And were those civilians in Coventry guilty?
How can we forget Dresden which wasnot a military target
but which was almost erased, Dresden one of the most
beautiful cities of medieval Germany. Were those who were
killed guilty?

149. Always go back to the genesis to find why there is
war in Palestine. It is because the Zionist movement
uprooted a people, the indigenous people and you gentlcmen here, through instructions from your Governments, are
trying to patch a piece of cloth that is already worn out.
Let us be frank with ourselves. You arc talking about public
opinion, world public opinion, Wtmrc is world
public
opinion? Where is the conscience of the world when the
politicians in almost every State in the world can drive the
people like sheep through the mass media of information
by planting articles or by swaying editors, with very few
exceptions? And I am not talking only of the Western press
or Of any press for that matter. 1 am talking of the pressin
general including that of the Arab world, because like every
other press it is subjected to the stresses that are quite
common in trying to present a cause, rightly or wrongly. It
is like advertising. Propagating causes is like advertising. The
media of information are media of advertising opinions and
causes like these media advertise a bar of soap. They
influence the subliminal part of the mind affecting the
subconscious, collectively, so that people can be made to

144. HOW CS.~ we forget the 10 or ‘15 million Russian
civilians who were killed in the Second World War? And by
whom were they killed? Of course by the Germans, but by
whom? Some German civilians were killed by the allies, We
deplore the 10~s of human life and we do not earmark the
victims as being either citizens of a righteous nation or
those of an evil nation.
145. What do YOU think of what is going on in the Par
East? In modem warfare planes soar to such heights,
hoping that the targets will be military targets and they use
so-called precision instruments. Bombs fall on areas,killing
CiVibS,
SOmetimeS
killing the soldiers of those who are
Wing to destroy the enemy themselves. Why did I mention
all this? Because war is war. It is deplorable. Nobody can
rationalize anything good coming out of war.
12

1

/
/

~
1

behave in such a way as to be at the command and behest
of those who pay for influencing them.

seize even the Province of Cilicia, a part of Turkey.”
Amongst the wisest and most mature were the French; they
later withdrew from Cilicia. Syria and Lebanon were put
under a French mandate; Palestine was put under a British
mandate; so was Iraq. I remember, in the twenties, how we
were all inflamed, and that was how Pan-Arabism began to
surge in our hearts. How we were misled after the war-our
fathers, if not we who were children-misled into believing
that we would be free from any foreign yoke. We found
ourselves under a new form of colonialism in disguise:
mandatory Powers whose rule was not terminated until
about ten or fifteen years ago. We had our presidents and
our republics, we had our kings, but we had overriding
mandatory Powers, even in Iraq. The Palestinian people had
a sovereignty, they were an entity, they had a personality;
and in 1919 they constituted 94 per cent of the population.

150. War is war. It is true that the Arab States are at war
with Israel, not because Israel is Jewish but because it is an
intrusion from Europe, just like the Crusaders were an
intrusion from Europe, just like our brothers the Ottomans
were for 400 years an intrusion into the Semitic world,
which includes the Arab world. Zionism is a foreign
element in the body politic and the body social of the Arab
people.
IS 1, But leave aside the Arab people. There happens to be
a people called the indigenous people of Palestine. They
number 1.5 million or 2 million-I
do not have a census of
that people. Does the representative of Israel and his
leaders, if they examine their innermost conscience, expect
the Arab Governments to crush those people because they
state that they have been robbed of their homeland? As I
have mentioned time and again, and shall continue to
mention, the Arab people from Morocco to the confines of
Iran down to the heart of the Sudan, are inflamed because
of that-rightly
or wrongly is beside the point-and any
Arab Government that will stand in the face of the people
unless all the Arab Governments become police States and
crush the people, will be accountable to the Arab people,
who will shoot them like birds more than they would the
Israelis. Who among the Arab Governments would dare
-leaving aside whether they would be willing-not
to
represent the sentiment of the people, and tell the
Palestinian people to forget their land?

154. By what yardstick of justice, whether the Covenant
of the League of Nations or the Charter of the United
Nations, can it be said that this is a fait accompli because
there was a vote taken on the partition of Palestine and, as I
said, by pressure they got a majority of the votes? I
remember Mr. Vishinsky-may God rest his soul in peace, in
spite of the fact that he had no belief in a Supreme Bt ing.
“There is no compulsion in religion”, as the Koran sdys.
Faith is elective. It was Mr. Vishinsky who drew our
attention to what he called the “mechanical majority” in
those days. The Zionists were very influential in the
Western world and they brought about this sad situation
-sad for themselves as well as for us.
15.5. But leave aside the Arab Governments for the time
being. Three years ago, I began to say, those Palestinians
woke up. They gave up; they said: “These Arab Governments-we cannot depend on them any more. What is
wrong with them? We cannot depend on them.” And what
did these Palestinians do? They began to organize.

132. Until three years ago those Palestinian people had
hopes that the countries continguous to Israel would be
able to find a solution. The countries contiguous to Israel
failed. Why? Because they are not as technologically
developed as the people from Israel who have come from
Europe and who have been through the ghettos of Europe
and who had to fight the Nazis and fight many battles to
free themselves or their remnants. The people of the Arab
world were emerging from under foreign rule after they had
been’ under the yoke of European colonialism following
World War I. And they were sold down the river by the
Sykes-Picot-Sazonov Agreement, Sazonov was not mentioned after the Revolution-as the Russians got nothing
out of that secret Agreement. Now the Russians are coming
into the area because they are a big Power. So what?

156. The Palestinians have organized and they want to
retrieve their homeland. What is wrong with that? The
Zionists no longer tell us that God gave them Palestine.
Now they say it is a fait accompli, that the United Nations
voted for the partition of Palestine and declared Israel an
independent State. That is their premise. I say their premise
is invalid, in the light of self-deterinination, in the light of
the termination of colonial rule everywhere. And I come
here as someone who, as I said, has been seized of this
question since 1920. We have tried to reason with them,
talking through the Council, and they begin reciting the
names of the civilians who had been killed in the market.
Some of our colleagues here are beginning to shed tears
over the market and airport incidents. We all shed tears for
people who die-1 mean those who were killed in the
market or in some airport, or anywhere else. We all shed
tears for people who die regardless of their religion or their
ideology.

153. In 1919, I was a boy of fourteen; but in the 1920s I
was a young man. I am a contemporary of those days.
During the Revolution, after the battle of Tannenberg, the
Russians turned over a copy of the s&ret Sykes-PicotSazonov Agreement-to whom? To the Germans. And the
Germans sent it to their allies, to Istanbul. And Jamal
Pasha, the Commander of the Fourth Army, sent a copy of
it through emissaries-because the Arabs were fighting the
Turks in those days-to Sherif Hussein, in Mecca-Sherif
Hussein, the great-grandfather of the present King Hussein
of Jordan. And what happened? Jamal Pasha sent a rider-I
knew Jamal ‘Pasha as a boy; I remember him very well-he
sent a rider with a copy that was turned over by the
Russians to the Germans, saying: “Look, we are all
Moslems here. Why are you fighting us? Those Europeans
want to partition your lands amongst themselves, and to

157. But I have received from one of my colleagues here a
letter (S/9110/, which was circulated on 25 March 1969
and though I do not wish to engage in the same sort of
cataloguing of names, for the benefit of Mr. Tekoah and for
the benefit of those who are shedding tears for the said
victims-whether they are Jews or gentiles-I do want to
read a few of the names listed here in the document before
13

me. I will be doing exactly what Mr. Tekoah has bee*
doing, still I will read a few names-the names of children:
Fouad Ahmad Saleh, four years old; Hayysam Mustafa
Sarda, five years old; Leitaf Mustafa Sardar, eight Years;
Fatima Ahmad Jossoumah, eleven years; Rajae Ahmad
Saleh, one and a half; Bassam Mustafa Sardar, fourteen.
Fourteen years old-he might have become a fighter, let me
tell you. I told you yesterday (1467th meeting] how the
mothers in the Arab world, some Palestinian mothers, feel
because their children are imbued with that spirit for
liberating their country leaving behind them such notes as
“We are going to fight those who usurped our homeland”.
Do you think any mother here would want her child to be
killed? Many mothers here do not want their children to be
drafted even when they are twenty-five. Nobody wants war.
158. Shall we follow the alternative methods of reciting:
Let us condemn the Israelis as well as the Arab States and
the commandos; let us be even-handed? “Even-handed”
-that is both Mr. Goldberg’s and Mr, Rostow’s term,
“even-handed”. Even Mr. Scranton used it, And what does
even-handedness mean? It means that you have a balance
there, the two pans of a balance, and you put the rights of
the Palestinians into one and the rights of the Israelis into
the other, and you are the arbiter, you are the one to read
the balance, whether singly like my good friend Mr. Yost,
or in association with those who are called the “Big
Powers”. But who are you, all of you not belonging to the
area, to be the arbiters of our destiny? Good Lord-it took
me forty-five years to try and jolt you into a consciousness
of this tragedy. No, this is not the way to resolve the
problem.
1.59. Yesterday Mr. Tekoah referred to Mein Kamp.f Look
how he distorts things by saying Mein Kampf has been
translated into Arabic. I did not read it in Arabic, I read
only parts of it and I got tired because it wasfoolish In
fact, I read Mein Kampf in English. And the taste of Power
must have gone into the heads of the Zionists that I would
not be surprised if they wielded their influence to have
Mein Kampf removed from the Library of Congress.
Shame-because that book was translated into Arabic, the
Arabs are Nazis. Why should they be? I am not a Nazi, The
Mufti is not a Nazi. I have known him for years, and he is
no Nazi even though he sought refuge in Germany, Would
YOUhave wanted him to seek refuge with Mr. Truman, who
gave you Palestine? If he had stayed ‘behind in the Middle
East, he would have been rounded up right away because,
then, the mandatory Powers had the upper hand. They had
spies who were Arabs too, just as there are spies that are
Jews-or Zionists; I do not wish to say “Jews” because I
have many friends who are Jews but who are not Zionists.
ZhiSm
is a political movement predicated on, and
motivated by, a noble religion which is Judaism. You are
secular, all of you, the people in charge of the Israeli
Government today. As you all will remember, in the Middle
Ages and also in Tsarist Russia, and also in the France of
Richelieu, as my good friend the Ambassador of Frace will
recall, all the secular persons in power in the world
surrounded themselves by the clergy, so as to give themselves a halo of wisdom and sanctity. But now when
religion has lost its grip on people, the secular persons in
power surround themselves with pseudo”professors to
rationalize their policies. Mr. Tekoah recites information

gathered from Jordan. By whom? By spies. That is the
trouble. In one of the organs of the United Nations they are
trying to defme aggression, and they have been at it for
years, How can you define aggresssion when the big Powers
and the small Powers who ape them have a network of
spies? What are the spies for? For self-defence, of course,
they say, to see where the weakness is and to strike.
160. There is a situation in Palestine whereby the Palestinian people have been aroused. Whether we like it or not
is beside the point. These Palestinians shall fight untii
doomsday, or until some Arab authorities kill them or are
killed by them. But these authorities cannot do that
because the Arab people will not let them kill the
Palestinians. Anyway, these Palestinians have a blacklist
already and they will shoot like birds any Arab who will
oppose them. I am not giving away any secret; this is
symptomatic of national movements that grip a people and
drive them into a psychosis, making them behave
abnormally-just as the Zionists are acting abnormally. But
as I said, these Zionists too have a cause. Only the location
is wrong and may be likened to an oasis surrounded by a
nest of wasps;I should say, several nests. You can kill wasps
and then you do not know where others come from, And
this is how it is going to be; I forewarn you. I may not be
alive; it will take years and years, as it took the Crusades,
only less, In the time of the Crusades there were no atomic
Powers, no great Powers with interest in the area. But
suppose there is a miscalculation and the great Powers get
at each other’s throats and there is an explosion; will the
whole world come to an end because Israel, the Zionists,
have power all over the world and they want to use it
through their media of information, through their firuncial
operations, through the influence they wield in the Western
world-and if you do not watch out they may also be
wielding it even in the Soviet Union. These Zionists have
the mentality of Samson, even if it is legendary, tot pull
down the pillars with their hands and say: “At last this is
the end”, The pillars of the future are not in the hands of
the Zionists. These pillars are indeed the young men who
are returning to the Arab countries, some of whom came to
my office and said: “You, Baroody, should join the
revolution,” I asked, “What revolution’? “, They said:
“Action to upset the old rdgimes in the Arab countries.
These regimes are no longer good”. Gentlemen, the future
is not mine nor yours, it does not even belong to the
intermediate generation. The new generation includes those
between the ages of eighteen and thirty-and I do not !kriow
whether they are working for good or for evil, Onl:y the
future will tell.
161. Not only in our region, but in the whole world, we
witness the revolution of youth. They have lost confidel!ce
in our politicians, in our men of religion, because our men
of religion and our politicians have not kept abreast of
social progress, economic development and the technology
to cope with all those changes that brought about the
vicissitudes of more than two decades ago. And we come
here and talk placidly. I want to try to infuse some life into
the Security Council, into the United Nations, before I
sever my service with this Organization to which I have
dedicated twenty-three years of my life.
162. Will YOU, gentlemen, on instructions from your
Governments, come here and work out plans without

14

consulting the people who are directly concerned, the
people of Palestine ? Once in a while you talk with our
respective Governments through yovr ambassadors. But
whatever you do the core of the question lies in the
self-determination of the Palestinian people, whether we
like it or not. I say all this whilst I deplore violence whether
it be against Jews or gentiles. Hence I do not want to
continue reading the names of the innocent Arabs who
were murdered. For as I have already said: “War is war.”

rather than Buddhism. Buddhism has flourished more in
China, in Japan, in Burma and South-East Asia. The
Chinese would never think of such a thing. They would
venerate and they would be-happy that India produced a
reformer, a great sage, a teacher like Buddha. But those
Europeans from Eastern Europe that are descended from
the Chazars use their noble religion which sprang from our
area ‘as a motivation for their political end-and they claim
to be more Jewish than our Jews or more Semitic than our
Semites. They use the term “anti-Semitic”-but
they are
Chazars of Turko-Finish or&@ from the northern tier of
Central Asia.

163. Now, of course, the Israelis have the upper hand;
they have the technology; they have the know-how to use
modern weapons. They are provided by one of the big
Powers with the most sophisticateg weapons and they
‘know how to use them. The Arabs, as I said, are emerging.
They may not know how to use advanced weapons now, so
they have to do what the French did against the Nazis,
what the Russians did by the scorched earth policy against
the Nazis, what any person does who cannot fight in battle.
War is the art of deception. You do not go and tell your foe
or your enemy-as in the days of chivalry-that you are
going to fight a battle with him. War is the art of deception.
Do you mean to say that those Palestinians should send
word, as was done in the days of chivalry-when it was the
knights at arms who fought in contests while the kings
watched and then the king of the victor received the fealty
or loyalty of the defeated knight on the other side? Those
days are gone. War, unfortunately, is the art of deception,
and the weaker party, never had the chance to elect a
government during the mandate while our friends the
British finally got so tired that they threw the whole thing
in the lap of the United Nations. And the United Nations
unjustly partitioned Palestine, waiving the Charter aside. In
contravention of the principle of self-determination, which
was elaborated into a right., the Palestinian people were not
consulted. They were driven out of their country. And now
you all talk here, including the representatives of the four
big Powers, about what should b.e done, through
Mr. Jarring. But with whom? With the Arab countries
contiguous with Israel that have a dispute with Israel. But
what about the Palestinian people who are the core of the
problem? They are dispersed in the whole Arab world,
including Saudi Arabia. Do you think they will heed even
His Majesty King Faisal who supports their human rights
anyway having said to me time and again: “You are a
member of the United Nations; you believe in human
rights”. Since the days of the Crusades, the Christians gave
up the idea that Jerusalem should belong to any sect, buD
that it should belong to the indigenous people who are
there, whether Moslems, Christians, or Jews. And if we go
by democratic principles, there are only seventeen million
Jews in the world and Jerusalem is as sacred to the
Christians and to the Moslems, so why, on the basis of
religion, should Jerusalem be occupied by the Jews?
Seventeen million Jews and 600 million Moslems to a
thousand million or more Christians.

165. If there is a conscience in the world-and conscience
is a social entity which is difficult to define sometimes; but
leave aside the word “conscience’‘-if there are standards
for justice, I do not see how we can all beat around the
bush. We cannot do that. And who is maligned? The Soviet
Union. We have no relations with the Soviet Union-do not
think I am just trying to court the Soviet Union. But the
Soviet Union is a Member of the United Nations. If the
Soviets say that it is unjust to treat the Palestinians thus, it
is said “Oh, they are looking after their own interests”. But
what about the other Powers-are they not looking after
their own interests-their oil interests, their strategic
interests? So why should not the Soviet Union look after
its interests? But I say to all the big Powers, “Leave us
alone! ” But they will not leave us alone. They meet here
to see how they can solve the problem of the Palestinian
people without consulting the Palestinian representatives of
the Palestinian people.
166. If we go on like this, I tell you sadly that this
Organization will fall if warscontinue to be perpetrated still
outside the pale of the United Nations. I say this with a
heavy heart. I am sure a man like U Thant, who is dedicated
not only actively but even formally by filling his post,
would also be one of the saddest men like everyone who is
dedicated to the United Nations. If we are going to
rationalize our violence, our atrocities, our terrorism, war,
and cast by the wayside the lofty principles of the Charter,
especially those that concern self-determination, I tell you
we shall be only a window dressing before the world, we
shall be the laughing stock of the world. Justice is justice, in
action and not in words, not by lip service.
167. With the permission of the President, I would say, let
there be a new orientation to this problem, not only
through the deliberations of the four big Powers but, I
hope, by a change of heart on the part of the leaders of
Israel. They would know that in the long run, if the world
does not explode and come to an end, they will be
assimilated like the remnants of *those Crusaders who in
northern Arabia are known as the Sulbiyyah tribe. This
tribe is of English, French and all kinds of European origin.
We Arabized them, or they got Arabized-I do not know.
Thirty or forty years from now, national boundaries will
disappear. We are living in the age of computers; passports
will be punch cards probably; religion will have been
reassessedwith other moral values. I do not say that there
will be a universal religion, but the code of ethics will be
universal in all religions, or in all ethical ideologies, if I may
use the terminology of some of our friends around this
table, who do not believe in religion as such, There will be a

164. Now, take Buddhism. It started in India, but it took
root in China and the Far East. Should the Chinese, because
they are preponderantly Buddhist, say to India: “We should
go and occupy the place where Buddha lived and flourished
and taught”, which is in India. That would be foolish.
Why? Because Bdddha to them is more important than to
the Indians whose religion is still preponderantly Hinduism
15

humanism, If there is not a humanism, mankind will come
to an end. It would not have to come to an end were it not
for #the ingenuity of man for devising those diabolical
weapons of mass destruction.
168. Mr, President, you remember your laudable work in
the Political Committee about bacteriological warfare. I
heard later that certain Powers have all kinds of biological
weapons-I ‘am not a physicist. But they also possess
ultrasonic weapons which would kill all creatures including
people and leave the buildings erect and intact. What kind
of homo sapiens is man? I hope the war in the Far East will
soon come to an end. There seem to be good auguries that
it will. I hope that people will not war against one another
again and that lip service will not.be given to what Isaiah
said seven centuries before Christ; we can see that saying
carved in stone, facing the entrance of the United Nations.

173. In the light of what I have said, may I, with your
permission Mr. President, and with the permission of
members of the Council, reserve my ri&t to address myself
to any draft resolution that may emerge from your
deliberations or private consultations, hoping that members
,of this Council, whose responsibility it is to preserve world
peace, will consult-not because Baroody spoke, but
because I happen to be a man of the area who has been
seized of this problem for forty-nine years. It is in t&e light
of my humble experience that I speak of what is happenin.g
in the Middle East. I say this in an attempt to open your
eyes to the entity of this Palestinian people, hoping that
you will consider very carefully the steps you may take for
the future.
174. Mr, YOST (United States of America): I have at this
time only a very few words to add to what I said yesterday.
175. We have heard repeated statements by the representatives of the parties, each accusing the other of a long series
of premeditated acts of violence, each seeking to justify
acts of violence on its side as necessary measures of
self-defence, reprisal or liberation. We can certainly share
the indignation of both sides at the cruel and repeated loss
of innocent civilian lives which both have suffered.

169. But we have to work for peace, not in theory but in
practice. If the Israelis want life, if they are really
motivated by religious’sentiment, let them live there, not
under the banner of Isrdel, and perhaps not under an Arab
flag, if the Arabs would want to live with them side by
side-1 mean the Arabs of Palestine. It is not for me to say,
it is for them to decide, I hope they will both opt one day
for a binational State.

176. The United States, for its part, however, cannot
accept as justified any of these acts of violence by either
side, particularly when by their character-bombs in supermarkets, or rockets from the air-they
are inevitably
undiscriminating and all too likely to result in the slaughter
of innocent women and children.

170. The age of prophecy is gone, but through my analysis
and haviag lived for so long with this question, I can foresee
what will happen if these things do not come to pass. The
only solution would be a sort of brotherhood between Jews
and Palestinian Arabs. We have witnessed foreign intrusions
before. We have absorbed many peoples. I do not think the
Zionists can absorb us becausethey are the minority. There
will always be contention and dissent if the Zionists
continue to establish themselves by force, always on the
alert about who might attack them from outside and
knowing very well in their innermost heart that the Arab
Governments cannot coerce the Palestinians or compel
them not to fight. It is indeed a tragedy fighting to retrieve
one’s homeland. And what will happen? There will always
be fighting; always dissension; always marauders, and, who
knows, maybe the Arabs may one day feel strong enough to
have another contest; and then the Zionists will try again,
singly or with others, to do the same thing. Would that not
be a human tragedy even without miscalculation and
confrontation taking place between the big Powers? And
would it ndt be a human tragedy that the Holy Land of
Palestine which is associated with the three monotheistic
religions of the world, should become the ground for
interminable strife? Finally, it is the innocent who suffer.

1.77. We therefore believe that the Council, on this
occasion as on previous similar occasions, should conclude
its deliberations by condemning the immediate
act of
yiplence which has been brought before us, as well as
condemning all other acts of violence which continue so
frequently and so recklessly to violate the cease-fire.
178. In so doing, we shall once again impress on all thie
parties this Council’s conviction that all these acts of
violence are prejudicial to the peace of the area and the
security of its peoples. In so doing, we shall also, I believe,
best preserve a spirit of impartiality and conciliation among
us on the Council, which will be most conducive to the
success of our efforts-efforts about to be renewed with
fresh vigour-to bring about at last a peaceful settlement of
this tragic conflict.
179. The PRESIDENT:
list for this afternoon,

171. This is the picture I am drawing for the future so that
the Council may ponder on what it should do before it
comes to any decision with regard to this incident, which is
onlf a passing incident, and other incidents that Israel or
Jordan may bring before the Council.

I have no more speakers on my

180. As members of the Council are fully aware, consultations are going on privately on the manner in which
consideration of this item should be concluded, and on th.e
document that might be produced as a result thereof. Sinc,e
the meeting has been called with urgency I urge all
members who are participating in those consultations to
utilize all available time to reach an acceptable arrangement
for the document that might be presented to the Council.
The President will be available to the members of the
Council at all times in order to contribute his efforts to the
attainment of the best possible results. In view of th:is

172. Finally, I want to be frank with the representative of
Israel across the table and say that in the long run the
Israelis who are living there will say, “Ah, how we wished
we were brothers of the Arabs without putting an emphasis
on a nationality that brought all this trouble and tribulation.”
16

situation, after having had a private exchange of views with
the members of the Council, I have scheduled a meeting for
11 o’clock tomorrow morning, Saturday.

some results which would lead towards a political
peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem.

and

183. Therefore, acts of this kind, no matter what their
reason or what justification is claimed in this Council,
cannot help to bring about favourable conditions for such
commendable efforts; on the contrary, they can only
hinder them.

181. Before adjourning this meeting, I call on the representative of the Soviet Union.
182. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I should like to limit myself to a
brief remark on the following matter. Hitherto the Security
Council, in reviewing such a discussion on events of this
kind, has had the courage to discern a difference and to
draw a distinction between the aggressor and the victim of
aggression. The new element which has arisen in today’s
situation lies in the fact that it is important not only to
keep this distinction in view but also to bear in mind that
the new act of aggression has been committed at a time
when many think that there is a possibility of achieving

184. On the usual understanding I waive consecutive
interpretation.
185. The PRESIDENT: As there has been no objection to
the proposal to hold a meeting tomorrow at 11 a.m., I shall
consider that it concurs with the wishes of all members of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
Nations,
Sales Section,
to: United

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
des Nations
Unies sont en venta
danr
Ies librairies
et les ogoncas
deporitairer
du monde entier.
Informer-vour
aupres
de votre librairle
ou adrerrez~vous
a:
Nations
Unies, Section des venter, New York ou Genivc.
KAK

llOJfYcfHTb

M3AAHHf-I

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPTAHM3AKHH

DE LAS NACIONES

tar publicaciones
de las Nacioner
Unidar
ertan
en todas partes del mundo. Conrulte
a su librero
Ventor, Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAYHA

UNIDAS

en venta en librerlar
y casas distribuidoror
a dirijare
a: Nocioner
Unidar,
Section

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

82030-November

1972-2,050
