United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/62/10
Distr.: General
18 December 2007

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 48

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 26 November 2007
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/62/L.15 and Add.1)]

62/10. World Day of Social Justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held at Copenhagen
from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving
social development for all in a globalizing world”, held at Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Reaffirming that the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the
Programme of Action 1 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session 2 constitute the basic
framework for the promotion of social development for all at the national and
international levels,
Recalling the commitment to promote national and global economic systems
based on the principles of justice, equity, democracy, participation, transparency,
accountability and inclusion,
Reaffirming the commitment made in the 2005 World Summit Outcome to full
and productive employment and decent work for all, including for women and
young people, as a central objective of relevant national and international policies as
well as national development strategies, including poverty reduction strategies, as
part of the efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, 3
1.
Recognizes that social development and social justice are indispensable
for the achievement and maintenance of peace and security within and among
nations and that, in turn, social development and social justice cannot be attained in
the absence of peace and security or in the absence of respect for all human rights
and fundamental freedoms;

_______________
1

Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
3
See resolution 60/1, para. 47.

07-46437

A/RES/62/10

2.
Also recognizes that broad-based and sustained economic growth in the
context of sustainable development is necessary to sustain social development and
social justice;
Further recognizes that globalization and interdependence are opening
3.
new opportunities through trade, investment and capital flows and advances in
technology, including information technology, for the growth of the world economy
and the development and improvement of living standards around the world, while
at the same time there remain serious challenges, including serious financial crises,
insecurity, poverty, exclusion and inequality within and among societies and
considerable obstacles to further integration and full participation in the global
economy for developing countries as well as some countries with economies in
transition;
Recognizes the need to consolidate further the efforts of the international
4.
community in poverty eradication and in promoting full employment and decent
work, gender equality and access to social well-being and justice for all;
Decides to declare that, starting from the sixty-third session of the
5.
General Assembly, 20 February will be celebrated annually as the World Day of
Social Justice;
Invites all Member States to devote this special day to the promotion, at
6.
the national level, of concrete activities in accordance with the objectives and goals
of the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session
of the General Assembly.
57th plenary meeting
26 November 2007

2
