S/PV.7915

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7915th meeting

Wednesday, 5 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/260)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09075 (E)
*1709075*

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/260)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Kim Won-soo,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kim Won-soo.
Mr. Kim Won-soo: I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to brief the
Council on the Syrian chemical file, undertaken in
furtherance of Security Council resolutions 2118
(2013), 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016). But I will do so
with a heavy heart.
Since yesterday morning, I have been in close
contact with the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). I
also met with the chargé d’affaires of the Syrian Arab
Republic in New York.
I will first brief the Security Council on the most
recent reported use of chemical weapons, in Khan
Shaykhun, in Idlib, Syria. At this point, information
is still coming in. Currently, details about the attack
are not fully known, but, according to the most recent
media reports, a chemical attack may have caused
the deaths of at least 70 civilians, with perhaps more
than 200 injured. Both the Secretary-General and the
OPCW Director General issued statements expressing
grave concern about these reports and reiterating their
condemnation of any chemical-weapons use.
I have been in close contact with the DirectorGeneral since the first reports came in yesterday. He
informed me that the OPCW Fact Finding Mission
2/20

05/04/2017

in the Syrian Arab Republic is actively engaged in
gathering and analysing information from all available
sources and will be prepared to deploy a team at the
earliest opportunity.
If confirmed, this would constitute the single
largest chemical-weapons attack in the Syrian Arab
Republic since the attack on eastern Ghouta, in August
2013. Reports have stated that the attack was carried
out through an airstrike on a residential area. However,
the means of delivery of the alleged attack cannot be
definitively confirmed at this stage.
Reports have also indicated that the presentation
of symptoms after the attack included respiratory
problems, vomiting, fainting and foaming at the mouth,
as well as miosis, or pupillary constriction. This was
visible in videos on social media said to have been
taken at the scene of the attack.
During my discussions yesterday with the chargé
d’affaires of the Syrian Arab Republic, he stated that
his Government denied having used chemical weapons
in this attack or any other attack.
I would like now to turn to my monthly briefing on
work regarding the Syrian chemical file.
First, on destruction, for the last three years
following Syria’s initial declaration, all declared
chemical materials and equipment have been removed
or destroyed. Four hangars and seven tunnels have
been disabled. One hangar and two above-ground
stationary facilities remain subject to verification of
their disablement.
This work is still pending, mainly due to the
prevailing security situation around these facilities. For
this work to be complete, the OPCW, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the United Nations Office for Project
Services extended the tripartite agreement until the end
of this year.
Secondly, on the declaration assessment, for the past
three years the OPCW has worked with the Syrian Arab
Republic to assess and verify the declaration. A number
of outstanding issues related to Syria’s declaration still
remain open. The high-level consultations between
the OPCW and the Government of Syria to address
these unresolved issues will resume in The Hague in
early May.
The first OPCW inspection at the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) took place
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

starting last February. During this inspection, OPCW
inspectors took samples, which are now being analysed
by OPCW-designated laboratories.
Thirdly, on investigations into alleged chemical
attacks, the OPCW Fact Finding Mission is looking at
a number of incidents that have taken place over the
past several months. It is in the process of finalizing its
reporting, and this should be done in some weeks’ time.
Should any Fact Finding Mission report conclude that
an incident involved or likely involved the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons, it will provide the basis for the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) to begin its work to attribute responsibility for
their use.
The investigative capacity of the JIM is now
operational. It is based in The Hague owing to the
obvious need for it to work closely with the OPCW
teams. It will be fully ready to begin its work as soon
as the Mission reaches its conclusions. The political
and other support structures of the JIM in New York
are likewise operational, with a liaison presence in
Damascus soon to be established.
As has been done in the past, I expect that all
members of the Security Council, and all Member
States in a position to do so, will provide information
and access to both the Mission and the JIM in order to
facilitate the collection of evidence for the establishment
of facts.
The Secretary-General is deeply disturbed by
the continuing reports of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun and elsewhere in Syria.
The Secretary-General recalls that the Security Council
has repeatedly determined that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to international
peace and security as well as a serious violation of
international law.
With this determination, the international
community has made tremendous efforts, symbolized
by three consecutive joint missions of the OPCW and
the United Nations over the past four years, to stop
the impunity for chemical-weapons use from growing
any further.
Despite these efforts, however, it is profoundly
disturbing to witness the tragic consequences of
the continued use of chemical weapons on innocent
civilians. We are grateful to the Security Council for

S/PV.7915

addressing this issue with unity, including through the
creation and renewal of the JIM.
On our part, we would like to reassure the members
of the Security Council that the OPCW and United
Nations secretariats will provide every possible support
to the work of both the Fact-finding Mission and the JIM
so that these missions will discharge their mandates in
an independent, impartial and professional manner.
We look forward to the deliberations of and continuing
guidance from the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking the United States presidency
for agreeing to our request to convene an emergency
meeting of the Security Council and to congratulate
you, Madam, on your accession to the presidency. I
also thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for his briefing and his
efforts over the past two years as High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs.
After six years of conflict in Syria, marked by the
most appalling violence against the civilian population,
and in particular by the prolonged and repeated use of
chemical weapons — in particular chlorine gas — by
the Syrian regime against its own people, we awoke
yesterday to learn yet again that an ignoble attack had
just been committed at Khan Shaykhun, south of Idlib.
This can only remind us of the terrible day of 21 August
2013, following the chemical attacks by the regime
in Ghouta, a suburb of Damascus, whose unbearable
images haunt our memories.
This chemical horror, which is hardly new and
should therefore surprise no one, marks the latest phase
of the Syrian tragedy’s descent into the abyss. The
facts are extremely shocking and extremely serious.
Once again, lethal toxic substances have been used and
released from the air. The sordid outcome is now over
100 people killed by asphyxiation, including more than
10 children, and there will undoubtedly be more victims.
The symptoms reported by those on site and visible
in the images of the attack are not characteristic of
chlorine but suggest the use of a much more aggressive
substance. This is the most deadly incident of violence
since the large-scale attacks by the Syrian regime in

17-090753/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

August 2013 in Ghouta, where more than 1,000 people
have lost their lives.
France, through its highest authorities, has firmly
condemned this carnage, which is further proof of the
barbarity that has stricken the Syrian population for
several years. While some claim that what occurred was
a strike against a chemical weapons depot belonging to
the “terrorists”, I would like to recall three simple facts.
First, there was no conflagration, while such a strike
would have caused a fire whose consequences would
have been far more serious for civilians. Secondly, the
incident occurred in an area where the Syrian army and
air force are currently active; moreover, new strikes
were observed in the Idlib area yesterday. Lastly, the
responsibility of the Syrian air force has already been
irrefutably called into question for the use of chlorine
as a chemical weapon at least three times by the
conclusions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, mandated by the Council.
Yesterday’s atrocities, which constitute war crimes,
come in addition to new suspicions of chlorine use late
last month and the multiple cases reported over several
months, in particular in Aleppo in December 2016.
They tragically illustrate the self-destructive folly of the
Bashar Al-Assad’s regime that even its supporters — as
we have seen today — are unable to prevent, and whose
silence is tantamount to endorsing these barbaric acts.
This new outbreak of violence confirms that until there
is a credible political transition, no one can guarantee
the peace and security of the Syrian people or the return
to stability in the Middle East. We must therefore set
in motion without delay the political transition that the
Council sought and approved by unanimously adopting
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). That has been France’s position
from the very outset.
All light must be shed as soon as possible on the
details of this shameful massacre. The Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
immediately addressed these allegations. My country
fully supports the OPCW’s Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to enable them
to investigate as soon as possible. All allegations
of chemical weapons use must be duly investigated
and monitored.
4/20

05/04/2017

But that, of course, is not enough. Those responsible
for these attacks answer for their deeds and be
brought to justice. It is high time for the international
community to put an end to the crimes of the Syrian
regime. No political alliance can justify turning a blind
eye to mass atrocities, procrastinating, equivocating or
diverting the world’s attention to other tragedies — in
short, denying the evidence.
Russia, as the guarantor of the ceasefire established
on 29 December 2016 and as a permanent member
of the Security Council, has a special responsibility
that it must now assume, alongside all members of
the Council. That is why France, the United Kingdom
and the United States have taken the initiative to
introduce a draft resolution that we hope will unite the
international community around a clear, firm position
rejecting the unaccptable.
Faced with evidence of the repeated, methodical and
barbaric use of weapons of mass destruction — in this
case chemical weapons — against civilian populations,
inaction and paralysis cannot be options. Our collective
credibility as the guardians of international peace and
security and as individual States committed to fighting
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is at
stake. This is a question of respect for international
humanitarian law and our ability to restore a collective
norm that has been openly flouted — the ban on the
use of chemical weapons against civilian populations,
which the international community sought to prohibit
for all time almost a century ago.
We have a collective responsibility to protect the
chemical non-proliferation regime that had been the
subject of a responsible consensus in the Council until
now, but which is disintegrating today before our very
eyes. The risk is that all the non-proliferation regimes
we have patiently built together, day after day, over the
recent decades will fall apart with it. The re-emergence
of these weapons in Syria, including in the hands of
Da’esh, while the international system fails to react
sends a signal of impunity that is extremely dangerous
and not acceptable. All of Syria’s chemical capacities
must be dismantled in order to protect the Syrian people
and our collective security.
Out of this fog of uncertainty emerge moments
of reality when we can no longer prevaricate or shirk
our responsibilities. The very bases of our values, the
law and our security are at stake. As to our values,
who would fail to condemn those who have murdered
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

women and children in cold blood and in such abject
and horrendous circumstances? Is this not the very
negation of civilization in its entirety? As to the law,
the Security Council unanimously agreed to condemn
those responsible for these deaths by chemical weapon.
What are we waiting for to apply the law that we
ourselves helped to formulate? As to our security, if we
close our eyes to the use of chemical weapons against
civilians, what legitimacy will we have in future to
condemn nuclear terrorism or a potential bacteriological
apocalypse? Who will be ready to assume that kind of
responsibility in the face of history?
Just a few weeks ago, I called on all of us here
to take stock of and assume their responsibilities
(see S/PV.7893). Let us make no mistake: the lack of
consensus in the Security Council on 28 February to
sanction the proven use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian regime was, unfortunately, a clear signalling
of impunity. The despicable massacre in Khan
Shaykhun is a terrible reminder of reality and of our
responsibility. The time has therefore come for us to
act collectively, with a sense of conscience and all the
necessary firmness, in the face of the use of weapons of
mass destruction. I would like to express the hope that
we can at last join together to reiterate collectively our
rejection of the use of chemical weapons. The world is
watching us — and in particular watching those who
would protect an indefensible regime, and who would
be complicit for this most heinous crime.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): On 28 February
(see S/PV.7893), I asked a simple question of the
Security Council, namely, would we take action
against those who used chemical weapons in Syria?
We had a chance that day to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2017/172) that would have done exactly that — a
draft resolution that would have taken action against
the Al-Assad regime and against Da’esh, proven to have
used chemical weapons by the mechanism that we set
up. We could have sent a clear message that day, a clear
signal that there would be consequences for using these
horrific weapons and for violating international law,
a clear signal that there was Security Council unity,
global unity, against any use of these weapons. But
after Russia and China vetoed the draft resolution, it
seems that the only message sent to Al-Assad was one
of encouragement.
Yesterday we saw the consequences of those vetoes.
Those consequences are painted on the stricken faces of
the children of Khan Shaykhun, killed potentially by

S/PV.7915

a regime that will stop at nothing to hold on to power.
History will judge all of us for how we respond to those
unforgettable, unforgivable images of the innocent, who
had already suffered so much even before yesterday’s
attack. How long are we going to sit here and pretend
that actions in this Chamber have no consequences, that
vetoes have no bearing on the lives of innocent men,
women and children?
Russia has said that the opposition is responsible,
that a regime airstrike struck an opposition munitions
depot. But we have seen nothing to suggest that any
non-State actors in Syria have the sort of chemical
weapons that would be consistent with the symptoms
that we saw yesterday. Russia will say simply that we do
not have enough information about the attack. And yet
we have every indication that this was a sustained attack
using aircraft over a number of hours. We see all the
signs of an attack using a nerve agent capable of killing
over 100 people and harming hundreds more. If that is
not enough to demand action, what is? There is only
one air force that has used such weapons in Syria. There
is only one party to this conflict that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) says
has “gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies” in its
Chemical Weapons Convention declaration. Only one
party still refuses inspectors access to its facilities.
This does not look like the work of terrorists. This does
not look like the work of the opposition. This bears all
the hallmarks of the Al-Assad regime, and the use of
chemical weapons is a war crime.
Make no mistake: this regime seems intent on
making a mockery of the Russian-backed ceasefire.
Russia has blocked Council action, claiming that we
might undermine the Astana process. Yet the only
thing undermining the Astana process is Al-Assad, the
very man they seek to protect. Russia deployed the full
weight of its armed forces to help him. They reduced
Aleppo to ruins and displaced hundreds of thousands of
men, women and children — all in the name of fighting
terrorism. And what does Russia get as repayment?
Al-Assad humiliates Russia in the eyes of the world
by intensifying his attacks and by reducing the Astana
ceasefire to ruble. Al-Assad humiliates Russia by
showing just how empty Syria’s promise was to remove
all its chemical weapons.
If Russia is to restore its credibility, it will need
to join us in condemning this attack and in urging the
OPCW to investigate it as soon as possible. They will
join us in calling for the fullest support and cooperation

17-090755/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

for the investigation team. They will help, not hinder,
our efforts to strengthen accountability through the
vital work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. There
can be no further delay in staffing the leadership of
the Mechanism. It must have the right technical and
analytical capacity to take on the task ahead. If Russia
fails to do so and falls back on its old ways, defending
the indefensible, we will not be deterred. The United
Kingdom, with our allies, will continue to seek justice
for the victims of chemical-weapon attacks, in Syria and
elsewhere. We will continue to pursue other avenues
for action. The European Union sanctions announced
last month against Syrian military persons show that
we can still take steps to hold individuals to account,
that we can still show that the use of chemical weapons
brings consequences.
But until Russia changes its ways, the Security
Council will remain blocked. That is the sad reality
that the world has gotten used to. They view us as a
table of diplomats doing nothing, our hands tied behind
our backs, beholden to Russian intransigence. But the
world should be under no illusion. What Russia does
in this Chamber does not cause inaction; defending the
indefensible causes suffering. Each and every abuse
of its veto has consequences. For the people of Khan
Shaykhun, those consequences have been unspeakable.
Let me conclude by asking Russia: what is its
plan to stop these horrific, senseless attacks? We had
a plan and we had the support. They rejected it to
protect Al-Assad. It is now time to stop blocking and
start helping, by joining Security Council consensus.
Our draft resolution condemns this attack and calls
for consequences. All 15 Security Council members
should be able to confirm this and every use of chemical
weapons. We expect members’ unanimous support.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Security Council is meeting
today in the face of a horrific event. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia expresses its strong condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons and the use of chemical
agents as weapons — justifiable and criminal acts
regardless of the reason behind them, whenever and by
whomever committed. Those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons must be duly investigated, tried
and punished to the fullest extent. The use of chemical
weapons is a violation of obligations established under
international law as well as a threat to international
peace and security. Bolivia demands an independent,
impartial, comprehensive and conclusive investigation
6/20

05/04/2017

that is completely depoliticized. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism
in ensuring that, in line with their mandates, they can
carry out the tasks I mentioned.
We also express our vigorous condemnation of any
type of attack against innocent civilians or civilian
infrastructure in this or, indeed, in any other conflict.
We reiterate the obligation incumbent upon all parties
to ensure the safety and security of persons caught
in the middle of the conflict. We reiterate that the
use of chemical weapons is a serious crime against
international security. We also express our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims and the
Syrian people while encouraging them to continue their
efforts to finding a lasting peace.
With regard to the note submitted on 23 February
by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the verification
process of chemical weapons in Syria, we appreciate
that its secretariat “verified the destruction of 24 of the
27 chemical weapons production facilities declared by
the Syrian Arab Republic” that could have produced
chemical weapons. We hope that the security situation
in Syria will improve and allow for the verification of
the remaining facilities. According to the same report,
“all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014
have now been destroyed”.
We therefore underscore the willingness and
readiness expressed by the Syrian Government to
comply with its international obligations. We also
welcome the fact that the Joint Investigative Mechanism
continues to strengthen its operational capacity in
reopening its office for research at OPCW headquarters
and that it carries out its work in the most methodical,
technical and trustworthy way possible.
Bolivia calls for the unity of the Security Council
so that the Council Chamber is not used as a sounding
board for war propaganda, so that that the international
community can look upon it with confidence and so
that it not be used as a pawn in planning for war. Only
investigations will determine the responsible parties,
and we believe that the most responsible way to proceed
is not to prematurely determine who is responsible for
those acts but to ensure an independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive investigation.
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, I would like to underscore the words of
the Secretary-General, who has reminded us that
Syria has undergone seven years of war marked by the
increasing suffering of the Syrian people. We believe
that it is incumbent on the Council to recall at present
and forever the causes of that terrible war. We would
probably not be sitting here and lamenting the seven
years of war and suffering of the Syrian people had it
not been for the invasion of Iraq more than 10 years ago
in the context of interventionist policies in the Middle
East. I believe that it is a universal responsibility for
those who committed such crimes to also assume their
historical responsibility. We believe that it is imperative
to recognize that interference, interventionism and that
policy of regime change undermine all civilizations
established by the various peoples of the world. We
naturally regret and are saddened and moved by the loss
of life, but we once again stridently call for the unity of
the Council and for it to be used not as a sounding board
for war propaganda but as a place in which we debate
and agree on the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is profoundly shocked by the alleged use of chemicals
as weapons in Syria that resulted in enormous civilian
casualties several days ago. We strongly condemn any
attacks against civilians. China firmly opposes the use
of chemical weapons by any country, organization or
person under any circumstances, and that has been its
unwavering and consistent position that no one should
ever distort. In Syria, there have been many instances
of the use of chemicals as weapons.
China supports the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and related United Nations entities
in carrying out comprehensive, objective and fair
investigations into all — I repeat all — uses of chemicals
as weapons. The findings of such invesitigations must
be based on substantial evidence and stand the test of
time and facts. It is essential to hold accountable all
relevant perpetrators and responsible parties in cases
involving chemical weapons.
The Syrian conflict has entered its seventh year
and, to date, resulted in enormous civilian casualties.
China empathetically shares in the suffering of the
Syrian people, and we call on the various Syrian parties
to quickly end the conflict. A political settlement is
the only way out the Syrian impasse. China hopes that
all the parties will create the conditions for a political
settlement rather than create difficulties. It is China’s

S/PV.7915

hope that the international community will capitalize on
the rare opportunities offered by a political settlement,
persist in the general direction of a political settlement,
step up its support for the United Nations as the main
channel for mediation, support the work of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General De Mistura, urge
the various Syrian parties to consolidate a ceasefire
and build up mutual trust, adhere to the principle of
a Syrian-led and owned settlement as advanced in
the Geneva talks, and push for positive results to be
achieved within the framework of a political settlement.
Counter-terrorism currently is the primary
area of concern in connection with the Syrian issue.
The international community should strengthen its
cooperation, unify its working methods and resolutely
fight against all the terrorist organizations listed by
the Council.
Lastly, I should like to point out once again that it
is totally unacceptable for the British representative to
publicly distort the solemn position of another country
in the Council Chamber. His logic is untenable. We
hope that, on the issue of chemical weapons, on which
the international community is in consensus, he will
stop using the Security Council in an abusive manner
for his own political purposes, as that is not in the
interest of the Syrian people, and that, in the future, the
British representative will refrain from such practices.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the United States
presidency for convening this meeting. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Kim Won-soo for his briefing.
Japan is seriously concerned by continued reports
of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria,
including most recently in Idlib, which reportedly led
to the tragedy affecting more than 400 victims. The use
of chemical weapons is not permissible and must be
strongly condemned under any circumstances, and those
who are responsible for their use must be identified and
held accountable. I believe that there is unity inside the
Security Council on those fundamental points.
In addressing the new allegations in Syria, we must
first determine whether chemical weapons were actually
used, and, secondly, if confirmed, we must identify
those who are responsible. Taking measures to hold the
perpetrators accountable is the final and indispensable
step in fulfilling the Council’s responsibility. Impunity
is unacceptable.

17-090757/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

In that context, Japan welcomes the fact that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic has already begun gathering information. We
urge the Syrian Government and all parties in Syria to
cooperate fully with the Fact-finding Mission and the
Mission itself to conclude its investigations, not only
in connection with the Idlib incident, but also with
other recent allegations as soon as possible, so that the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
can conduct its own investigation in order to identify
those responsible.
With that in mind, it is increasingly important
to further improve the coordination between the two
mechanisms and the Council so that we can react more
swiftly to any alleged use of chemical weapons. If we
are to dissuade potential actors from using them, it is
crucial to show that any such use will be brought to light
and that those responsible will be held accountable.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would first like to thank
High Representative Kim Won-soo for his briefing
and to express our appreciation to you, Madam
President, for your leadership in navigating this year’s
difficult and crucial issues related to the international
security architecture.
Italy is shocked by the chemical-weapon attack
that is once again alleged to have been perpetrated in
Syria, and by the additional bombardments of hospitals
where the wounded were being treated. What happened
in Khan Shaykhun is sickening and despicable, and we
condemn it in the strongest possible terms, just as we
would condemn the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and in any circumstances. Such attacks
not only confirm the Syrian regime’s utter contempt
for its own people but are also a tragic reminder
that international law, including Security Council
resolutions and the international non-proliferation
architecture, continue to be blatantly violated.
We welcome the commitment of the Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
gathering information from all available resources,
and we look forward to its findings. In that regard, we
supported the draft resolution (S/2017/170) submitted
by the United Kingdom, the United States and France
and aimed at condemning the attack and ensuring that
the investigations are as effective as possible.
8/20

05/04/2017

As long as nobody is being held accountable for
these war crimes and crimes against humanity, there
will still be an incentive to continue carrying them
out. That is why fighting impunity, identifying the
perpetrators and holding them accountable must be
a shared priority for the Council, one that unifies
rather than divides us. Italy encouraged action by the
Security Council for ensuring the accountability of
those responsible and the imposition of sanctions on
them, as a follow-up to the activities of the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigation Mechanism. After
that pathway in the Council was blocked, on 20 March
Italy backed new restrictive measures imposed by the
European Union on four high-ranking Syrian military
officials for their role in the use of chemical weapons
against their civilian population.
Italy also supports the mechanism set up by the
General Assembly to gather evidence and assist future
prosecutions of crimes committed in Syria. Moreover,
as a subscriber to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group’s code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes, and to the initiative of
France and Mexico on veto restraints in cases of mass
atrocities, we once again reiterate our call to the Council
to act. In our view, those crimes should also warrant
the attention of the International Criminal Court.
Indiscriminate violence against civilians continues to
be seen as a tool for winning this war militarily. That
approach is not only morally unacceptable, it is wrongheaded and delusional. A solution will never be found
through military means, however appealing that may
seem to one of the parties at the moment. The only
way out of the crisis is through an inclusive political
settlement, arrived at in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), that addresses the plight and aspirations
of the Syrian people and drains the quagmire of
violence and instability where terrorism flourishes and
endangers the whole world.
Furthermore, we should emphasize that the attacks
were cynically perpetrated just at the end of the most
recent round of talks in Geneva, which, under the
leadership of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, whom we support, attempted to inject new life
into the political process. The attacks cast serious new
doubt on the commitment to a political solution.
The attacks also cast new doubt on the regime’s
willingness to abide by the terms of the ceasefire. They
do not represent an isolated case but are just one of
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the repeated violations of the ceasefire that have been
carried out, particularly by the regime, over the past
few months. Such behaviour destroys the possibility
of any confidence between the parties on the ground,
just as the deliberate restrictions on the provision of aid
that continue to worsen an already tragic humanitarian
situation have been doing. A strengthened cessation
of hostilities is our best hope to move on from
the military phase and ensure safe and complete
humanitarian access. In that regard, and in conclusion,
all of us — particularly the guarantors of the Astana
process — have a special responsibility to live up to
our commitments and ensure that the ceasefire is fully
implemented and can thus provide a basis for a concrete
political process.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by expressing Egypt’s firm condemnation
of any use of chemical weapons or weapons of mass
destruction by any party. We especially condemn the
confirmed use of chemical weapons in more than one
incident in Syria against our brothers the Syrian people,
as reported by the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the United Nations, which is responsible
for investigating such incidents.
We do not understand how such crimes can continue
to be ignored, with no thorough or just accountability.
Egypt has therefore always affirmed the importance of
holding any party responsible for such inhumane acts
accountable, whatever their justification, including by
the Security Council and based on agreed rules and
principles and on effective evidence-gathering and
investigation. In that regard, I deplore the division
within the Council and our failure to come up with a
resolution that can ensure accountability untainted by
the politicization and polarization that have afflicted
the international arena.
With regard to the reports of yesterday’s sad
incidents in Khan Shaykhun in Idlib, I urge all parties
to cooperate closely with the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in order to enable
it to determine the facts on the ground. I call on the
Mission to reach its conclusions as quickly as possible
so as to enable the Joint Investigative Mechanism to
conduct its activities in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We will therefore support
any serious action in the Council to address this and
other incidents and hold those responsible accountable.
In that regard, we stress the importance of focusing on

S/PV.7915

and addressing the issue of the production, possession
and use by any non-State actors of weapons of mass
destruction, which constitutes a threat to the region
and the world, particularly in view of the fact that the
Security Council lacks the legal instruments that could
deter and address such threats.
The killing and targeting of civilians have become
a painful reality that is part of the Syrian people’s
daily life. We are now used to hearing death and
displacement in Syria spoken of in terms of figures
and numbers, to be used and exploited purely for
political purposes. Regrettably, after the Council had
succeeded in agreeing on the parameters of a political
process for addressing the threat of chemical weapons
and ensuring humanitarian access in Syria, divisions
and infighting within the Council — even on issues
unrelated to Syria — appear to be threatening the
prospects for a settlement once again. I would like
to once again emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the international mechanisms can investigate
all war crimes committed in Syria in order to ensure
accountability through a serious and honest approach.
I urge Council members to resume serious
political dialogue with a view to addressing the Syrian
crisis, while avoiding the atmosphere of competition,
polarization and mutual blaming in the media that
has characterized recent years. It is worth noting that
millions of innocent civilians are paying the price, and
that the people of the region will bear the brunt of this
crisis for years to come.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Yesterday, as I looked at the images coming out of
Khan Shaykhun, I felt physically and mentally ill.
The words used by Joseph Conrad in his novel Heart
of Darkness, and subsequently placed by Francis Ford
Coppola in the mouth of Marlon Brando in his film
Apocalypse Now — “the horror, the horror” — came
to mind. That is what one perceives and feels in the
face of these horrors. These are not acts of war. These
are barbaric acts, and Uruguay condemns in the
strongest terms yesterday’s attack, which resulted in
a huge loss of life, including of women and children.
We saw children dying as they tried to breathe. We saw
women — already dead — clutching their children.
And this is not the first time because, unfortunately,
we have seen these images coming out of Syria time
and again.

17-090759/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

The use of sarin gas or other nerve agent indicates
that the culprits intended to cause as much damage
to the residents of that area as possible. They lost
their lives in horrible circumstances, choking. Once
more, we are witnessing a display of a complete lack
of humanity on the part of combatants in Syria. The
hospital in which the wounded were being treated was
bombed just a few minutes after the initial attack. That
is becoming a recurring model in Syria, in Yemen,
and other countries. First, civilians are attacked, and
then minutes later, all those trying to aid the victims
are attacked.
As Secretary-General Guterres so aptly put it
yesterday, no one is winning this war. Everyone is losing
it, especially the millions of Syrians who continue to
see their lives destroyed on a daily basis. These horrific
crimes should not and cannot remain unpunished,
whoever is responsible for them. For the time being,
we do not have the information that would allow us
to categorically confirm who is responsible for this
action. However, we need to recall that it is the primary
responsibility of the Syrian Government to protect its
population, and it is also the Syrian Government that
has the main responsibility to provide the maximum and
unhindered access to Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons experts who arrived in Syria
yesterday to investigate the circumstances of the attack
and to collect evidence. We hope that, unlike previous
cases, the investigation will take place expeditiously
and in such a way as to allow us to understand who
was behind these deeds and to demand that they be held
accountable for their actions.
This is not an isolated event; it occurred amid the
intensified bombing and fighting of past weeks — in spite
of the ceasefire that is supposed to be in effect — and
the recent terrorist attacks that have also caused many
deaths. All of this threatens the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura
to bring the parties together to reach an intra-Syrian
political solution that would make it possible to put an
end to this conflict.
Unfortunately, the Security Council remains part
of the problem and not part of the solution. There is
little time, and with every day that passes we see an
increasing number of people wounded or killed and the
entire country being destroyed. The money collected
during donors’ pledging conference will be useless if
the destruction of Syria and other countries continues.
It might certainly be possible to rebuild the physical
10/20

05/04/2017

infrastructure, but it will never be possible to give life
back to the thousands of innocent civilians. The total
cessation of bombings and hostilities has re-emerged
as a necessity.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The position of
Kazakhstan on the use of chemical weapons in Syria
is consistent and well known. We strongly oppose any
use of chemical weapons, as well as any other kind of
weapon of mass destruction by any State organization
or individual, regardless of the circumstances.
We were shocked and deeply saddened by this
terrible chemical attack in Idlib, Syria. Kazakhstan
strongly condemns such actions, which demonstrate
the ruthless intent to destabilize the situation in the
country. We wish to take this opportunity to express
our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of the
victims and to wish a speedy recovery to those injured.
Will our collective efforts to prevent further
escalation of the situation in Syria, including the
continued peace negotiations in Geneva, risk being
undermined by such provocative actions? Any criminal
behaviour that is implemented in such an inhuman
way, and that pursues intimidation, must be classified
as a terrorist action, which we must combat with
full determination.
Kazakhstan urges the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the United Nations to immediately conduct full
investigations without any delay, and to identify the
perpetrators of this heinous crime. As we see, it is
mainly innocent people who continue to suffer. The
deliberate use by criminals to sow fear and anxiety is a
characteristic method of terrorist organizations. In the
light of this, we request a full and prompt investigation,
which must go beyond routine procedural formalities.
The Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
must directly collect evidence and make every effort to
identify the perpetrators of this flagrant crime in order
to bring them to justice.
Given the circumstances and proceeding from
the need for a complete and unbiased disclosure
of these crimes, we need comprehensive and open
cooperation between the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the Fact-finding Mission.
As a proponent of impartial and full disclosure of
all chemicals crimes in Syria, Kazakhstan urges the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as
other parties, to cooperate fully with the international
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

inspectors of the United Nations and the OPCW. Any
delay in terms of disclosure or holding the perpetrators
accountable demonstrates tacit agreement to continue
such crimes in the future.
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Kim Won-soo, for his briefing. Yesterday’s
flagrant crimes in the Idlib region of Syria, as well
as the ongoing potential threat of the use of chemical
weapons in this country demand serious and energetic
efforts. Unfortunately, as we see from the report before
us (S/2017/260, annex), the critical issues that require
progress to move us forward remain unchanged.
First, there is the issue of the three remaining
facilities, the destruction of which still seems impossible
due to the lack of the necessary security conditions. It
is necessary to take urgent action to finally resolve
this problem. In turn, it will help us to ensure that
all official sources that raise suspicions about the
storage of hazardous chemicals would no longer exist.
Therefore, more active interaction is needed with the
Government of Syria. In that regard we look forward
to the resumption of high-level consultations with
Damascus in May to address all unresolved issues
related to the declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We expect the results of these consultations in the next
report, which will outline the forthcoming steps that
need to be taken.
Secondly we would like to see more dynamic and
speedy measures taken by the fact-finding mission,
which would help the Joint Investigative Mechanism
commence investigations on new crimes.
Thirdly, the active interaction and collaboration
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism with the three
Security Council Committees in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2319 (2016) will result in a
more effective response for preventing and combating
such threats. Bearing in mind that the mandate of the
Mechanism is already coming to an end in November
2017, we must urgently take all measures to strengthen
the work, which is necessary if it is to complete in a
timely manner all pending investigations of previous
crimes as well as new ones committed in Syria.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Madam
President, for calling this meeting with the urgency that
the situation requires. I hope that the Security Council
will shoulder its responsibility and act in a firm and
united way in response to what we have seen.

S/PV.7915

We join other members of the Council in condemning
the monstrous and cowardly attacks reported to have
been carried out with chemical weapons yesterday on
the people of Idlib. The pictures emerging are truly
shocking. We have seen the lifeless bodies of those
struck down as they went about their daily lives and the
heartbreaking images of children desperately gasping
for air. Our thoughts are with the families and friends
of those who died and who have been injured, but there
is also a sense of outrage. The attacks on the hospitals
that followed are equally appalling.
The use of chemical weapons is illegal and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity. What happened in Idlib must now be
investigated without delay. If the allegations are proven
to be correct, then this will be a gruesome addition to the
already-confirmed cases of the use of chemical weapons
and other serious international crimes committed by
the Syrian regime. Those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria must be held accountable,
as the Council agreed in resolution 2209 (2015).
In the light of what we have seen over the last
24 hours, it is important that the Council now show
a united front. We must do all that is necessary to
facilitate the important work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). Sweden therefore fully
supports the draft resolution put forward this morning
by the United Kingdom, France and the United States.
There is an urgent need for OPCW fact-finding mission
to establish the facts and report its findings as soon
as possible, including to identify those responsible. In
order to do so successfully, they must receive the full
cooperation of the Syrian authorities.
This attack further underlines the importance of
the Council’s continued focus on chemical-weapons
use in Syria. As we have stated before, the Syrian
authorities must cooperate fully with the OPCW to
allow it to verify the accuracy and completeness of
the chemical-weapons declarations. This is critical for
addressing the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
that remain.
We appreciate the work of the JIM and we welcome
that it will soon be fully operational. We look forward
to reports containing more information on the four
previously identified cases involving Da’esh and the
Syrian regime as well as the new cases, including this

17-0907511/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

most recent attack, to be presented by the OPCW Factfinding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In conclusion, we will continue our efforts in the
Council and elsewhere to ensure that those responsible
for the heinous crimes in Syria are held accountable.
Sweden has contributed to the JIM as well as to the
impartial and independent mechanism mandated by
the General Assembly which is now being set up. The
work of the Commission of Inquiry for Syria must also
continue. We have also actively supported the European
Union’s recent introduction of targeted sanctions on
individuals implicated in the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
The attack in Idlib underlines the importance of
the Security Council’s work to end the use of chemical
weapons. We cannot shy away from our responsibilities.
We must now redouble our efforts.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Mr. Kim
Won-soo for his briefing. Let me take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to him for his commitment
and dedicated service as Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
since June 2015. I would also like to congratulate his
successor, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.
The report of the use of chemical weapons in Idlib
yesterday is indeed very shocking. What we have seen
in videos and pictures is simply heartbreaking. Earlier,
the representative of Uruguay expressed so eloquently
what we also felt at this gruesome sight. We express
our profound sympathy for the victims of the attack.
As we have stated before, we are concerned about
continued reports of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, including the eight incidents that have been
recorded since the beginning of the year. We strongly
condemn any use of chemical weapons by any State or
non-State actor.
The use of chemicals as weapons is unacceptable
and unjustifiable under any circumstances. We agree
with what the Secretary-General stated in his letter
dated 27 March 2017:
“The continuing use of toxic chemicals as
weapons, as well as the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic, imperils the longestablished norm against such weapons. Their
use is intolerable and impunity must be stopped
by identifying and holding those responsible to
account.” (S/2017/260, p.1)
12/20

05/04/2017

We hope the reported attack in Idlib will be
investigated by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic as effectively as possible. In
this regard, we welcome the statement of the OPCW
that indicated that the fact-finding mission is in the
process of gathering and analysing information from
all available sources. More importantly, after a proper
investigation process, the perpetrators of the attack
should be identified by the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) based on reliable
evidence in order to ensure accountability. It is very
critical that whatever action is taken by the Security
Council is and appears to be based on credible evidence
about which no well-meaning and objectively disposed
person could have doubts.
The continued reports of chemical attacks in Syria
give us additional justification for fully supporting
the work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
That is why it is so critical that the JIM resume its
work as expeditiously as possible. Without its full
operationalization, the Council would be unable to
ensure accountability, which we believe is imperative
for holding perpetrators to account and deterring
the further use of chemical weapons. It is therefore
essential to provide all necessary support for the JIM
so that it could resume and conduct this investigation in
a professional, independent and impartial manner.
It is not only a matter of ensuring justice to the
victims of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria, but it is
also about preserving the non-proliferation architecture
that is a critical pillar for maintaining global peace and
security. The proliferation of chemical weapons and their
use including by terrorists is a source of grave concern
and poses a serious threat to peace and stability in the
region and beyond. Such a threat could be sustainably
addressed if political and diplomatic solutions are
given primacy. Only an inclusive political process
could ultimately address the Syrian crisis and stop the
horrible attacks, including what we saw yesterday, from
continuing to cause unspeakable suffering to the people
of Syria. Without underestimating the challenges that
lie ahead, we note the limited progress made in the fifth
round of intra-Syrian talks, which concluded a few days
ago. We look forward to the briefing by Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura next week.
In conclusion, we are inclined to look favourably at
the draft resolution proposed by the United Kingdom,
the United States and France. It is our conviction that,
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the more united the Council is with respect to the actions
that it takes on the matter, the easier the international
community will find it to control the menace of the use
of chemical weapons. That is why we look forward to
finding common ground to ensure that there is unity
within the Council so that investigations are conducted
as speedily and as effectively as possible.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom and France for requesting
today’s meeting, and the presidency for promptly
convening it.
At the outset, let me recall the statement by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine issued today on the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria, which reiterates,
inter alia, that the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and under any circumstances is a blatant
violation of international law and must be strongly
condemned, and those responsible for such acts must
be held accountable.
There appears to be no end to the incessant flow of
reports from Syria regarding the use of toxic chemicals
as weapons. A real Pandora’s box was opened in
2012 and, to date, we continue to witness the grave
consequences of the Syrian Government’s actions and
decisions, or rather the lack of them, from five years
ago. The genie is out of the bottle but the international
community is still undecided about what to do about it,
despite the consensus that the use of chemical weapons
is unjustifiable and cannot be tolerated.
The international community, including the Security
Council, has been very prolific and eloquent in
expressing concern and condemning the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons, but that is as far as it goes. There
is an astounding lack of concrete actions, and therefore
the gap between talking the talk and walking the walk
is only growing. Vivid images of the victims who were
exposed to the poisonous gas in Idlib yesterday serve as
a loud and clear wake-up call for the whole international
community. They are a stark reminder to all of us in the
Chamber that there is a price to be paid for any failure to
act. Those innocent civilians in Idlib paid the ultimate
price because the Council could not get its act together
on the Syrian chemical weapons issue. Those children
whose pictures we saw yesterday fight for breath and
battle suffocation because of fateful decisions made
in distant capitals by people preoccupied by their own
grand agendas.

S/PV.7915

Under the circumstances, repeating the usual
mantras of “Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons investigation”, “Joint Investigative
Mechanism involvement”, “need for the host
Government’s full cooperation” and so on sounds
hollow and, frankly, is an affront to the people of Syria.
Moreover, the Council’s failure to act on the issue will
create the false perception that perpetrators of that crime
can hide behind the wall of lies and falsification — the
hybrid wall constructed by the Al-Assad regime and
secured by the Russian veto. That wall must be knocked
down. My only question today is this, Where is the
limit to our collective tolerance, which appears to have
no boundaries? And as a follow up: How many more
Idlibs will it take to finally move on this issue?
Proceeding from the Council’s common position
that the use of chemical weapons is a flagrant violation
of international law, we believe it should act resolutely
and without any delay. In that regard, Ukraine supports
the draft resolution presented by the United States, the
United Kingdom and France, as a balanced and focused
document that introduces specific actions. We hope
that this important document will be adopted by the
Council today. That is the least we can do to ensure that
the Idlib attack is not ignored.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like commend France and the
United Kingdom on their initiative to request today’s
meeting, and you, Madam President, on your decision
to promptly convene the meeting to enable the Security
Council to address the subject of the alleged use of
poisonous substances — chemical agents and chemical
weapons — yesterday, 4 April — my country’s national
holiday — in Khan Shaykhun, Idlib governorate.
Scores were killed and hundreds suffocated, including
children. The entire civilian population was affected.
We express sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and to our Syrian brothers and sisters. We wish
the injured a speedy recovery.
I would like to congratulate today’s briefer, Mr. Kim
Won-soo, on his clear and objective presentation and
to commend him for taking the precaution, to the
extent possible, of consulting with the representatives
of the Syrian Government here in New York. The
communiqué issued by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which
is already tasked with gathering and analysing
information from all available sources in order to

17-0907513/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

determine those responsible, is also concerned about
proceeding with caution.
As you, Madam, recalled here on 28 February (see
S/PV.7893), nothing can justify the atrocity of the use
of chemical substances as weapons anywhere or at
any time, including in Syria, a conflict zone, and in
particular on civilian populations. That is why, staying
true to its principled stance, and in its capacity as a
State party to the Convention on Chemical Weapons,
Senegal reiterates, through me, its firm condemnation
of the use of weapons of mass destruction of all
kinds — including chemical weapons — as occurred
yesterday in Khan Shaykhun.
Yesterday’s barbaric act in an interminable war in
Syria and ongoing allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in that country further illustrate the relevance
of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. In that regard, we continue to encourage the
steering committee in its efforts, pursuant to resolution
2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), to conduct objective and
impartial investigations to identify those responsible
for the unacceptable use of chemical substances as
weapons. Ongoing consultations between the OPCW
secretariat and the competent Syrian authorities are
also of vital importance to ensure that the Fact-finding
Mission can effectively discharge its mission.
How can we not be concerned yet again about
non-State actors — terrorist groups such as Islamic
State and the former Al-Nusra Front — possessing such
loathsome weapons? That is why we are calling for
improved cooperation among all States Members of the
United Nations, in particular those of the region, to put
an end to the ongoing threat posed by chemical weapons
in Syria and beyond. Once again, my delegation calls
on all the members of the Security Council to return to
the spirit of consensus and cooperation that prevailed
prior to the adoption of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2235 (2015). It should be recalled that those resolutions
enabled the Council to make tangible progress on
the destruction of the chemical-weapon production
facilities declared by the Syrian Government. It is now
up to the members of the Council to work together to
provide follow up to the substantive findings of the
investigations undertaken by the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. Everyone is well aware of the complexity
of its work.
In conclusion, we continue to believe that only
a negotiated political solution based on the Geneva
14/20

05/04/2017

communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015) will help us achieve a lasting solution to this
conflict, which is having devastating humanitarian
consequences, while we must also shed light on all the
facts concering the allegations of the use of prohibited
weapons in Syria. My delegation therefore once again
expresses its desire for the success of the fifth round
of the Geneva talks, which began on 23 March, and we
hope that, together with the Astana process, the talks
will also strengthen the substantive findings of the
fourth session, which helped us, for the first time, to get
to the substantive issues, such as constitutional reform,
the political transition and the holding United Nationssupervised elections.
In the interim, Senegal calls for a swift and reliable
assessment of what took place in Idlib yesterday. We
also call for the speedy and reliable identification of
the perpetrators. As for the team of the OPCW FactFinding Mission for Syria, whose members are ready
to start work, and that of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose conclusions are
pending to identify those responsible, Senegal reiterate
its full support.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of the
United States for this opportunity for an open debate
and to discuss honestly the very complex topic of
the use of poisonous substances in the context of
the Syrian conflict. Unfortunately, interest in such
events clearly has an ideological thrust. Let us
acknowledge that it is closely interwoven with the
anti-Damascus campaign, which has not yet reached
the place it deserves on the rubbish heap of history.
As soon as an element of realism appears, when the
political process in Astana and Geneva starts to really
take shape and gain speed, then, strangely, all kinds of
incidents start to occur. The last example is the tragedy
in Khan Shaykun.
According to our information, the Syrian
Government has requested the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to send a fact-finding mission to
Syria to investigate the incident, as well as an OPCW
rapid response and assistance mission. There is no need
to repeat that the Russian Federation has always had
a clear and unequivocal position: the use of chemical
weapons by anyone is absolutely unacceptable under
any circumstances. Those guilty of committing such
kinds of crimes must be held accountable.
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Let us look at the origin of this problem. The
watershed in the history of the use of toxic chemicals in
Syria, and then of full-fledged chemical warfare agents,
was the establishment of the so-called “red lines”
initiated by the previous United States Administration
in 2012. Crossing those red lines was supposed to have
led to military intervention in the intra-Syrian conflict.
That decision served as a starting point for future
provocations by terrorist and extremist groups with the
use of chemical weapons. They sought to discredit the
official Damascus regime and to create a pretext for the
use of military force against a sovereign State.
Back then, our Western partners preferred to
remain silent, including regarding the request that came
from Damascus in March 2013 about investigating the
use of sarin by insurgents in a suburb of Aleppo, Khan
Al-Assal. We hope that this kind of attitude will not be
repeated this time. It was such inaction that encouraged
the insurgents, who felt they enjoyed impunity, to
commit more large-scale acts on 21 August 2013 in
eastern Ghouta, when sarin was used again. By the
way, quite coincidentally, this action was timed to
coincide with the first mission to Syria of a United
Nations group of experts, led by Åke Sellström. It tried
to ascribe responsibility for the attack on Government
troops, but they did not succeed in doing so because,
at the time, Damascus showed sufficient good faith,
and, through the efforts of the Russian Federation and
the United States, with the support of the international
community, it was possible to achieve a successful
chemical demilitarization of Syria.
When it became clear that the Government of
Al-Assad in very brief time frames and in very complex
conditions of the armed conflict was able to eliminate
its chemical arsenals, we saw reports about the alleged
use in Syria of chlorine as chemical weapons. The
OPCW established a Fact-finding Mission for that
chemical attack, with the support of the Government
of Damascus, which was meant to swiftly investigate
such incidents. But in fact this mission never visited
the supposed sites where chlorine was used to verify
this. And so a poor foundation was laid in the work
of the Fact-finding Mission, and then of the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
in Syria to investigate cases of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. In fact, reports were fabricated
by the Syrian opposition and non-governmental
organizations that support it about the alleged use of
chlorine by Government forces. Those reports were

S/PV.7915

taken at face value, and no one sought to conduct an
objective investigation.
If anyone has any doubt that the images of the socalled use of sarin incidents, in particular in Sarmin,
were staged in advance, one need only look at the
videos that were filmed on that subject by certain
pseudo-humanitarian non-governmental organizations,
such as the White Helmets, which were praised by
some in this Chamber, and by Jabhat Al-Nusra. In those
videos, one sees the same “actor-correspondents”.
It is a fact that the White Helmets are closely linked
to that terrorist organization, or perhaps those who
fabricated those materials were the same persons who
were exaggerating about the humanitarian catastrophe
in eastern Aleppo while they were busy filling their
warehouses with medication and food when the
population was starving. I asked here at the United
Nations, “Is that true”? They said, “Yes ,that is true.
Why”? Apparently, they were getting ready for a longterm siege. Can you believe the degree of cynicism:
those are the organizations that provide video materials
for this, and these video materials should serve as a
basis for us to draw conclusions?
The OPCW experts have confirmed that these
kinds of terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and Al-Nusra, produce fully fledged
weaponized chemical substances, mustard gas and
sarin, which are regularly used in Syria and Iraq. By the
way, the Western intelligence community also agrees
with those kinds of conclusions. We have often argued
our position in the Security Council regarding the
preliminary outcome of investigations in the framework
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Much still needs
to be examined. That is why we agreed to extend the
mandate of the Mechanism for another year. We need to
conduct a thorough, depoliticized investigation of cases
of the use of chemical weapons, based on reliable and
verified facts. The future work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism needs to be expanded geographically. Its
mandate needs to be buttressed by real anti-terrorist
content, which is provided for by a Security Council
resolution.
No one should seek to sew the seeds of discord
between the Russian Federation and the government of
Iraq and other countries of the region. We have a solid
position in the Middle East. People believe us, and what
we are doing is to support Baghdad and not act against
it, as some affirm. There should be some bounds of
propriety.

17-0907515/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

We are very concerned about the fact that certain
States are already manipulating the preliminary results
of the work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. An
example of this kind of irresponsible approach was
the draft resolution on sanctions (S/2017/172) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
that was put to the vote on 28 February, even while
the political processes in Astana and Geneva were
working very well. The aforementioned States created
an absolutely artificial provocation in the Security
Council without even explaining the purpose of putting
the draft resolution to a vote. If the Russian and
Chinese initiative had been taken seriously two years
ago, including the draft resolution that we submitted,
then the situation today would be radically different.
But that initiative was disregarded.
To respond to the question posed by the United
Kingdom as to whether Russia has a plan, the answer
is yes. We have more than one plan. The first plan is
to combat terrorism. The second plan relates to the
draft resolution before us. At this stage, we do not see
a particular need to adopt a draft resolution. Previously
adopted decisions are more than sufficient to conduct a
thorough investigation of the incident. But, if some of
the Security Council members think that a new draft
resolution is desirable or necessary, then it needs to
have a completely different shape and form.
The preambular part should state that the Security
Council deeply regrets the massacre of people as a
result of the use chemical agents in Khan Shaykhun.
It should also state that those reports dictate the need
to carry out a comprehensive investigation in order
to find out what happened and who is responsible.
The preambular section should also condemn the use
of chemical weapons by anyone. The operative part
should be limited to one paragraph indicating that the
OPCW Fact-finding Mission should conduct a thorough
investigation of the reports on the ground, but with one
important condition — the staff of the investigative
Mission should be introduced to the Council and should
reflect a geographical balance. There should also be
a demand that illegal armed groups that control the
area where the incident took place must provide full,
unimpeded and safe access to that area and furnish all
the necessary information. The main task now is to
conduct an objective inquiry into what occurred.
Thus far, all falsified reports regarding the incident
have come from the previously mentioned White
Helmets or the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights,
16/20

05/04/2017

based in London. Those two sources have long been
discredited. To take their reports at face value as a basis
for making important decisions is neither professional
nor prudent. At the same time, we note the contradictory
character of the reports about the incident. The White
Helmets are jumbling information in their reports; their
versions keep changing. They refer to bombings, either
from helicopters or aircraft; they mention the use of
chlorine or sarin; and they constantly change the number
of victims. In the videos and photos released on social
media, we see the representatives of the White Helmets
providing assistance to the victims while acting very
unprofessionally and without any decent protective
means. Also, the behaviour of the representatives of
the White Helmets in extreme circumstances is very
relaxed, which leads one to question the plausibility of
those materials. Such actions are meant to provoke.
As a matter of fact, the aforementioned
discrepancies arealso reflected in the draft resolution.
The second preambular paragraph, for example,
expresses the horror of what occurred — as though
it were an established fact. The operative paragraph
3 states that we need to establish whether or not the
event took place. Has anyone even checked what was
written? In other words, this draft resolution is hasty
and superficial. Let us be clear — putting forward such
a text for adoption by the Security Council is simply
inappropriate.
As for the incident that allegedly took place on
territory that since 2014 has been under the control of
terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front, it is true that on
4 April, from 11.30 to 12.30, local time, Syrian planes
conducted an air strike in the eastern edge of Khan
Shaykhun, on a large warehouse containing ammunition
and military equipment. At that site, there was a facility
for producing ammunition with toxic agents. That
ammunition was for use in Iraq and Aleppo. Their
use in that region was confirmed last year by Russian
military experts. The symptoms of those affected in
Khan Shaykhun, as shown in video footage on social
networks, were the same as those who were affected last
year in Aleppo, when all of the information regarding
the use of those chemical substances, found in samples
of soil from that city, was collected and forwarded to the
OPCW, where they continue to be reviewed hesitantly.
What is clear to us is that chemical terrorism is
increasing and needs to be countered as decisively as
possible. Unfortunately, over the past three years, all of
our attempts to get the Security Council to respond to
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the crimes of terrorists who are using chemical weapons
with increasing frequency have been unsuccessful
due to the opposition of our Western colleagues. In
typical fashion, they were completely indifferent to
the recent actions of terrorists in Mosul, and that fact
was confirmed by reputable and impartial international
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
I now draw the Council’s attention to the SecretaryGeneral’s statement. He called for a thorough inquiry
into what really happened in Khan Shaykhun. We
fully support that position. The investigation must be
comprehensive and objective. We must put an end to the
very poor practice of investigation from afar, often based
on information that is posted on the Internet or taken
from neighbouring countries — used even by the Factfinding Mission. That information is questionable and
very difficult to prove. Any investigative body, including
the Fact-finding Mission, must actually visit the site
where the alleged use of chemical weapons occurred
in Syria, while using a broad range of methodologies,
such as taking samples and consulting with medical
and legal forensic experts. The need for such a serious
and professional approach was specifically mentioned
in the fourth and fifth reports of the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (see S/2016/888
and S/2017/131), in paragraphs 49 and 11, respectively.
I once again stress that the team of investigators
must be truly international, in line with the principles
of broad geographical representation as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. In its current form,
the composition of the Fact-finding Mission in no way
respects that foundational principle. The conclusions
of the Fact-finding Mission cannot possibly be
called impartial.
There is one other thing I would like to talk
about, which is, once again, the utterly irresponsible,
disrespectful, unprofessional statement by the British
Ambassador. It can be explained by the fact that
they are doing nothing — nothing — to normalize
the situation in Syria. Actually, they are doing one
thing — dumping provocative draft resolutions in
the Security Council — and, by the way, openly
putting unilateral pressure on the Joint Investigative
Mechanism in an attempt to extract the conclusions that
he needs. Just in general, Mr. Rycroft’s pronouncements
about China and Russia cross a diplomatic line that is
simply unacceptable and must not be repeated. We are
not going to sit here and listen to it any more. Better

S/PV.7915

that they should tell us what Britain is doing to solve
the situation in Syria. They keep asking questions of
Russia and China. Do they feel any such responsibility
with regard to the issue? No, they do not.
This is all about an obsession with regime change.
That is what is preventing the Security Council from
working constructively. It is they who are undermining
the Council through their attempts to use Council
decisions to give their illegitimate plans a veneer of
legitimacy. But it is not working, and it will never work.
It is time to change that broken record. Nor should they
attempt yet again to set us against the peoples of Syria,
Iraq and other nations of the Middle East. I thought that
British diplomacy had long ago abandoned such crude
tactics. They should think very hard about that.
I reiterate once again that we will never be able to
resolve the Syrian conflict or any other global problems,
including that of aggressive terrorism, without genuine
united effort. We are ready to work together on that.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
It was interesting to hear my Russian colleague
talk about the independent investigations and their
importance, because the entire Security Council
decided on what the Joint Investigative Mechanism
would be and what it would do, and it was actually
voted on unanimously. The Joint Investigative
Mechanism reported that the Syrian Government had
used chemical weapons against its own people three
different times. But somehow now we do not like what
the Joint Investigative Mechanism does.
Having said that, I will say that in the life of the
United Nations there are times when we are compelled
to do more than just talk; there are times when we
are compelled to take collective action. The Security
Council thinks of itself as a defender of peace, security
and human rights. We will not deserve that description
if we do not rise to the challenge and take action today.
Yesterday morning we awoke to pictures of children
foaming at the mouth and suffering convulsions being
carried in the arms of desperate parents. We saw rows
of lifeless bodies, some still in diapers, some with the
visible scars of a chemical-weapon attack. Look at those
pictures. We cannot close our eyes to those pictures. We
not cannot close our minds to the responsibility to act.
We do not yet know everything about yesterday’s
attack, but there are many things we do know. We

17-0907517/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

know that yesterday’s attack bears all the hallmarks of
the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons. We
know that Al-Assad has used these weapons against
the Syrian people before; that was confirmed by the
Council’s own independent team of investigators. We
know that yesterday’s attack was a new low, even for
the barbaric Al-Assad regime.
Evidence reported from the scene indicates that
Al-Assad is now using even more lethal chemical
agents than he did before. The gas that fell out of the
sky yesterday was even more deadly, leaving men,
women, the elderly and children gasping for their very
last breath. And as first responders, doctors and nurses
rushed to help the victims, a second round of bombs
rained down. They died in the same slow, horrendous
manner as the civilians they were trying to save.
We all also know this. Just a few weeks ago, the
Council attempted to hold Al-Assad accountable for
suffocating his own people to death with toxic chemicals.
Russia stood in the way of ensuring such accountability.
It made an unconscionable choice and chose to close its
eyes to the barbarity. It defied the conscience of the
world. Russia cannot escape responsibility for this. In
fact, if Russia had been fulfilling its responsibility,
there would not even be any chemical weapons left for
the Syrian regime to use.
There is one more thing we know. We know that if
nothing is done, these attacks will continue. Al-Assad
has no incentive to stop using chemical weapons as
long as Russia continues to protect his regime from
consequences. I implore my colleagues to take a hard
look at their words in the Council. We regularly repeat
tired talking points in support of a peace process that
is regularly undermined by the Al-Assad regime. Time
and time again, Russia uses the same false narrative to
deflect attention from its allies in Damascus. Time and
time again, without any factual basis, Russia attempts
to place blame on others.
There is an obvious truth here that must be spoken.
The truth is that Al-Assad, Russia and Iran have no
interest in peace. The illegitimate Syrian Government,
led by man with no conscience, has committed untold
atrocities against his people for more than six years.
Al-Assad has made it clear that he does not want to take
part in a meaningful political process.
Iran has reinforced Al-Assad’s military, and Russia
has shielded Al-Assad from United Nations sanctions.
If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to
18/20

05/04/2017

have, we need to see it use it. We need to see it put
an end to these horrific acts. How many more children
have to die before Russia cares?
The United States sees yesterday’s attack as a
disgrace at the highest level, an assurance that humanity
means nothing to the Syrian Government. The question
that the members of the Council must ask themselves is
this: if we are not able to enforce resolutions preventing
the use of chemical weapons, what does that say about
our chances of ending the broader conflict in Syria?
What does that say about our ability to bring relief to the
Syrian people? If we are not able to enforce resolutions
preventing the use of chemical weapons, what does that
say about our effectiveness in this institution?
If we are not prepared to act, then the Council will
keep meeting, month after month, to express outrage at
the continuing use of chemical weapons, and it will not
end. We will see more conflict in Syria; we will see more
pictures that we can never unsee.
I began my remarks by saying that, in the life of the
United Nations, there are times when we are compelled
to take collective action. I will now add this: when
the United Nations consistently fails in its duty to act
collectively, there are times in the life of States in which
we are compelled to take our own action. For the sake of
the victims, I hope that the rest of the Council is finally
willing to do the same. The world needs to acknowledge
the use of chemical weapons and the fact that it will not
be tolerated.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Several members of the Security Council
today made statements that have unequivocally further
demonstrated that my country, Syria, is the victim of two
simultaneous acts of aggression. The first involves the
attack by the permanent members of the Council, and
the second concerns the attack by proxy being carried
out by armed terrorist groups in Syria on the instructions
of those permanent member States of the Council. Both
seem to have an appetite for falsifying and fabricating
evidence. We have borne witness to such practices for
more than 10 years in the Council. It all began with the
lie concerning Iraq and its alleged weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). First and foremost, we categorically
17-09075

05/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

reject the false accusations and allegations of the Syrian
Arab Army’s use of toxic chemical substances against
Syrian civilians in Khan Shaykhun. The latter are used
as human shields by armed terrorist groups. Syria also
reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not possess
any type of chemical weapon. We have never used them,
and we never will.
My Government subscribes to the principled and
firm position that eschews the use of chemical weapons
and all weapons of mass destruction whatever the parties
concerned, wherever, whatever the circumstance and
whatever the justification. Such use constitutes a crime
against humanity — an unjustifiable crime that runs
contrary to all ethics. Those are the firm principles by
which we stand and based upon which we joined the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We have honoured all our obligations under
the Convention on Chemical Weapons because we
believe that the Middle East should be a WMD-free
zone. We have demonstrated our commitment and
transparency within the framework of the agreement
between my country, the OPCW and the United Nations
Office for Project Services.
Baseless politicized accusations have been levelled
against my country and its allies in our war against
terror since day one, as the media have disseminated
information provided by Council-designated terrorist
groups, especially in Khan Shaykhun. That confirms
that certain parties represented within the Council,
as well as Turkey and other countries, will continue
their politicized and dangerous practices aimed at
blackmailing my Government and its allies, tarnishing
our reputation in our efforts to combat terror,
obstructing talks in Astana and Geneva and ending all
prospects for a political settlement of the crisis, even if
it is at the expense of children and women who are the
innocent victims of the terrorism that today threatens
Syria and the rest of the world. Certain Governments
are now of one voice in unjustifiably and systematically
accusing Syria so as to as to send us back to square one
with regard to the issue of chemical weapons and serve
clear political objectives. That is an attempt to hamper
the attitude of openness towards Syria that had begun
to take shape only recently.
On 21 March, the head of my country’s delegation
in the Geneva talks expressed to Mr. De Mistura
Syria’s concern about reports of armed terrorists
groups’ possession of toxic chemicals in the rural areas
of Damascus, Idlib and Hama and their potential use

S/PV.7915

as weapons against civilians. He warned of fabricated
and falsified evidence and any other accusation levelled
against my country as was done in the past.
I would like to remind the Council that my
Government has sent more than 90 letters, of which the
most recent dates from several days ago, to the Council,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs and the OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism.
All those letters includede information documenting
armed terrorist groups’ — namely, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) — possession of toxic
chemicals that had been acquired via Turkish territory.
We condemn the latter and find it very strange that
such actions coincide with the holding of international
meetings on Syria, negotiations with Syrian
representatives in Astana and Geneva, and incidents in
which civilians have been targeted.
That is in line with the continued cheap political
exploitation by certain Member States represented
in the Council through using fabricated reports
disseminated by the media that have ties to certain
countries’ intelligence bodies. They do not rely on
reason or logic, or wait to establish the facts. They
do not even give a minute’s thought to who is the real
beneficiary of using toxic chemicals against innocent
civilians. The answer is clear: the main beneficiaries
are the same regimes that have targeted Syria for
more than six years. They are now attempting to come
to the rescue of the armed groups and the alliance of
armed groups, so that they can undermine the political
process in Geneva and Astana. That narrative in the
Council against my country is the only explanation that
accounts for the statements made by the President of
the Council for the month of March when he declared
that he would oppose any draft resolution introduced
by the Russian Federation or China with regard to the
issue of armed groups’ possession of chemical weapons
in Syria and Iraq.
It is quite paradoxical that France called for this
meeting. On instructions from former Minister for
Foreign Affairs Laurent Fabius, that country fabricated
the report of the use of toxic chemicals in eastern
Ghouta in August 2013, which was documented in
a book by two French journalists entitled Le Chemin
de Damas. France, along with its accomplices, is
politically, legally and ethically responsible for the
illegal international coalition’s role in the shelling of
civilians and the destruction of infrastructure. I would

17-0907519/20

S/PV.7915

The situation in the Middle East

like to remind the Council of the barbaric massacre
carried out by French warplanes against 200 civilians
in an Aleppo village in July 2016 and the recent airs
trikes by the international alliance in Raqqa and Deir
ez-Zor that claimed the lives of scores of civilians and
destroyed numerous bridges and infrastructure.
In conclusion, my Government categorically rejects
falsified and fabricated accusations. It nevertheless

20/20

05/04/2017

reaffirms that it will continue to honour its obligations
under the Convention on Chemical Weapons and in
its ceaseless war against terror. We will relentlessly
combat terror despite any cheap attempt to exploit the
innocent blood spilled in Syria.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-09075
