United Nations

S/PV.4406

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4406th meeting
Thursday, 8 November 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Miss Durrant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jamaica)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Amin
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Corr
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Tekaya
Mr. Krokhmal
Ms. Howe-Jones
Mr. Scott

Agenda
The situation in Burundi.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-62602 (E)

*0162602*

S/PV.4406

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite The Honourable
James Wapakhabulo, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda and Chairman
of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi; Mr.
Térence Sinunguruza, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burundi; Mr. Léonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
the representatives of Ethiopia and Kenya; Mr. Patrick
Mazimhaka, Special Envoy of the President of
Rwanda; The Honourable Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania; the
representative of Gabon; Mr. Hackman OwusuAgyemang, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana; the
representatives of Nigeria and South Africa; and The
Honourable Keli S. Walubita, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, to take seats at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Wapakhabulo
(Uganda),
Mr.
Sinunguruza
(Burundi), Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic
Republic of the Congo), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia),
Mr. Jalang’o (Kenya), Mr. Mazimhaka (Rwanda),
Mr. Kikwete (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
Dangue Réwaka (Gabon), Mr. Owusu-Agyemang
(Ghana), Mr. Apata (Nigeria), Mr. Kumalo (South
Africa) and Mr. Walubita (Zambia) took seats at
the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Berhanu Dinka, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region and Chairman of the Implementation
Monitoring Committee, to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and rule 39 of the

2

Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Amadou Kébé, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of African Unity, to take a seat at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Berhanu Dinka,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region and Chairman of the
Implementation Monitoring Committee.
Mr. Dinka: As the Security Council is aware, on
1 November 2001, the Transitional Government of
National Unity was inaugurated in Burundi. That
solemn occasion was witnessed by the Presidents of the
United Republic of Tanzania, Nigeria, Zambia, Malawi
and Rwanda, as well as by the facilitator of the
Burundi peace process, Nelson Mandela, the Deputy
Presidents of South Africa and Uganda and the
Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). I represented the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and the European Union was
represented by its Special Representative for the Great
Lakes region, Mr. Aldo Aiello. A number of other
African States were represented at the ministerial level.
During the week leading up to the main event,
important preparatory measures were undertaken. On
27 October, the National Assembly adopted a
transitional constitution, which will guide the work of
the Transitional Government during the coming three
years. The first group of the special protection unit has
arrived from South Africa. A number of political
leaders have returned from exile to participate in the
new Government.
The inauguration of the Transitional Government
constitutes a significant step in the implementation of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
momentum created by that event should be built upon
in order to consolidate and render irreversible the hardwon gains. The people of Burundi, as well as the
friends of Burundi and all those who supported or
participated in the peace process, are hopeful that the
installation of the Transitional Government will usher
in a new and historic era of reconciliation, tolerance
and peace. It is now up to the Burundian political
leaders, with support from the region and from the
international community at large, to ensure the success

S/PV.4406

of the transitional institutions. That is the only way that
durable peace and stability can be guaranteed. Failure
is not an option.
In his statement at the inauguration, President
Buyoya set out the priorities of the Transitional
Government. They are: ceasefire negotiations,
commune-level council elections, repatriation of
refugees, rebuilding of infrastructure, reform of the
security and judicial systems, et cetera. He appealed to
the countries of the subregion, the facilitation and the
international community to continue to assist, so that
those priorities can be achieved. He indicated that his
Government would approach the Security Council in
due course to create an international judicial
commission of inquiry to investigate possible cases of
genocide, war crimes and other crimes against
humanity, while his Government would set up a
national truth and reconciliation commission as
provided for by the Arusha Agreement.
The facilitator, Madiba Nelson Mandela, has
announced that his task as facilitator has now been
completed, and that he is now “passing the baton” to
the Implementation Monitoring Committee (IMC). He
will, however, continue to serve as moral guarantor of
the Arusha Agreement, and will be represented on the
IMC. We are all grateful to him.
What has been achieved so far would not have
been possible without the initiative of the leaders of the
subregion, the relentless efforts deployed in turn by
two of Africa’s most renowned statesmen — the late
Mwalimu Julius Nyerere and Madiba Nelson
Mandela — and
the
generous
support
and
encouragement of the international community. As a
result there is today strong reason for cautious
optimism.
But we must not lose sight of the fact that there
are unfinished and challenging tasks ahead. First
among them is the issue of the ceasefire, because so
long as violence persists the peace process will remain
fragile. The two armed groups — the Forces pour la
Défense de la Démocratie (FDD) and the Forces
Nationales de Libération (FNL) — have stepped up
pressure against Government forces in recent days. The
two armed groups must realize, and the international
community must send them a clear signal, that the time
has now come for them to put down their arms and
without delay join their compatriots in the search for
durable peace in Burundi; that it is time to put an end

to the killing, to the suffering of innocent people and to
the devastation of the country; that it is time to
reconcile and to move the country on towards muchneeded reconstruction and development.
There are other challenges as well. As members
may recall, the decision to deploy a regional force in
Burundi was necessitated by the fact that an allBurundian special protection unit could not be trained
before 1 November. Consequently, it was decided that,
pending the completion of training by Burundians
coming from the army and from the G-7 group of
parties, troops from South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria and
Senegal should provide protection to political leaders
returning from exile. The presence of the regional
force, therefore, is only a stopgap measure. The
training of an all-Burundian special protection force
which will take over from the regional force remains a
priority.
The regional force which is already in place in
Burundi has the capacity to carry out the task of
protecting returning politicians while at the same time
undertaking the task of training. There is, however, an
urgent need for the international community to provide
the force with the financial and material resources it
needs to accomplish its dual mandate. The deployment
of foreign forces, even when they are from the region,
requires a significant resource outlay. The only way to
bring down costs and at the same time ensure the longterm success of the transitional arrangement is
immediately to initiate the training of a national
protection unit with a view to replacing the regional
force with an all-Burundian special protection unit as
soon as possible.
The other major challenge that must be tackled on
a priority basis is the reconstruction and development
of the country. Now that the Transitional Government
is in place, the Burundian population, which has been
suffering for years, should be made to see in a concrete
way that what happened last week was more than a
power-sharing arrangement among the country’s
political elite. The only way to ensure that the
population of Burundi continues to support the peace
process long after the current euphoria of the moment
has worn off is if their lives are positively affected by
the changes. It is imperative that there be a peace
dividend. The international community can bring that
about by resuming in a significant way its socioeconomic development cooperation and enhancing its

3

S/PV.4406

humanitarian
quantitatively.

assistance,

qualitatively

and

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fall
(Senegal) took a seat at the Council table.

The international community has supported the
Burundi peace process since its inception. The
installation of the Transitional Government on 1
November has created an even more propitious
atmosphere for that support and cooperation not only to
continue but also to expand. The Security Council may
therefore wish to consider calling on the two armed
groups — the FDD and the FNL — to engage the new
Government in serious negotiations and to conclude a
ceasefire agreement without delay; expressing support
for the regional special protection unit already in
Bujumbura and calling on all Burundian parties to
cooperate with it to enable the contingent to carry out
its tasks freely, expeditiously and without any
hindrance; urging strongly all those in a position to do
so, particularly the donor community, to stay the course
and to provide adequate financial resources to enable
the regional special protection unit successfully to
carry out its double mandate of providing protection
and training a Burundian special protection unit;
calling on all the Burundian signatory parties to respect
the independence of and cooperate fully with the IMC
in the discharge of its mandate under the Arusha
Agreement; and calling on donor countries and
institutions to release all resources that have been
destined for Burundi’s socio-economic development
but that remain undisbursed so far, including those
resources pledged in Paris in December of last year.

The President: I call now on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda,
The Honourable James W. Wapakhabulo, Chairman of
the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi.

That would go a long way in assisting the
Transitional Government of Burundi to consolidate the
peace process by responding to the needs of its people.
Donors should also be urged to enhance their
humanitarian assistance to Burundi.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Senegal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

4

Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda): On behalf of the
regional ministerial representatives on the Regional
Peace Initiative on Burundi, I congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Let me also thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Ireland, for his leadership during his presidency of the
Council last month. I wish you, Madam President, and
all the other members of the Council, successful
deliberations on this and all the other issues on the
Council’s agenda.
The conflict in Burundi has been on the Council’s
agenda for some time now. I salute the Council for its
partnership with the Great Lakes Regional Initiative in
the search for a permanent solution to the conflict in
Burundi. Indeed, the forum accorded to us today is a
clear demonstration that the Security Council continues
to be an ally as it executes its Charter responsibility of
ensuring international peace and security.
Former President Nelson Mandela of South
Africa, the facilitator of the Burundi peace
negotiations, may be making a presentation to the
Council on the peace process at some later date.
However, allow me to update the Council on the recent
developments resulting from the Regional Initiative on
Burundi.
Nineteen Burundian political parties signed on 28
August 2000 the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which provides for a three-year
Transitional
Government.
The
Transitional
Government was successfully inaugurated on 1
November this year. President Buyoya will be the
leader for the first 18 months, deputized by Mr.
Domitien Ndayizeye of the G7-Hutu alliance parties,
and the reverse will apply for the next 18 months of the
transition, although personalities may change. There
will also be a pro rata power sharing arrangement in
the Cabinet, Parliament, army and other State
institutions.

S/PV.4406

The swearing in of the Transitional Government
in Burundi on 1 November this year will go down in
the annals of African history as the day of the first step
towards tangible peace in Burundi. For us in the region
it is significant that our initiative and efforts have been
able to bear fruit. I congratulate the people of Burundi
on their commitment and determination to find a
peaceful solution of the conflict in their country.
The region wishes to pay special tribute to the
late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, who set the course for
the negotiations, and to his successor, Nelson Mandela,
for his extraordinary resolve and leadership in
facilitating peace negotiations in Burundi. We
commend them for a job well done.
The contribution of the United Nations and the
international community to the peace process cannot be
overemphasized. We particularly acknowledge the
European Union for the financial support it has given
so far.
However, there should be no celebrations yet. The
daunting challenge is to consolidate what has been
achieved so far and to ensure further progress by
supporting the Transitional Government during this
delicate phase of implementing the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement.
As the Council will appreciate, one bit of
unfinished business relates to the participation of the
Burundian armed opposition, namely, the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD)/Front for la défense de la démocratie (FDD)
and the Pelipehutu Forces nationales pour la libération
(FNL). These armed groups did not participate in the
negotiations that led to the August 2000 Agreement
and have not agreed to a ceasefire. The position of the
region is that negotiations, facilitated by President
Omar Bongo of Gabon and Deputy President Jacob
Zuma of South Africa will continue between the
Transitional Government and the armed opposition.
We call upon the Security Council as a whole and
individual members of the Council to bring their
influence to bear on these groups so that they agree to
take part in ceasefire negotiations. We assure the
Security Council that we are prepared to work with it
to bring the armed groups into the peace process, and
we are also prepared to take the necessary measures
should the CNDD/FDD and the Pelipehutu FNL remain
intransigent in the peace process for Burundi.

The other major challenges during the
implementation phase relate to the formation of a new
national army, Parliament and other institutions of the
transition. The Transitional Government and the
Implementation Monitoring Committee for the Arusha
Peace Agreement will need continuous support and
encouragement from the Council.
The link between the conflicts in Burundi and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has hitherto
been a complicating factor in the search for peace in
the Great Lakes region. For the first time the prospects
of a ceasefire in Burundi bring us closer to an
opportunity to turn the negative forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into positive forces
in Burundi and reduce the magnitude of the task for the
third phase of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
imminent disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation, or resettlement exercise in that country.
According
to
the
Arusha
Peace
and
Reconciliation Agreement, it is envisaged that the
Security Council will mandate a peacekeeping force in
Burundi. However, the regional leaders agreed that,
while they were awaiting a resolution of the Council
mandating the deployment of a peacekeeping force, a
regional force should be formed and deployed for
various functions entailed in the Agreement. In this
respect, a special protection unit to protect political
leaders has already been deployed in Burundi. We take
this opportunity to thank the Republic of South Africa
for offering 700 of its troops, who are already on the
ground in Burundi. Troops from Nigeria, Ghana and
Senegal are expected to follow. All this demonstrates
the seriousness of the region about seeing to it that the
conflict is finally put to rest. Regional arrangements
will, however, need to be buttressed by the United
Nations, especially during this delicate phase.
In conclusion, we have a Transitional
Government in Bujumbura. But let us have no illusion
about the peace process in Burundi. The challenge of
sustaining the achievements of the Arusha process
remains. It is extremely important that a ceasefire be
urgently put in place in Burundi in order to allow for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force
under Chapter VII of the Charter and the involvement
of the armed groups — FDD and FNL — in the powersharing arrangement. We therefore call upon the
Security Council and its individual members to
positively and actively support the second track of the

5

S/PV.4406

Regional Initiative under President Bongo of Gabon
and Deputy President Jacob Zuma of South Africa for a
ceasefire agreement in Burundi.
Secondly, we ask the Security Council to send a
strong message that it is prepared to commit an
adequate United Nations peacekeeping force as soon as
a ceasefire is in place in Burundi.
Thirdly, we call on the United Nations and the
international community to mobilize the necessary
resources for humanitarian assistance and economic
recovery in support of the peace process in Burundi. It
is important that the Transitional Government should
receive adequate assistance to enable it to provide
social services and to handle the return and
resettlement of refugees and internally displaced
persons.
The President: I thank the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda
for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement as President of the
Security Council.
It is my honour to welcome to the Security
Council the members of the Regional Peace Initiative
on Burundi. I extend a cordial welcome on behalf of
the members of the Security Council to the ministers
and representatives of Uganda, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South
Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia,
as well as to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
Chairman
of
the
Implementation
Monitoring
Committee and to the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity.
Let me in the first instance express appreciation
to Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, whose
idea it was to convene such a dialogue, which was
unable to be held as planned due to the events of 11
September.
The meeting of the Regional Peace Initiative on
Burundi with the Security Council today is a
momentous one. On 1 November, the Transitional
Government of National Unity in Burundi was
inaugurated. This is indeed a defining period in the
history of Burundi and its long suffering people. To all
of us, the establishment of the Transitional Government
is a significant milestone, as it ushers in a new political

6

dispensation within the country. We would like to
congratulate
President
Buyoya,
Vice-President
Domitien Ndayizeye and all other members of the
Transitional Government and wish them every success
in charting a new path for the Burundian people.
We pay special tribute to the facilitator, Madiba
Nelson Mandela, the regional leaders and the
Burundian parties for their untiring efforts in making
the Transitional Government a reality. They may rest
assured that the Security Council remains committed to
the process of peace in Burundi and will remain
actively engaged to ensure that the momentum gained
so far will not be lost. Every effort must be made by
the international community and the Security Council
to ensure that what has been achieved so far is not
eroded.
The main purpose of today’s meeting is to have
an exchange of views on the implementation of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
Security Council on its part has endeavoured to and
will maintain a spirit of partnership with the Burundian
peace process. The dialogue between the Security
Council and the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi
attests to the will of the Council to remain actively
engaged in the process.
We recall that, at our last meeting during the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region,
there were fruitful deliberations which ensued and
which we hope to continue today. It is our hope that,
emanating from our discussions today, we can ascertain
how the United Nations can help in the post-transition
period as the new Burundian Government addresses the
many challenges which lie ahead. The most critical
priority is the cessation of hostilities and for the armed
groups to involve themselves in the political life of the
country through dialogue and negotiations. We reiterate
our call to the armed groups to cooperate with the
Transitional Government in order to ensure its
representation in the broad-based Government which is
envisaged.
The Security Council is also fully supportive of
the regional special protection force, which is aimed at
protecting the returning political exiles. On October 29,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1375 (2001)
expressing its support for this initiative. It is therefore
imperative that all parties cooperate to ensure that
normalcy is returned to the country. We commend the
Government of South Africa, which has taken the first

S/PV.4406

step in deploying troops, and look forward to the
subsequent deployment of troops from Senegal,
Nigeria and Ghana.
The success of the transitional institutions is the
only guarantee of durable peace and stability in
Burundi. Failure, on the other hand, could result in
chaos and continuing crisis in the Great Lakes region.
Consequently, the support of the international
community is critical.
Now that the Transitional Government is in place,
attention must be paid to the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation in that country. Every effort
must be made to revive the economic well-being of the
people of Burundi by improving their socio-economic

condition. The international community, including the
Security Council stands, ready to assist in this regard.
We look forward to a more detailed discussion in
the private meeting which follows.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
our prior consultations, I shall now adjourn this
meeting and invite the Council members and all
invitees to attend the private meeting within the next
five minutes.
May I invite the non-Council members to leave
this Chamber so that we can proceed with our private
meeting.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

7
