V.

34/112.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3313
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December
1976, 32/54 of 8 December 1977 and 33/108 of
18 December 1978,
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University59 and the note by the Secretary-General, by which he
and the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization transmitted
the report on fund-raising efforts for the University," 0
Noting decision 5.2.4 of 11 October 1979 adopted by
the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one hundred
and eighth session, in which the Board, inter alia, noted
with satisfaction the expansion of the activities of the
United Nations University in general and the development of interprogramme projects in particular, emphasized the need for strengthening further co-operation
with the agencies of the United Nations system,
particularly the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, with a view to avoiding duplication and assuring complementarity between the respective activities, encouraged the University to enhance
its distinctiveness through developing specific approaches
for the implementation of its programme, affirmed its
conviction that the growing activities of the University
required and deserved greater financial support than it
had so far received and reiterated its appeal to Member
States to contribute generously to the University Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively, to
make special contributions for research and training
activities,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the research and advanced training activities of the United Nations University have made substantial progress and achieved
increasing distinctiveness in the three priority areasworld hunger, human and social development and use
and management of natural resources-and also in the
development of interprogramme projects;
2. Welcomes the active participation of the United
Nations University in the United Nations Conference
on Science and Technology for Development and encourages the University to continue to intensify its
efforts to concern itself with major activities taking place
in the United Nations system and thereby further develop its co-operative and co-ordinated relationships
with relevant agencies and bodies of the system;
3. Recognizes that the major activities of the United
Nations University are especially concerned with the
problems and institutions in developing countries and
supports the University's endeavours to ensure broader
geographical coverage in its activities;
4. Notes that, while gratifying progress in fundraising has been made during the past year, the results
have not yet proved sufficient to support the programmes
of the United Nations University at an adequate level;
5. Notes with satisfaction that the report transmitted
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization° 0 on the question of
Ge Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/34/31 and Corr.1).
RO

A/34/654.

105

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ways and means of promoting the awareness and understanding of the programmes and activities of the United
Nations University, with a view to establishing a more
stable financial situation, provides promising suggestions for overcoming difficulties confronting the University in this area which require careful study;
6. Invites the Council of the United Nations University to consider the valuable suggestions and recommendations contained in the above-mentioned report
and to submit its findings and, if any, opinions to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session for its further
consideration;
7. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as
well as the Rector of the United Nations University, to
increase their efforts to obtain financial support for the
University from all possible sources;
8. Appeals to all Member States to take cognizance
of the achievements of the United Nations University in
the important areas of its three programmes and to make
substantial contributions to the University Endowment
Fund and/or to specific programmes of the University,
so that its work can continue to make steady progress.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/ 113.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 1976, '" and the relevant recommendations
for national action';" adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions
of the Palestinians in occupied territories", contained in
the recommendations for international co-operation
adopted by the Conference,° 3 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 and
2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Recalling its resolutions 31/110 of 16 December
1976, 32/171 of 19 December 1977 and 33/110 of
18 December 1978.
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Arab territories 64 and notes that, although it
contains many relevant facts, it has not been sufficiently
analytical;
2. Requests, therefore, the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the relevant United Nations organs
and specialized agencies, particularly the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, the Economic Commission for Western Asia
and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories, to prepare and submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a comprehensive and analytical report on the social and economic
impact of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Arab territories;
61
Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations

publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. I.
62 Ibid., chap. II.
63 Jbid., chap. III.
G4 A/34/536 and Corr. l.

106

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate
with the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges all States to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparation of the report.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/114.

zations outside the United Nations system and nongovernmental organizations, to collaborate wit~ the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements m the
preparation of those reports;
6. Requests the Executive Director of the Uni!ed
Nations Centre for Human Settlements, in consultation
with the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, to
explore the establishment of .efficient mechani~ms for
regular and systematic reportmg and consultations for
the above-mentioned reports.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

Global report on human settlements and periodic reports on international co-operation
and assistance on human settlements

The General Assembly,
Recq,lling its resolution 2598 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it directed the Secretary-General to
prepare a comprehensive housing survey every five years,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
976 G (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963, in which the Council
requested the Secretary~G~neral to prepar~, with the
co-operation of the specialized agencies, reg10nal commissions international financial institutions and governmental ;gencies, a biennial r_eport o~ the le~el a!"ld kind
of official assistance and mtemat10nal aid given to
developing countries in the field of housing, building
and planning,
1. Decides that the quinquennial housing survey
called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 2598
(XXIV) should become the "Global report on human
settlements" and should be issued every five years, according to the objectives, format and contents set out in
paragraphs 10 to 20 of the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) ;65
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements to undertake the
preparation of a biennial report in 1982, beginning with
an interim report in 1981, on the following subjects:
(a) Financial and other assistance provided to and
among developing countries for human settlements, and
the human settlements activities of the United Nations
system, according to the objectives, format and contents
set out in sections II and III of the report of the Executive Director, 65 as modified by the Commission on
Human Settlements; 66
(b) Activities and collaboration between the Centre
and non-governmental organizations;
(c) Human settlements activities of intergovernmental organizations outside the United Nations system
and co-operation between them and the Centre;
3. Urges all Member States to provide the necessary
information for the preparation of the above-mentioned
reports;
4. Calls upon the Secretariat, particularly the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs
and the Department of Technical Co-operation for Development, the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and all other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to provide the necessary information for the
preparation of the above-mentioned reports and to
collaborate with the Centre in their preparation;
5. Invites organizations working in the field of
human settlements, including intergovernmental organi65 HS/C/2/8.
66 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/34/8), paras. 89-95.

34/115.

United Nations Audio-Visual Information
Centre on Human Settlements (Vision
Habitat)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 115 of 16 December 1976,
by which it established the United Nations Audio-Visual
Information Centre on Human Settlements,
Recalling further its resolution 32/162 of 19 December 1977 by which it established the United Nations
Centre f~r Human Settlements (Habitat), entrusted it
with responsibility for promoting the fur!her and continued use of audio-visual material relatmg to human
settlements and decided that the Director of the United
Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on Human
Settlements (Vision Habitat) should report to the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements,
Recognizing that the effective dissemination of information, including the use of audio-visual techniques and
materials will help accelerate the process of development th;ough the effective and rapid dissemination
among policy-makers, experts and the public_ in all
countries of information on the need for new awareness
and on new approaches, methods a~d techniques
improving human settlements, especially their social,
economic and environmental aspects, as well as through
their increasing use for project-monitoring, education,
training and public information,
Noting that the agreement between the Government
of Canada and the United Nations on the operations of
the United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on
Human Settlements expires on 31 March 1980,
Convinced that the programme developed by the
United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on
Human Settlements should be continued,
Noting that the audio-visual activities have been fully
integrated into the work programme of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements,
1. Recommends that the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
should take the necessary steps to establish a unified
information service within the Centre to comprise a suitable range of information and communications skills
and capabilities, including an audio-visual component
at an appropriate level;
2. Decides that, upon the termination or expiration
of the agreement referred to above, the functions and
transferable assets of the United Nations Audio-Visual
Information Centre on Human Settlements (Vision
Habitat) should be transferred to the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the Government of Canada on the appropriate formal

!or
