A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/54
10 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 76
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/54/563)]
54/54.

General and complete disarmament
A

PRESERVATION OF AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE TREATY ON THE LIMITATION
OF ANTI-BALLISTIC MISSILE SYSTEMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/60 of 12 December 1995 and 52/30 of 9 December 1997 on compliance
with arms limitation and disarmament and non-proliferation agreements,
Recognizing the historical role of the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems of
26 May 1972 between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1 as a
cornerstone for maintaining global peace and security and strategic stability, and reaffirming its continued
validity and relevance, especially in the current international situation,
Stressing the paramount importance of full and strict compliance with the Treaty by the parties,
Recalling that the provisions of the Treaty are intended as a contribution to the creation of more
favourable conditions for further negotiations on limiting strategic arms,

1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 944, No. 13446.

00 23183

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 2

Mindful of the obligations of the parties to the Treaty under article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2
Concerned that the implementation of any measures undermining the purposes and provisions of the
Treaty affects not only the security interests of the parties, but also those of the whole international
community,
Recalling the widespread concern about the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery,
1. Calls for continued efforts to strengthen the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems and to preserve its integrity and validity so that it remains a cornerstone in maintaining global
strategic stability and world peace and in promoting further strategic nuclear arms reductions;
2. Calls also for renewed efforts by each of the States parties to preserve and strengthen the Treaty
through full and strict compliance;
3. Calls upon the parties to the Treaty, in accordance with their obligations under the Treaty, to
limit the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems and refrain from the deployment of anti-ballistic
missile systems for the defence of the territory of their country and not to provide a base for such a
defence, and not to transfer to other States or deploy outside their national territory anti-ballistic missile
systems or their components limited by the Treaty;
4. Considers that the implementation of any measure undermining the purposes and the provisions
of the Treaty also undermines global strategic stability and world peace and the promotion of further
strategic nuclear arms reductions;
5. Urges all Member States to support efforts aimed at stemming the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery;
6. Supports further efforts by the international community, in the light of emerging developments,
towards safeguarding the inviolability and integrity of the Treaty, which is in the strongest interest of the
international community;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session an item entitled
“Preservation of and compliance with the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

2

Ibid., vol. 729, No. 10485.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 3

B
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE USE,
STOCKPILING, PRODUCTION AND TRANSFER OF ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES
AND ON THEIR DESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/77 N of 4 December 1998,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel
mines, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week, mostly innocent and defenceless civilians and
especially children, obstruct economic development and reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and have other severe consequences for years after emplacement,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and coordinated manner to facing
the challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world, and to assure their
destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in ensuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation, including the social
and economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Welcoming the entry into force on 1 March 1999 of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,3
Recalling the First Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention, held at Maputo from 3 to 7 May
1999, and the reaffirmation made in the Maputo Declaration4 of a commitment to the total eradication
of anti-personnel mines,
Noting with satisfaction the addition of new States signatories to the Convention, the rapid ratification
by many signatories, and the accession to the Convention by other States, bringing the total number of
States that have signed to one hundred and thirty-three, and that eighty-nine States have ratified or acceded
to the Convention in the two years since it was opened for signature,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the Convention, and
determined to work strenuously towards the promotion of its universalization,
Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in conflicts around the world,
causing human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1. Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction3 to accede it without delay;

3

See CD/1478.

4

APLC/MSP.1/1999/1, part II.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 4

2.

Urges all States that have signed but not ratified the Convention to ratify it without delay;

3. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of, and compliance with, the
Convention;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information,
as required in article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the
Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary
basis, information to make global mine action efforts more effective;
6. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together to promote, support
and advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic reintegration of mine victims, mine awareness
programmes, and the removal of anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world and the assurance of
their destruction;
7. Invites and encourages all interested States, the United Nations, other relevant international
organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
relevant non-governmental organizations to participate in the programme of inter-sessional work
established at the First Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention,
to undertake the preparations necessary to convene the Second Meeting of the States Parties to the
Convention at Geneva, from 11 to 15 September 2000, and, on behalf of States parties and according to
article 11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, to invite States not parties to the Convention, as well as the
United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental organizations to attend the
Meeting as observers;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 5

C
PROHIBITION OF THE DUMPING OF RADIOACTIVE WASTES
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153(XLVIII) of 19885 and CM/Res.1225(L) of 1989,6 adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, concerning the dumping of nuclear and
industrial wastes in Africa,
Welcoming resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing a Code of Practice on the International
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session,7
Also welcoming resolution GC(XXXVIII)/RES/6, adopted on 23 September 1994 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-eighth regular session,8 inviting the
Board of Governors and the Director General of the Agency to commence preparations for a convention
on the safety of radioactive waste management, and noting the progress that has been made in that regard,
Taking note of the commitment by the participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security,
held in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, to ban the dumping at sea of radioactive wastes,9
Considering its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it requested the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,10 inter alia, to consider effective methods of control
against the use of radiological methods of warfare,
Recalling resolution CM/Res.1356(LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity,11 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous
Wastes into Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa,
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes that would constitute
radiological warfare and its implications for regional and international security, in particular for the
security of developing countries,

5

See A/43/398, annex I.

6

See A/44/603, annex I.

7

See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other Decisions of the General Conference,
Thirty-fourth Regular Session, 17-21 September 1990 (GC(XXXIV)/RESOLUTIONS (1990)).
8

Ibid., Thirty-eighth Regular Session, 19-23 September 1994 (GC(XXXVIII)/RES/DEC (1994)).

9

A/51/131, annex I, para. 20.

10

The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament became the Committee on Disarmament as from the
tenth special session of the General Assembly. The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the
Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
11

See A/46/390, annex I.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 6

Recalling all its resolutions on the matter since its forty-third session in 1988, including its resolution
51/45 J of 10 December 1996,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly,12 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
1. Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament relating to a future
convention on the prohibition of radiological weapons;13
2. Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that would constitute radiological
warfare and have grave implications for the national security of all States;
3. Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing any dumping of
nuclear or radioactive wastes that would infringe upon the sovereignty of States;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in the negotiations for a
convention on the prohibition of radiological weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a
convention;
5. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to intensify efforts towards an early conclusion
of such a convention and to include in its report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session the
progress recorded in the negotiations on this subject;
6. Takes note of resolution CM/Res.1356(LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity, on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous Wastes
into Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa;
7. Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the
protection of all States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
8. Welcomes the adoption at Vienna on 5 September 1997 of the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,14 as recommended by
the participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security held in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996,
and the signing of the Joint Convention by a number of States beginning on 29 September 1997, and
appeals to all States to sign and subsequently ratify, accept or approve the Convention, so that it may enter
into force as soon as possible;

12

Resolution S-10/2.

13

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/54/27), chap. III,
sect. E.

14

See GOV/INF/821-GC(41)/INF/12, appendix l.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 7

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the item entitled
“Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
D
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT WITH A VIEW TO THE ULTIMATE ELIMINATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 H of 15 December 1994, 50/70 C of 12 December 1995, 51/45 G of
10 December 1996, 52/38 K of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 U of 4 December 1998,
Bearing in mind the recent nuclear tests, as well as the regional situations, which pose a challenge
to international efforts to strengthen the global regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Noting the progress made in commencing the discussions between the United States of America and
the Russian Federation on START III,
Welcoming the efforts to increase transparency in nuclear disarmament activities as a contribution
towards building international confidence and security,
Also welcoming the international efforts to promote the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty15 at the conference convened at Vienna from 6 to 8 October 199916 in
accordance with article XIV of the Treaty,
Taking note of the report of the Tokyo Forum for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament,17
bearing in mind the views of Member States on the report,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international peace and security and the promotion of nuclear
disarmament mutually complement and strengthen each other,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons2 as
the cornerstone of the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation and as an essential foundation for
the pursuit of nuclear disarmament,

15

See resolution 50/245.

16

See A/54/514-S/1999/1102, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1999, document S/1999/1102.
17

A/54/205-S/1999/853, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1999, document S/1999/853.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 8

Also reaffirming the conviction that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute to
consolidating the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, ensuring international peace and
security,
1. Reaffirms the importance of achieving the universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,2 and calls upon States not parties to the Treaty to accede to it without delay and without
conditions;
2. Also reaffirms the importance for all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to fulfil their obligations under the Treaty;
3. Calls for the determined pursuit by the nuclear-weapon States of systematic and progressive
efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of eliminating those weapons, and by
all States of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control;
4. Stresses that, in order to make advancements towards the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear
weapons, it is important and necessary to pursue such actions as:
(a) The early signature and ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty15 by all
States, especially by those States whose ratification is required for its entry into force, with a view to its
early entry into force, as well as the cessation of nuclear tests pending its entry into force;
(b) Intensive negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on the early conclusion of a nondiscriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, on the basis of the report of the
Special Coordinator of 199518 and the mandate contained therein, and, pending its entry into force, a
moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons;
(c) Multilateral discussions on possible future steps on nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation;
(d) The early entry into force of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II)19 and the early commencement and conclusion of negotiations for START
III by the Russian Federation and the United States of America, and the continuation of the process
beyond START III;
(e) Further efforts by the five nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally and
through their negotiations;
5. Invites the nuclear-weapon States to keep the States Members of the United Nations duly
informed of the progress or efforts made towards nuclear disarmament;

18

CD/1299.

19

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 18: 1993 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.94.IX.1), appendix II.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 9

6. Welcomes the ongoing efforts in the dismantlement of nuclear weapons, notes the importance
of the safe and effective management of the resultant fissile material, and calls for continued efforts by
States that possess fissile material no longer required for defence purposes to make such material available
for safeguards by the International Atomic Energy Agency as soon as practicable;
7. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, confirming and strengthening if necessary their policies not to
export equipment, materials or technology that could contribute to the proliferation of those weapons;
8. Stresses the importance of the Model Protocol Additional to the Agreement(s) between State(s)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards20 for ensuring nuclear
non-proliferation, and encourages all States that have not done so to conclude an additional protocol with
the International Atomic Energy Agency as soon as possible;
9. Underlines the vital importance of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons for the preservation and strengthening of the regime anchored
in the Treaty, and calls upon all States parties to the Treaty to reaffirm the decisions and the resolution
adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty21 and to intensify their
efforts with a view to reaching an agreement on updated objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, based on a review of the achievements since 1995;
10. Encourages the constructive role played by civil society in promoting nuclear non-proliferation
and nuclear disarmament.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
E
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT,
PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND
ON THEIR DESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in particular resolution 53/77
R of 4 December 1998, adopted without a vote, in which it noted with appreciation the ongoing work to
achieve the objective and purpose of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,22

20

International Atomic Energy Agency, INFCIRC/540(Corrected).

21

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex.
22

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27),
appendix I.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 10

Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, acquisition, transfer,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of resolution 53/77 R, six additional States have
ratified the Convention, bringing the total number of States parties to the Convention to one hundred and
twenty-six,
1. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to achieve the objective and purpose of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, to ensure the full
implementation of its provisions, including those for international verification of compliance with it, and
to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation among States parties;
2. Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in verifying
compliance with the provisions of the Convention as well as in promoting the timely and efficient
accomplishment of all its objectives;
3. Also stresses the vital importance of full and effective implementation of and compliance with
all provisions of the Convention;
4. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time their obligations under the
Convention and to support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its
implementation activities;
5. Emphasizes the necessity of universal adherence to the Convention, and calls upon all States that
have not yet done so to become States parties to the Convention without delay;
6. Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical weapons, chemical
weapons production facilities and chemical weapons development facilities, including previously declared
possessor States, should be among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
7. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and efforts towards the prompt conclusion of a relationship agreement between the
United Nations and the Organization, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 11

F
MISSILES
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations in the field of arms regulation and disarmament and the
commitment of Member States to take concrete steps to strengthen that role,
Realizing the need to promote regional and international peace and security in a world free from the
scourge of war and the burden of armaments,
Convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach towards missiles, in a balanced and nondiscriminatory manner, as a contribution to international peace and security,
Bearing in mind that the security concerns of Member States at the international and regional levels
should be taken into consideration in addressing the issue of missiles,
Underlining the complexities involved in considering the issue of missiles in the conventional context,
Expressing its support for the international efforts against the development and proliferation of all
weapons of mass destruction,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of all Member States on the issue of missiles
in all its aspects, and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
2.

Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session an item entitled “Missiles”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
G
TOWARDS A NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE WORLD: THE NEED FOR A NEW AGENDA

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the existence of nuclear weapons is a threat to the survival of humanity,
Concerned at the prospect of the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons, believing that the
contention that nuclear weapons can be retained in perpetuity and never used is not supported by the
history of human experience, and convinced that the only complete defence is the elimination of nuclear
weapons and the assurance that they will never be produced again,
Concerned also at the continued retention of the nuclear-weapons option by those three States that
are nuclear-weapons-capable and that have not acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,2 and concerned at their failure to renounce that option,

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 12

Concerned further that negotiations on nuclear arms reductions are currently stalled,
Bearing in mind that the overwhelming majority of States have entered into legally binding
commitments not to receive, manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices, and recalling that these undertakings were made in the context of the corresponding legally
binding commitments by the nuclear-weapon States to the pursuit of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice in its 1996 advisory
opinion23 that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Stressing that the international community must not enter the new millennium with the prospect that
the possession of nuclear weapons will be considered legitimate for the indefinite future, and convinced
of the imperative to proceed with determination to prohibit and eradicate them for all time,
Recognizing that the total elimination of nuclear weapons will require measures to be taken firstly
by those nuclear-weapon States that have the largest arsenals, and stressing that these States must be
joined in a seamless process by those nuclear-weapon States with lesser arsenals in the near future,
Welcoming the achievements to date and the future promise of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks
process and the possibility it offers for development as a plurilateral mechanism including all the nuclearweapon States, for the practical dismantling and destruction of nuclear armaments undertaken in pursuit
of the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Welcoming also the Trilateral Initiative between the United States of America, the Russian Federation
and the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure the irreversible removal of fissile materials from
weapons programmes,
Believing that there are a number of practical steps that the nuclear-weapon States can and should take
immediately before the actual elimination of nuclear arsenals and the development of requisite verification
regimes take place, and in this connection noting certain recent unilateral and other steps,
Underlining that the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems1 remains a cornerstone
of strategic stability,
Stressing that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is binding on
the respective States parties at all times and in all circumstances,
Stressing also the importance of pursuing negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament in the Ad
Hoc Committee established under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and
nuclear disarmament”, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator18 and the mandate contained
therein, on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning
the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and considering
that such a treaty must further underpin the process towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons,

23

Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, 8 July 1996 (A/51/218, annex).
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 13

Emphasizing that, for the total elimination of nuclear weapons to be achieved, effective international
cooperation to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons is vital and must be enhanced through, inter
alia, the extension of international controls over all fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices,
Emphasizing also the importance of existing nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties and of the early
signature and ratification of the relevant protocols to those treaties,
Noting the joint ministerial declaration of 9 June 199824 and its call for a new international agenda
to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world, through the pursuit, in parallel, of a series of mutually reinforcing
measures at the bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral levels,
Acknowledging the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 53/77 Y of 4 December 1998,25
Taking note of the observations of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
contained in the report of the Secretary-General,26
1. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to make an unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the
speedy and total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and to engage without delay in an accelerated process
of negotiations, thus achieving nuclear disarmament, to which they are committed under article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;2
2. Calls upon the United States of America and the Russian Federation to bring the Treaty on
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START II)19 into force without further
delay and to commence negotiations on START III with a view to its early conclusion;
3. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the necessary steps towards the seamless
integration of all five nuclear-weapon States into the process leading to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons;
4. Calls for the examination of ways and means to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in security
policies so as to enhance strategic stability, facilitate the process of the elimination of these weapons and
contribute to international confidence and security;
5.

Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, in this context, to take early steps:

(a) To reduce tactical nuclear weapons with a view to their elimination as an integral part of nuclear
arms reductions;
(b) To examine the possibilities for and to proceed to the de-alerting and removal of nuclear
warheads from delivery vehicles;

24

A/53/138, annex.

25

A/54/372.

26

Ibid., sect. III.A.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 14

(c) To examine nuclear weapons policies and postures further;
(d) To demonstrate transparency with regard to their nuclear arsenals and fissile material inventories;
(e) To place all fissile material for nuclear weapons declared to be in excess of military requirements
under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards in the framework of the voluntary safeguards
agreements in place;
6. Calls upon those three States that are nuclear weapons capable and that have not yet acceded
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reverse clearly and urgently the pursuit of
all nuclear weapons development or deployment and to refrain from any action that could undermine
regional and international peace and security and the efforts of the international community towards
nuclear disarmament and the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
7. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to adhere unconditionally and without delay
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to take all the necessary measures which
flow from adherence to that instrument as non-nuclear-weapon States;
8. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to conclude full-scope safeguards agreements
with the International Atomic Energy Agency and to conclude additional protocols to their safeguards
agreements on the basis of the Model Protocol approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 15
May 1997;20
9. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify, unconditionally and without
delay, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty15 and, pending the entry into force of the Treaty, to
observe a moratorium on nuclear tests;
10. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to adhere to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material27 and to work towards its further strengthening;
11. Urges the development of the Trilateral Initiative between the United States of America, the
Russian Federation and the International Atomic Energy Agency, and urges that similar arrangements be
developed by the other nuclear-weapon States;
12. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to re-establish the Ad Hoc Committee under item
1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, on the basis of the
report of the Special Coordinator18 and the mandate contained therein, of a non-discriminatory, multilateral
and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, taking into consideration both nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament objectives, and to pursue and conclude these negotiations without delay, and, pending
the entry into force of the treaty, urges all States to observe a moratorium on the production of fissile
materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;

27

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1456, No. 24631.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 15

13. Also calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish an appropriate subsidiary body to
deal with nuclear disarmament and, to that end, to pursue as a matter of priority its intensive consultations
on appropriate methods and approaches with a view to reaching such a decision without delay;
14. Considers that an international conference on nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
which would effectively complement efforts being undertaken in other settings, could facilitate the
consolidation of a new agenda for a nuclear-weapon-free world;
15. Notes, in this context, that the Millennium Summit of the United Nations in 2000 will consider
peace, security and disarmament;
16. Stresses the importance of the full implementation of the decisions and the resolution adopted
at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,21 and, in this connection, underlines the significance of the forthcoming Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held in
April/May 2000;
17. Affirms that the development of verification arrangements will be necessary for the maintenance
of a world free from nuclear weapons, and requests the International Atomic Energy Agency, together with
any other relevant international organizations and bodies, to continue to explore the elements of such a
system;
18. Calls for the conclusion of an internationally legally binding instrument to effectively assure nonnuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
19. Stresses that the pursuit, extension and establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis
of arrangements freely arrived at, especially in regions of tension, such as the Middle East and South Asia,
represent a significant contribution to the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
20. Affirms that a nuclear-weapon-free world will ultimately require the underpinnings of a universal
and multilaterally negotiated legally binding instrument or a framework encompassing a mutually
reinforcing set of instruments;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to compile a report on the
implementation of the present resolution;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Towards
a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda”, and to review the implementation of the present
resolution.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 16

H
CONSOLIDATION OF PEACE THROUGH PRACTICAL DISARMAMENT MEASURES
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 N of 10 December 1996, 52/38 G of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 M
of 4 December 1998,
Convinced that a comprehensive and integrated approach towards certain practical disarmament
measures, such as, inter alia, arms control, particularly with regard to small arms and light weapons,
confidence-building measures, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, demining and
conversion, often is a prerequisite to maintaining and consolidating peace and security and thus provides
a basis for effective rehabilitation and social and economic development in areas that have suffered from
conflict,
Noting with satisfaction that the international community is more than ever aware of the importance
of such practical disarmament measures, especially with regard to the growing problems arising from the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation and proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which pose
a threat to peace and security and reduce the prospects for economic development in many regions,
particularly in post-conflict situations,
Stressing that further efforts are needed in order to develop and effectively implement programmes
of practical disarmament in affected areas,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General prepared with the assistance of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms,28 and in particular the recommendations contained therein, as an
important contribution to the consolidation of the peace process through practical disarmament measures,
1. Welcomes the adoption by consensus of the “Guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation
and disarmament, with particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly
resolution 51/45 N”29 at the 1999 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission;
2.

Stresses the particular relevance of the guidelines in the context of the present resolution;

3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the consolidation of peace through practical
disarmament measures, submitted pursuant to resolution 51/45 N,30 and once again encourages Member
States, as well as regional arrangements and agencies, to lend their support to the implementation of
recommendations contained therein;

28

A/54/258.

29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex III.

30

A/52/289.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 17

4. Welcomes the activities undertaken by the group of interested States that was formed in New
York in March 1998, and invites the group to continue to analyse lessons learned from previous
disarmament and peace-building projects, as well as to promote new practical disarmament measures to
consolidate peace, especially as undertaken or designed by affected States themselves;
5. Encourages Member States, including the group of interested States, to lend their support to the
Secretary-General in responding to requests by Member States to collect and destroy small arms and light
weapons in post-conflict situations;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
I
TRANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Member States have
undertaken to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world's human and economic resources,
Considering the urgent need to accelerate efforts towards general and complete disarmament with a
view to maintaining regional and international peace and security in a world free from the scourge of war
and the burden of all types of armaments,
Considering also that openness and transparency relating to all types of armaments would contribute
greatly to confidence-building and security among States,
Recognizing that an enhanced level of transparency relating to both conventional weapons and
weapons of mass destruction and transfers of equipment and technologies directly related to the
development and manufacture of such weapons, as well as to high technology with military applications,
would promote stability, strengthen regional and international peace and security, and accelerate efforts
towards general and complete disarmament,
Convinced that the principle of transparency should also apply to all weapons of mass destruction,
in particular nuclear weapons, and to transfers of equipment and technology directly related to the
development and manufacture of such weapons, as well as to high technology with military applications,

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 18

Recognizing that the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms,31 in its current form, constitutes
an important first step towards the promotion of transparency in military matters on a comprehensive,
universal and non-discriminatory basis,
Aware of the need to foster international efforts in this direction through, inter alia, the constant
review of the operation of the Register with a view to its development,
Stressing the need to achieve universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,2 and of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction22 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction,32 with a view to realizing the goal of the total elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction,
Recalling its earlier resolutions on transparency in armaments,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on transparency in armaments;33

2. Recalls the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, which convened in 1994 and 1997 to consider the continuing operation of the
Register31 and its development, and the views expressed and proposals presented therein;
3. Recognizes the importance of achieving greater progress in the development of the Register in
order that it may truly enhance confidence-building and security among States and accelerate efforts
towards attainment of general and complete disarmament;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts to be
convened in the year 2000 and taking into account the views submitted by Member States, to report to
the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on:
(a) The early expansion of the scope of the Register;
(b) The elaboration of practical means for the development of the Register in order to increase
transparency related to weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to transfers of
equipment and technology directly related to the development and manufacture of such weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Transparency in armaments”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

31

See resolution 46/36 L.

32

Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

33

A/54/226 and Add.1 and 2.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 19

J
ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR CURBING THE ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS
AND COLLECTING THEM

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/77 B of 4 December 1998,
Considering that the illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small arms constitute an
impediment to development, a threat to populations and to national and regional security and are a factor
contributing to the destabilization of States,
Gravely concerned at the extent of the illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small arms
in the States of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion,
Welcoming the conclusions of the United Nations advisory missions sent to the affected countries of
the subregion by the Secretary-General to study the best way of curbing the illicit circulation of small arms
and ensuring their collection,
Welcoming also the designation of the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat as the
coordination centre for all United Nations activities concerning small arms,
Thanking the Secretary-General for his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa,34 and bearing in mind the statement on small arms made
by the President of the Security Council on 24 September 1999,35
Welcoming the recommendations made at the meetings of the States of the subregion held at Banjul,
Algiers, Bamako, Yamoussoukro and Niamey to establish close regional cooperation with a view to
strengthening security,
Welcoming also the initiative taken by the Economic Community of West African States concerning
the declaration of a moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light
weapons in West Africa,
Recalling the Algiers Declaration36 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Algiers from 12 to 14 July
1999, and bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity on
the illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small arms,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Panel of Governmental Experts on Small Arms,

34

A/52/871-S/1998/318; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/318.
35

S/PRST/1999/28; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1999.

36

A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Decl.1 (XXXV).
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 20

Emphasizing the need to advance efforts towards wider cooperation and better coordination in the
struggle against the accumulation, proliferation and widespread use of small arms through the common
understanding reached at the meeting on small arms held at Oslo on 13 and 14 July 199837 and the
Brussels Call for Action adopted by the International Conference on Sustainable Disarmament for
Sustainable Development, held at Brussels on 12 and 13 October 1998,38
1. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, in the context of the implementation
of resolution 49/75 G of 15 December 1994 and of the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions, to curb the illicit circulation of small arms and to collect such arms in the affected States that
so request, with the support of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
and in close cooperation with the Organization of African Unity;
2. Also encourages the setting up in the countries of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion of national
commissions against the proliferation of small arms, and invites the international community to support
as far as possible the smooth functioning of the national commissions where they have been set up;
3. Welcomes the Declaration of a Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of
Small Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa, adopted by the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States at Abuja on 31 October 1998,39 and urges the international
community to give its support to the implementation of the moratorium;
4. Takes note of the conclusions of the meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Economic
Community of West African States, held at Bamako on 24 and 25 March 1999, on the modalities for the
implementation of the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development, and
welcomes the adoption at the meeting of a plan of action;
5. Expresses its full support for the appeal launched by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary session for a coordinated
African approach, under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity, to the problems posed by the
illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small arms, bearing in mind the experiences and
activities of the various regions in this regard;40
6. Also expresses its full support for the convening of an international conference on the illicit arms
trade in all its aspects no later than 2001, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/77 E of 4
December 1998;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to examine the question and to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;

37

See CD/1556.

38

A/53/681, annex.

39

A/53/763-S/1998/1194, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1998, document S/1998/1194.
40

A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.137 (XXXV), para. 10.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 21

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Assistance
to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
K
REDUCING NUCLEAR DANGER
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to mankind and to the
survival of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would seriously enhance the
danger of nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are
essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the part of the nuclearweapon States to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries unacceptable risks of
unintentional or accidental use of nuclear weapons, which would have catastrophic consequences for all
mankind,
Emphasizing the imperative need to adopt measures to avoid accidental, unauthorized or unexplained
incidents arising from computer anomaly or other technical malfunctions before the next millennium,
Conscious that limited steps relating to detargeting have been taken by the nuclear-weapon States and
that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing steps are necessary to contribute to the
improvement in the international climate for negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that reduction of tensions brought about by a change in nuclear doctrines would positively
impact on international peace and security and improve the conditions for the further reduction and the
elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly12 and by the international community,

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 22

Recalling that the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat
or Use of Nuclear Weapons41 states that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith
and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate and urgent steps to reduce
the risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to undertake measures towards the implementation of
paragraph 1 of the present resolution;
3. Calls upon Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate objective of eliminating
nuclear weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to seek inputs from the Advisory
Board on Disarmament Matters on information with regard to specific measures that would significantly
reduce the risk of nuclear war and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Reducing
nuclear danger”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
L
NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE AND ADJACENT AREAS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996, 52/38 N of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 Q
of 4 December 1998,
Welcoming the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999 substantive session of a text
entitled “Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among
the States of the region concerned”,42
Determined to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all
its aspects and to the process of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control, in particular in the field of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view

41

A/51/218, annex.

42

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 23

to strengthening international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly,12 the first special session devoted to disarmament, as well as of the
decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review
and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,43
Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco,44 Rarotonga,45 Bangkok46 and Pelindaba,47
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic Treaty,48 to, inter alia, the ultimate
objective of achieving a world entirely free of nuclear weapons, and underlining also the value of
enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty members by means of mechanisms such
as joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high
seas and the rights of passage through maritime space, including those of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,49
1. Welcomes the continued contribution that the Antarctic Treaty48 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,44
Rarotonga,45 Bangkok46 and Pelindaba47 are making towards freeing the southern hemisphere and adjacent
areas covered by those treaties from nuclear weapons;
2. Calls for the ratification of the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba by all
States of the region concerned, and calls upon all concerned States to continue to work together in order
to facilitate adherence to the protocols to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties by all relevant States that have
not yet done so;
3. Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, and calls upon all States to
consider all relevant proposals, including those reflected in General Assembly resolutions on the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and South Asia;

43

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex, decision 2.
44

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.

45

See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
46

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.

47

A/50/426, annex.

48

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.

49

Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, vol. XVII (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document A/CONF.62/122.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 24

4. Reiterates the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones in strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime and in extending the areas of the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and, with
particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calls upon all States to support
the process of nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate goal of eliminating all nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok
and Pelindaba, in order to pursue the common goals envisaged in those treaties and to promote the
nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas, to explore and implement
further ways and means of cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
6. Encourages the competent authorities of nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties to provide assistance
to the States parties and signatories to such treaties so as to facilitate the accomplishment of these goals;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Nuclearweapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
M
CONVENTIONAL ARMS CONTROL AT THE REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL LEVELS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of 15 December 1994, 50/70 L of
12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996, 52/38 Q of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 P of 4
December 1998,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting regional and international
peace and security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the regional and
subregional contexts since most threats to peace and security in the post-cold-war era arise mainly among
States located in the same region or subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at the lowest level of
armaments would contribute to peace and stability and should be a prime objective of conventional arms
control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at the lowest possible
level of armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different regions of the world,
in particular the commencement of consultations among a number of Latin American countries and the
proposals for conventional arms control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 25

of this subject, the relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe,50 which
is a cornerstone of European security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military capabilities have a special
responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in regions of tension should
be to prevent the possibility of military attack launched by surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in conventional arms control at the
regional and subregional levels;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, as a first step, to consider the formulation of
principles that can serve as a framework for regional agreements on conventional arms control, and looks
forward to a report of the Conference on this subject;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
N
REGIONAL DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December 1991, 47/52 J of 9
December 1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of 15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December
1995, 51/45 K of 10 December 1996, 52/38 P of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 O of 4 December 1998 on
regional disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the ideal of general and
complete disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire for genuine peace and security, the
elimination of the danger of war and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful
pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations in the conduct of their international relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete disarmament were adopted
at the tenth special session of the General Assembly,12

50

CD/1064.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 26

Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to disarmament within
the context of global security adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1993 substantive session,51
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament engendered in recent years
as a result of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and international peace and
security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament, taking into account the
specific characteristics of each region and in accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the
lowest level of armaments, would enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to
international peace and security by reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the Conference on
Disarmament and under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make progress on the entire range of
disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement each other and should
therefore be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and international peace and security;
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and security undertaken
by some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the
regional and subregional levels in order to ease regional tensions and to further disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation measures at the regional and subregional levels;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Regional
disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

51

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 27

O
TRANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 L of 9 December 1991, 47/52 L of 15 December 1992, 48/75 E of 16
December 1993, 49/75 C of 15 December 1994, 50/70 D of 12 December 1995, 51/45 H of 10 December
1996, 52/38 R of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 V of 4 December 1998 entitled “Transparency in
armaments”,
Continuing to take the view that an enhanced level of transparency in armaments contributes greatly
to confidence-building and security among States and that the establishment of the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms31 constitutes an important step forward in the promotion of transparency in military
matters,
Welcoming the consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the Register,33 which contains the
returns of Member States for 1998,
Welcoming also the response of Member States to the request contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of
resolution 46/36 L to provide data on their imports and exports of arms, as well as available background
information regarding their military holdings, procurement through national production and relevant
policies,
Stressing that the continuing operation of the Register and its further development should be reviewed
in order to secure a Register that is capable of attracting the widest possible participation,
1. Reaffirms its determination to ensure the effective operation of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms,31 as provided for in paragraphs 7 to 10 of resolution 46/36 L;
2. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving universal participation, to provide the
Secretary-General by 31 May annually with the requested data and information for the Register, including
nil reports if appropriate, on the basis of resolutions 46/36 L and 47/52 L and the recommendations
contained in paragraph 64 of the 1997 report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the
Register and its further development;52
3. Invites Member States in a position to do so, pending further development of the Register, to
provide additional information on procurement from national production and military holdings and to make
use of the “Remarks” column in the standardized reporting form to provide additional information such
as types and models;
4. Reaffirms its decision, with a view to further development of the Register, to keep the scope of
and participation in the Register under review and, to that end, recalls:

52

A/52/316 and Corr.2.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 28

(a) Its request to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with their views on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development and on transparency measures related to weapons
of mass destruction;
(b) Its request to the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts to
be convened in 2000, on the basis of equitable geographical representation, to prepare a report on the
continuing operation of the Register and its further development, taking into account the work of the
Conference on Disarmament, the views expressed by Member States and his reports on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development,53 with a view to a decision at its fifty-fifth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that sufficient resources are made available for the
Secretariat to operate and maintain the Register;
6. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to consider continuing its work undertaken in the field
of transparency in armaments;
7. Reiterates its call upon all Member States to cooperate at the regional and subregional levels,
taking fully into account the specific conditions prevailing in the region or subregion, with a view to
enhancing and coordinating international efforts aimed at increased openness and transparency in
armaments;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on
progress made in implementing the present resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Transparency in armaments”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
P
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step reduction of the nuclear
threat, and its resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995, 51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9
December 1997 and 53/77 X of 4 December 1998 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world,

53

A/49/316 and A/52/316 and Corr.2.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 29

Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction of 197232 and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction of 199322 have already established legal regimes on the complete
prohibition of biological and chemical weapons, respectively, and determined to achieve a nuclear weapons
convention on the prohibition of the development, testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and
threat of use of nuclear weapons and on their destruction, and to conclude such an international convention
at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world free of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,12 the first special session devoted to disarmament, calling for the urgent negotiation of
agreements for the cessation of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems,
and for a comprehensive and phased programme with agreed time-frames, wherever feasible, for the
progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their
ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Noting the reiteration by the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons2 of their conviction that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament and the reaffirmation by the States parties of the importance of the decision on strengthening
the review process for the Treaty,21 the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament,21 the decision on the extension of the Treaty21 and the resolution on the Middle East,21
adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly and by the international community,
Recognizing that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty15 and any proposed treaty on fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices must constitute disarmament measures,
and not only non-proliferation measures, and that these measures, together with an international legal
instrument on the joint undertaking of no first use of nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon States and
on adequate security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of such weapons for non-nuclear-weapon
States, respectively, and an international convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons, should be
integral measures in a programme leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive
Arms (START I),54 to which Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States
of America are States parties,
Welcoming also the conclusion of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II)19 by the Russian Federation and the United States of America and the
ratification of that Treaty by the United States of America, and looking forward to the full implementation

54

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 30

of the START I and START II Treaties by the States parties, and to further concrete steps for nuclear
disarmament by all the nuclear-weapon States,
Welcoming further the joint declaration of the Russian Federation and the United States of America
to commence START III negotiations, regardless of the status of completion of the START II process,
Noting with appreciation the unilateral measures by the nuclear-weapon States for nuclear arms
limitation, and encouraging them to undertake further such measures,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for
the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons, and the multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach
agreement on such an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,41 and welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all
Judges of the Court that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective
international control,
Mindful of paragraph 114 and other relevant recommendations in the Final Document of the Twelfth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa,
from 29 August to 3 September 1998,55 calling upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on
a priority basis, an ad hoc committee to commence negotiations in 1998 on a phased programme of
nuclear disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of
time,
Bearing in mind the proposal of twenty-eight delegations to the Conference on Disarmament that are
members of the Group of 21 for a programme of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons,56 and
expressing its conviction that this proposal will be an important input and will contribute to negotiations
on this question in the Conference,
Commending the initiative by twenty-six delegations to the Conference on Disarmament that are
members of the Group of 2157 proposing a comprehensive mandate for an ad hoc committee on nuclear
disarmament, which includes negotiations for, as a first step, a universal and legally binding multilateral
agreement committing all States to the objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, an agreement
on further steps required in a phased programme leading to the total elimination of these weapons and a
convention on the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear

55

A/53/667-S/1998/1071, annex I; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1998, document S/1998/1071.

56

A/C.1/51/12, annex.

57

CD/1463.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 31

explosive devices taking into account the report of the Special Coordinator on that item18 and the views
relating to the scope of the treaty,
Recalling paragraphs 38 to 50 of the final communiqué of the meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Heads of Delegation of the Non-Aligned Countries, held in New York on 23 September
1999,58
Taking note of the draft decision and mandate on the establishment of an ad hoc committee on
nuclear disarmament proposed by the Group of 21,59
1. Recognizes that, in view of recent political developments, the time is now opportune for all the
nuclear-weapon States to undertake effective disarmament measures with a view to the total elimination
of these weapons;
2. Also recognizes that there is a genuine need to de-emphasize the role of nuclear weapons and
to review and revise nuclear doctrines accordingly;
3. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative improvement, development,
production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems;
4. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert and deactivate
immediately their nuclear weapons;
5. Calls for the conclusion, as a first step, of a universal and legally binding multilateral agreement
committing States to the process of nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons;
6. Reiterates its calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the step-by-step reduction of
the nuclear threat and to carry out effective nuclear disarmament measures with a view to the total
elimination of these weapons;
7. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally binding instrument on the joint undertaking
not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, and calls upon all States to conclude an internationally and
legally binding instrument on security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon States;
8. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations among themselves at an
appropriate stage on further deep reductions of nuclear weapons as an effective measure of nuclear
disarmament;

58

A/54/469-S/1999/1063, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1999, document S/1999/1063.
59

CD/1571.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 32

9. Welcomes the establishment in the Conference on Disarmament in 1998 of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, urges a speedy conclusion of a universal and non-discriminatory convention thereon,
welcomes the establishment in 1998 of the Ad Hoc Committee on effective international arrangements to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and urges the
pursuit of efforts in this regard as a matter of priority;
10. Expresses its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was unable to establish an ad hoc
committee on nuclear disarmament at its 1999 session, as called for in General Assembly resolution
53/77 X;
11. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a priority basis, an ad
hoc committee on nuclear disarmament to commence negotiations early in 2000 on a phased programme
of nuclear disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons, through a set of legal
instruments, which may include a nuclear weapons convention;
12. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear disarmament at an early date
with the objective of arriving at an agreement or agreements on a phased programme of nuclear
disarmament and for the eventual total elimination of nuclear weapons, through a set of legal instruments,
which may include a nuclear weapons convention;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Nuclear
disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
Q
FOLLOW-UP TO THE ADVISORY OPINION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
ON THE LEGALITY OF THE THREAT OR USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of 10 December 1996, 52/38 O of
9 December 1997 and 53/77 W of 4 December 1998,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to all humanity and that
their use would have catastrophic consequences for all life on Earth, and recognizing that the only defence
against a nuclear catastrophe is the total elimination of nuclear weapons and the certainty that they will
never be produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 33

Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted at the
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,43 and in particular the objective of determined pursuit by the nuclear-weapon States of
systematic and progressive efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of
eliminating those weapons,
Recalling also the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its resolution 50/245
of 10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the increasing number of States that have signed
and ratified the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty48 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,44 Rarotonga,45
Bangkok46 and Pelindaba47 are gradually freeing the entire southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered
by those treaties from nuclear weapons,
Noting the efforts by the States possessing the largest inventories of nuclear weapons to reduce their
stockpiles of such weapons through bilateral agreements or arrangements and unilateral decisions, and
calling for the intensification of such efforts to accelerate the significant reduction of nuclear-weapon
arsenals,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum, and regretting the lack of progress in disarmament negotiations, particularly nuclear
disarmament, in the Conference on Disarmament during its 1999 session,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a phased
programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the development, production,
testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective
international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,41
Taking note of the relevant portions of the note by the Secretary-General 60 relating to the
implementation of resolution 53/77 W,

60

A/54/161 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 34

1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there
exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States immediately to fulfil that obligation by commencing multilateral
negotiations in 2000 leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the
development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and
providing for their elimination;
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and measures they have taken
on the implementation of the present resolution and nuclear disarmament, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to apprise the General Assembly of that information at its fifty-fifth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Follow-up
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of
Nuclear Weapons”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
R
ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/77 T of 4 December 1998,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the report on the results of his broad-based
consultations on the magnitude and scope of the phenomenon of illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, possible measures to combat illicit trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons, and the role of the United Nations in collecting, collating, sharing and disseminating information
on illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,61
Convinced of the importance of national, regional and international measures to combat illicit
trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons, including those suited to indigenous
regional approaches,
Welcoming in this regard the decision on the illicit proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small
arms and light weapons, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Algiers from 12 to 14 July 1999,62 the entry
into force of the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in

61

A/54/404 and Add.1.

62

A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.137 (XXXV).
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 35

Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials,63 the decision on prevention and
combating of illicit trafficking in small arms and related crimes, adopted by the Council of Ministers at
the nineteenth Summit of Heads of State or Government of the Southern African Development
Community, held at Maputo on 17 and 18 August 1999,64 the initiative taken by States members of the
Economic Community of West African States in declaring a moratorium on the importation, exportation
and manufacture of small arms and light weapons in West Africa,39 and the adoption by the European
Union of the Programme for Preventing and Combating Illicit Trafficking in Conventional Arms and the
other initiatives it has taken, such as the Joint Action on Small Arms65 that has been endorsed by several
Member States not members of the European Union,
Welcoming also the assistance provided by Member States in support of bilateral, regional and
multilateral initiatives aimed at addressing illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
Mindful of the impact of surplus small arms and light weapons on the illicit trade in these weapons,
and welcoming the practical measures taken by Member States to destroy surplus weapons and confiscated
or collected weapons, in accordance with the recommendations of the Secretary-General in his reports on
small arms,66
Recognizing the human suffering caused by illicit trafficking in small arms and that Governments bear
the responsibility to intensify their efforts by developing an understanding of the issues and practical ways
of addressing the problem,
Bearing in mind the interface between violence, criminality, drug trafficking and terrorism and illicit
trafficking in small arms,
Stressing the importance of ongoing efforts to elaborate an international convention against
transnational organized crime, including a protocol to combat the illicit manufacturing of and illicit
trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, within the framework of the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
Considering that the United Nations could, through a coordinated approach, collect, share and
disseminate information to Member States on useful and successful practices to prevent the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and mindful of the role of the mechanism for Coordinating
Action on Small Arms in this regard,
Emphasizing the importance of increased cooperation and coordination both among the relevant
United Nations intergovernmental bodies and within the Secretariat through the mechanism for
Coordinating Action on Small Arms in its ongoing initiatives related to illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons,

63

See A/53/78, annex.

64

A/54/488-S/1999/1082, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1999, document S/1999/1082.

65

A/54/374, annex.

66

A/52/298 and A/54/258.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 36

Noting with appreciation the workshops on illicit trafficking in small arms, held at Lomé and Lima,
organized, respectively by the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean,
Conscious of its decision to convene an international conference on the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects no later than 2001,67 and taking into consideration the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report on small arms, prepared with the assistance of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms,28 as well as the views of Member States on the objectives, scope,
agenda, dates and venue of such an international conference,68
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his broad-based consultations, within available
financial resources and with any other assistance provided by Member States in a position to do so, and
to submit to the international conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects information on the magnitude and scope of illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
measures to combat illicit trafficking in and circulation of small arms and light weapons, and the role of
the United Nations in collecting, collating, sharing and disseminating information on illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons;
2. Encourages Member States to promote regional and subregional initiatives and requests the
Secretary-General, within available financial resources, and States in a position to do so to assist States
in taking such initiatives to address the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons in affected
regions, and invites the Secretary-General to utilize these initiatives as part of his consultations;
3. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to take appropriate national measures to
destroy surplus small arms and light weapons, confiscated or collected small arms and light weapons, and
to provide, on a voluntary basis, information to the Secretary-General on the types and quantities
destroyed;
4. Invites Member States in a position to do so to continue to provide assistance, bilaterally,
regionally and through multilateral channels, such as the United Nations, in support of measures associated
with combating illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Illicit
traffic in small arms”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

67

See resolution 53/77 E.

68

A/54/260.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 37

S
OBSERVANCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL NORMS IN THE DRAFTING AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF AGREEMENTS ON DISARMAMENT
AND ARMS CONTROL

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of 10 December 1996, 52/38 E of
9 December 1997 and 53/77 J of 4 December 1998,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the preparation and
implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements adopted at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, as well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting
and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms limitation,
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,
1. Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into account the relevant
environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on disarmament and arms limitation and that
all States, through their actions, should fully contribute to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned
norms in the implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures so as to
contribute to ensuring the application of scientific and technological progress in the framework of
international security, disarmament and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to
its effective contribution to attaining sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the implementation of the measures
they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution;69
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures
they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing this information to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth
session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999

69

A/54/163 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 38

T
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly12 concerning the relationship between disarmament and development,
Recalling also the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final Document of the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,70
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of 12 December 1995,
51/45 D of 10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 K of 4 December 1998,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September 1998,55
Taking note of the deliberations during the symposium on disarmament and development held at
Headquarters on 20 July 1999,71
Stressing the growing importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament and development
in current international relations,
1. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General,72 and welcomes the establishment, as a first
step by the Secretary-General, of the Steering Group on Disarmament and Development with the purpose
of determining the short, medium and long-term priorities, according to the mandate set out in the action
programme adopted at the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and
Development;73
2. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made available by the
implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to economic and social development, with
a view to reducing the ever widening gap between developed and developing countries;
3. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General, by 15 April 2000, their
views and proposals for the implementation of the action programme adopted at the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, as well as any other views and
proposals with a view to achieving the goals of the action programme, within the framework of current
international relations;

70

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8.

71

See A/54/254, paras. 11 and 12.

72

A/54/254.

73

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8, para. 35.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 39

4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through appropriate organs and within
available resources, for the implementation of the action programme adopted at the International
Conference;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth
session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled
“Relationship between disarmament and development”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
U
CONVENING OF THE FOURTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 I of 15 December 1994, 50/70 F of 12 December 1995, 51/45 C of
10 December 1996, 52/38 F of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 AA of 4 December 1998,
Recalling also that, there being a consensus to do so in each case, three special sessions of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament were held in 1978, 1982 and 1988, respectively,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,12 adopted
by consensus at the first special session devoted to disarmament, which included the Declaration, the
Programme of Action and the Machinery for disarmament,
Bearing in mind also the objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Taking note of paragraph 145 of the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September
1998,55 which supported the convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, which would offer an opportunity to review, from a perspective more in tune with the
current international situation, the most critical aspects of the process of disarmament and to mobilize the
international community and public opinion in favour of the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction and of the control and reduction of conventional weapons,
Taking note also of the report of the 1999 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission74
and of the fact that no consensus was reached on the item entitled “Fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament”,

74

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 40

Desiring to build upon the substantive exchange of views on the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament during the 1999 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission,
Reiterating its conviction that a special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament can
set the future course of action in the field of disarmament, arms control and related international security
matters,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateralism in the process of disarmament, arms control and
related international security matters,
Noting that, with the recent accomplishments made by the international community in the field of
weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional arms, the following years would be opportune for
the international community to start the process of reviewing the state of affairs in the entire field of
disarmament and arms control in the post-cold-war era,
1. Decides, subject to the emergence of a consensus on its objectives and agenda, to convene the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of States Members of the United Nations on
the objectives, agenda and timing of the special session and to report to the General Assembly at its fiftyfifth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Convening
of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
V
SMALL ARMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 B of 12 December 1995, 52/38 J of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 E
of 4 December 1998,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament and the commitment of
Member States to take concrete steps in order to strengthen that role,
Recognizing the importance of the role of civil society, including non-governmental organizations,
in preventing and reducing the excessive and destabilizing accumulations of small arms and light weapons,
Convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach to promote, at the global and regional levels,
the control and reduction of small arms and light weapons in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner
as a contribution to international peace and security,

/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 41

Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1209 (1998) of 19 November 1998 on illicit arms flows
to and in Africa and the statement by the President of the Security Council of 24 September 1999 on
behalf of the Council in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled “Small arms”,35
Taking note of the complementarity of the efforts to prevent and reduce the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation and transfer of small arms and light weapons and the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, including a
protocol to combat illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and
ammunition,
Reaffirming the inherent right to individual or collective self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which implies that States also have the right to acquire arms with which
to defend themselves,
Reaffirming also the right of self-determination of all peoples, in particular peoples under colonial
or other forms of alien domination or foreign occupation, and the importance of the effective realization
of this right, as enunciated, inter alia, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,75
Concerned about the wide range of humanitarian and socio-economic consequences affecting, in
particular, large segments of civilian populations, exacerbated by the illicit trafficking in and the ready
availability of small arms and light weapons,
Also concerned about the close link between terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking, on the
one hand, and the uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons, on the other, and stressing the
importance of international efforts aimed at combating them,
Welcoming the adoption by the Disarmament Commission of the “Guidelines on conventional arms
control/limitation and disarmament, with particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of
General Assembly resolution 51/45 N”,29
Also welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on small arms, prepared with the assistance of
the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms pursuant to General Assembly resolution 52/38 J,28
Bearing in mind the note by the Secretary-General on the consultations held with a group of qualified
experts to examine the feasibility of carrying out a study on restricting the manufacture and trade of small
arms to manufacturers and dealers authorized by States76 and also his report on the broad-based
consultations held by him pursuant to General Assembly resolution 53/77 T of 4 December 1998,61
Noting the replies received to date to the request by the Secretary-General to Member States for their
views on his report on small arms to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session77 and on the steps

75

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

76

A/54/160.

77

A/52/298, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 42

that they have taken to implement its recommendations, in particular, the recommendation concerning the
convening of an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects,68
Taking due note of the report of the Group of Experts on the problem of ammunition and
explosives,78
Welcoming with appreciation the recommendations of the Secretary-General on the international
conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects to be convened no later
than 200168 and the relevant recommendations contained in his report on small arms,28
Welcoming the offer by the Government of Switzerland to host at Geneva, no later than 2001, an
international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects,
1. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects in June/July 2001;
2. Also decides that the scope of the Conference shall be the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects;
3. Further decides to establish a preparatory committee open to participation by all States, which
will hold no fewer than three sessions, the first session to be held in New York from 28 February to 3
March 2000;
4. Decides that the specialized agencies, other relevant intergovernmental organizations and relevant
entities, having received a standing invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and in the work
of the General Assembly, shall participate, as observers, in the Preparatory Committee, and requests the
Committee to take a decision on the modalities of attendance of non-governmental organizations at its
sessions;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to decide, at its first session, on the date and venue of the
Conference in 2001 as well as on the dates and venue of its subsequent sessions;
6.
2001;

Stresses the need to ensure the widest possible and effective participation in the Conference in

7. Requests the Preparatory Committee to make recommendations to the Conference on all relevant
matters, including the objective, a draft agenda, draft rules of procedure and draft final documents, which
will include a programme of action, and to decide on background documents to be made available in
advance;
8. Invites all Member States, in particular those that have not yet done so, in response to the note
verbale of the Secretary-General dated 20 January 1999, to communicate to the Secretary-General their
views on the agenda and other relevant questions relating to the Conference;

78

See A/54/155.
/...

A/RES/54/54
Page 43

9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the replies of Member States relevant to paragraph
8 above to the Preparatory Committee and to render to the Preparatory Committee and the Conference all
necessary assistance, including the provision of essential background information, relevant documents and
summary records;
10. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on small arms, prepared with the assistance of the
Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms pursuant to General Assembly resolution 52/38 J,28
bearing in mind the views of Member States on the report;
11. Calls upon all Member States to implement the relevant recommendations contained in section
IV of that report to the extent possible and where necessary in cooperation with appropriate international
and regional organizations and/or through international and regional cooperation;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the report as well as on
the implementation of the relevant recommendations contained therein;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to implement the relevant recommendations contained in
section IV of the report within available financial resources and with any other assistance provided by
States in a position to do so and in cooperation with appropriate international and regional organizations
where necessary;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to assist in preventing the illicit trafficking in
and illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons:
(a) To carry out a study, within available financial resources and with any other assistance provided
by Member States in a position to do so, and with the assistance of governmental experts appointed by
him, on the basis of equitable geographical representation, while seeking the views of Member States, on
the feasibility of restricting the manufacture and trade of such weapons to the manufacturers and dealers
authorized by States, which will cover the brokering activities, particularly illicit activities, relating to
small arms and light weapons, including transportation agents and financial transactions;
(b) To submit the study as one of the background documents for the Conference to be held in 2001;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Small
arms”.
80th plenary meeting
15 December 1999
