A/65/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

32

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 18 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 11
Sport for peace and development
(a) Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/270)
(b) Draft resolution (A/65/L.4)
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.4.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to express my delegation’s satisfaction with
the Secretary-General’s report entitled “Sport for
development and peace: strengthening the partnerships”
(A/65/270). We welcome the actions undertaken by the
United Nations system, especially the Office of Sport
for Development and Peace.
I would also like to stress how much my
delegation values the continuing and unstinting efforts
of Mr. Wilfried Lemke, the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace. We
particularly applaud his activities in Côte d’Ivoire in
cooperation with the United Nations Operation in that
country and the role he has played on behalf of the
United Nations vis-à-vis the authorities of that friendly
country, to which a Tunisian contingent has been sent
as part of the United Nations peacekeeping forces there.
We wish Mr. Lemke every success in his noble
endeavour and assure him of our full support for his
efforts to ensure the success of programmes aimed at
promoting sport around the world. Tunisia, which

supported the original idea of the International Year for
Sport and Physical Education in 2005 (resolution 58/5),
remains determined to continue its efforts to make
sport, through its ability to promote communication and
rapprochement, become a driving force for integrating
development, at both the national and the international
levels, and a means of promoting solidarity, tolerance
and cultural and human diversity.
Today, sport is part and parcel of the United
Nations and an effective tool that should be borne in
mind as we consider the issues confronting this
Organization, as was pointed out during the
consultations on the Outcome Document (resolution
65/1) of the Summit on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), whose paragraph 67 deals with the role
that sport can play in facilitating the implementation of
the MDGs.
We thank the Secretary-General for formulating
the Action Plan in his report to the sixty-first session
(A/61/373), and we welcome the fact that that has been
continued in the current report, with proposed
improvements and adjustments that will undoubtedly
only strengthen the effectiveness of sport as a tool for
promoting peace, development, education and health.
I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate South Africa on its successful holding of
the last World Cup, and Singapore on the success of the
first Youth Olympics. Those events clearly
demonstrated the unifying nature of sport and the
enthusiasm it can generate for friendship and solidarity
among athletes and fans, irrespective of their origins,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-58990 (E)

*1058990*

A/65/PV.32

loyalties and beliefs. Given sport’s noble nature and
the vital contribution it can make to the emergence of
younger generations in good physical and mental
health, Tunisia takes this opportunity to call on
Member States to take all necessary measures to
confront the dangers of doping, which threatens both
the health of athletes and the image and credibility of
sporting events. We welcome the growing number of
Member States that have signed the International
Convention against Doping in Sport, which is the first
global instrument in the fight against that scourge,
adopted at the thirty-third session of the UNESCO
General Conference in 2005.
Based on our interest in continuing that
momentum and making sport a means of promoting
universal principles in the service of future
generations, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.4 entitled “Sport as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace”, on
behalf of Monaco, Tunisia, the members of the Group
of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace and on
behalf of the other sponsors, whose names are listed in
the document.
I would like to point out that, since the
publication of that document, the following Member
States have joined the list of sponsors, namely,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland,
Lithuania, Montenegro, Poland, Portugal, San Marino,
Spain, Thailand and Zambia.
The draft resolution is the outcome of
consultations, both with a large number of Member
States and with United Nations bodies, to whom we
extend our sincere thanks and gratitude for the interest
accorded to the draft text.
The draft resolution encourages all stakeholders
to cooperate with the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral in order to make more widely known the
importance of including sport in development
programmes, while calling on Member States to
appoint focal points responsible for sport for
development and peace and to establish innovative
partnerships with the United Nations Office on Sport
for Development and Peace.
Here, I would like to express the hope that the
draft resolution will enjoy the support of all General
Assembly Member States, which would send a strong
message to all those acting in the name of the noble

2

practice of sport and provide great encouragement to
all athletes.
Mr. Quintães (Brazil): At the very outset, the
Brazilian delegation would like to welcome draft
resolution A/65/L.4, submitted by the delegations of
Monaco and Tunisia and entitled “Sports as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace”.
That effort seems to be in close harmony with the main
initiatives and programmes undertaken by Member
States and international organizations to promote that
objective in an integrated manner that is consistent
with accomplishments in other social fields.
The practice of sports is deeply rooted in
Brazilian society. Accordingly, sport in Brazil is
traditionally regarded as instrumental in forging good
standards of citizenship, thereby playing a very special
role in maintaining a healthy social fabric. Furthermore,
it cannot be overstressed that access to sport constitutes
a fundamental social right that is enshrined in our
Constitution.
In that regard, the Brazilian Government firmly
believes in the potential of sport as an important factor
in social inclusiveness and development, as well as a
tool for fostering role model values and a solid
upbringing for our children and youth.
Our Government’s policy is to consider sport as
part of a broader context that also encompasses the
fields of education and health. We believe that dealing
with sport in a socially integrated and holistic way
promotes peace and development.
That view stems from the collective awareness
that sport alone is not capable of solving complex
social and economic challenges and that it cannot, by
itself, ensure peace and mutual cooperation. Bearing
that in mind, the Brazilian Government has adopted a
series of public policies focused on promoting
citizenship, education and health through sports.
Thus, several governmental initiatives are been
launched in Brazil with a focus on multi-stakeholder
partnerships with representative institutions in our
society. For instance, we have started a programme that
employs over 12,000 inmates from State prisons to
manufacture sports equipment, whose output is then
used in other educational sports programmes carried
out by the Brazilian Government.
The so-called Second Half programme fosters, in
turn, sports activities for children and youngsters

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

enrolled in public schools, and it already has more than
1 million participants. Likewise, pursuant to the
recommendations of draft resolution A/65/L.4, Brazil
is currently developing international sports cooperation
projects in partnership with other developing countries,
namely, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Palestine, South
Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. We remain open
not only to increasing and expanding the scope of such
programmes with other countries, but also to launching
initiatives in cooperation with United Nations agencies
and programmes.
We feel that an exciting sports-centred decade has
just begun. Over the next six years, Brazil will host
three mega-sporting events: the fifth World Military
Games in 2011, the World Cup of the Fédération
internationale de football association in 2014, and the
Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016. During this
decade, sports will be at the top of the Brazilian social,
political and economic agenda.
The decision to host those mega-events is very
much consistent with the priority accorded to the
promotion of sustainable development and social
inclusiveness. Hence, the Brazilian Government remains
committed to fostering and adopting public policies,
convinced that hosting such events will help generate
more jobs and improve our national infrastructure and
increase opportunities for Brazilian youth.
Brazil also hopes that those mega-events will
provide an opportunity for us to share experience in
promoting sports as a means to achieve social
inclusiveness and to enhance the development of
partnerships with other nations, especially developing
countries.
For all those reasons, it is with the utmost
satisfaction that Brazil renews its support for and
sponsorship of the draft resolution on sport as a means
to promote education, health, development and peace.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, on
behalf of the Republic of Kazakhstan, I wish to express
our warm appreciation to Mr. Wilfried Lemke, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
on Sport for Development and Peace, and his Office
for their record of commendable activities over the past
year.
My Government would also like to convey special
gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
as the driving force behind that thrust, for his report
entitled “Sport for development and peace:

10-58990

strengthening the partnerships” (A/65/270). The report
presents a comprehensive overview of how sport has
been used to achieve development and peace at the
national, regional and international levels. It also
highlights the innovative use of sport in carrying
forward the messages of the United Nations at major
global games and sporting events, such as during the
2010 World Cup of the Fédération internationale de
football (FIFA) in South Africa.
That was the first FIFA championship hosted on
the African continent, indeed in a developing country,
which gave momentum to the political, socio-economic
and development goals of the region through the
convening power of sports. In addition, the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to all Member States to adhere to the
Olympic Truce, called for in the universally accepted
resolution 64/4, has been effective in upholding peace,
security and human dignity, as demonstrated during the
XXI Olympic Winter Games and the X Paralympic
Winter Games, in Vancouver, Canada, in February and
March 2010.
The Action Plan on Sport for Development and
Peace should be an integral component of all national
and international policies and agendas aimed at
promoting peace and development. My country would
therefore like to underscore the decisive role of the
Sport for Development and Peace International
Working Group in providing consultations and
technical assistance to Member States with a view to
making sport a vehicle for advancing national
measures for security, human rights, equality and the
betterment of humankind.
Kazakhstan took special steps to align itself with
the work of the United Nations by developing a largescale programme of physical training and sports
throughout the country, accessible to all age groups and
levels of the population, for the period from 2007 to
2011. The 2008 national legislation makes it obligatory
for the Government to create sports facilities and
infrastructure, provide training for national teams and
protect the legal right of each citizen to have equal
access to those possibilities.
Kazakhstan has already set in place a complex
goal-oriented agenda and programme for the athletes
competing in the XXX Olympic Summer Games in
London in 2012. Furthermore, Kazakhstan will host the
seventh Asian Winter Games, Asiada 2011, and
intensive projects are under way to ensure that the
stated objectives and targets are reached in time. The

3

A/65/PV.32

programme will comprise 11 different types of sport
and 69 sets of tournaments, with an estimated total of
10,000 accredited participants and approximately 1,400
athletes.
The Ministry of Tourism and Sport of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, together with leading world
architects, has developed a massive project for
constructing numerous sports stadiums, arenas and
related facilities of the highest standards in quality,
meeting international norms of durability and safety.
Currently, some 80 per cent of construction work is
under way, and it is anticipated that all facilities in
Astana will be completed by 25 October 2010 and in
Almaty by the end of this year. Asiada 2011 will be the
first Winter Games of the continent, and my
Government is striving to make them a memorable
event for the region. The preliminarily expenditure for
constructing facilities and for other preparations is to
the tune of $1 billion.
Kazakhstan strictly complies with the regulations
of the International Convention against Doping in
Sport and has ratified it. We would especially like to
stress the effectiveness of the use of sport as a tool for
development and peace, as demonstrated during the
XXI Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver. Kazakhstan
will continue to do its utmost towards that objective in
its national and regional activities and also at the
international level.
Inspired by the ideals of the Paralympic Games,
Kazakhstan, like all other countries, pays increasing
attention to sports for the personal development and
rehabilitation of persons with disabilities by creating
the optimal conditions for their participation. I am
pleased to report that Kazakhstan will soon ratify the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and its Optional Protocol.
Kazakhstan also undertakes measures for
enhancing excellence in professional and competitive
sports and, at the same time, developing leisure
sporting activities for the wider community with varied
interests. The focus is also on using sport for physical
fitness and inculcating the values of a healthy lifestyle
in the population. Legislation has been adopted to
support the effective creation and functioning of sportoriented non-governmental organizations to partner
with the Government to promote education, physical
and mental health and well-being.

4

A very significant advantage of sport is its
effectiveness in inspiring youth with the positive ideals
of national and community service, as well as promoting
the values of equity, tolerance, respect for rules, fair
play, hard work, healthy competition and good
character. Kazakhstan focuses on all those elements.
My delegation considers that the accelerated
dynamism and outreach seen in United Nations efforts
to integrate sport for development and peace, under the
leadership of the Secretary-General, are most
encouraging. We call for the further engagement of all
stakeholders — Governments, parliamentarians,
religious leaders, academia, the business sector, media,
civil society and especially youth groups — to work
for this new vision of sport. Through collective
multilateral action, sport can become one of the most
powerful means to accelerate the achievement of
broader development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
Sport is only a means, yet an important one, to
strengthen our collective multilateral enterprise in
combating climate change, drugs and illicit trafficking
in all forms and in promoting environmental
conservation and sustainable development, human
rights and gender equality, as well as interreligious and
cultural dialogue, to mention a few issues, through
raising awareness and mobilizing action on them. We
need to fully seize this moment to utilize sport in
propelling action to support the United Nations, as well
as the individual efforts of Member States for their
agendas of development and peace.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The San Francisco Charter established the bases of a
new system of international relations, conceived to
avoid repetition of the terrible consequences of the two
world wars of the twentieth century. The main purpose,
inscribed in the first paragraph of the Charter, is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
and to create a democratic and equitable international
order based on respect for the dignity of all human
beings equally.
More than six decades after the creation of the
United Nations, the vast majority of the world suffers
the consequences of the profoundly unjust and
unsustainable prevailing international order. We are
witness to a sad economic and social panorama,
characterized by the combination of the economic and
financial crisis, the food and energy crisis and the

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

negative impact of climate change, which endangers
the human species.
Now more than ever, it is our duty to promote a
peaceful international environment through solidarity,
cooperation and multilateralism.
Sport constitutes a significant aspect of
development at both the national and the international
levels. Sport strengthens solidarity and friendship
among peoples as essential elements in the promotion
of peace, development and cooperation among nations.
Since the triumph of the Cuban revolution in
1959, sport in our country has not been an exclusive
pastime and became a right for all our people. As a
result, Cuba has achieved significant success in
regional and international sport competitions.
We have fostered a pedagogical system that
includes physical education as an integral part of all
stages of training the human being. We work to provide
sport training for our children from an early age.
Likewise, we oppose athletic activities that have
money as their only reward. We also denounce the
talent drain in sports, which developing countries are
victims of. Cuba has suffered the consequences of that
unacceptable practice.
For years, the Cuban sports movement, led by the
Cuban Olympic Committee and the National Institute
of Sports, Physical Education and Recreation has
selflessly collaborated with various countries of the
South. We have sent to those countries technicians,
professors and trainers who in a modest way teach new
sport training methods, thus contributing to improving
sport results and people’s participation in sport and
developing bonds of brotherhood and friendship
between peoples.
Likewise, we have strengthened international
cooperation by making our Institute of Sports Medicine
and the National Anti-doping Laboratory available to
other countries, with the purpose of contributing to the
fight against the scourge of drugs, which corrupt
athletes and impede fair play.
Cuba created the International School of Physical
Education and Sport, dedicated to training
professionals from different countries. Its central value
is solidarity.
the

The countries of the South also deserve to host
Olympic Games, which are a forum for

10-58990

brotherhood and solidarity. We are certain that the 2016
Olympics Games, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, will be a
success for the entire South.
If we promote international solidarity, including
through the Olympic ideal, all the weapons created by
this civilization will be rendered superfluous. Let us
promote and sow peace and development through
sport, and we will have a better world.
Mr. Al Mujaini (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session. I wish you every success in your
task so that we can achieve our desired objectives.
Sport is an important means of strengthening
social cohesion and the ideals of peace, brotherhood,
solidarity, justice, non-violence and tolerance. It
facilitates the resolution of problems in post-crisis
times. Sport can bring people together and serve as a
forum for development, peace and social development.
It is a recognized means of reinforcing peace among
various countries of the world. It transcends borders
and social classes and plays an important role in social
integration and economic development in the political,
cultural and geographical fields.
The participation of youth in sport is an important
element for achieving peace and development in the
world, not to mention its cultural and intellectual
contributions to different issues. It enables youth to be
uniquely creative in developing their societies. In
reinforcing their participation in sport, we must
provide youth with the necessary means and resources
for them to achieve their vision of and aspiration to a
prosperous homeland. That will help them build their
capacities and skills so that they can be positively
integrated in society and achieve the objectives of
peace and development and so that they can spread
their vision and goals and increase their chances of
creative participation within their societies.
The General Assembly recognized this in
resolutions 58/5, 59/10, 60/9 and in its proclamation of
2005 as the International Year for Sport and Physical
Education, seeking to encourage sport as a means of
promoting education, health, development and peace.
Also, the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1) states that sport could foster peace and
development.

5

A/65/PV.32

Sport and physical education could provide
opportunities for solidarity and cooperation that would
foster tolerance and a culture of peace and equality
between genders. It can also provide for the needs of
disabled persons, achieve dialogue among civilizations
and foster social cohesion and concord.
We need a joint framework within the United
Nations to encourage sport as a means to reinforce
education, health, development and peace. To that end,
we must expand the mandate of the Group of Friends
of Sport for Development and Peace, along with the
United Nations communications team that would set up
a practical approach, strategies, policies and common
programmes in order to increase awareness and
cooperative action within the United Nations and with
other partners from outside the Organization.
The Government of my country, under the
sponsorship of His Excellency the Sultan of Oman,
provides to Omani citizens every means to carry out
their tasks in the fields of development and
construction, especially since the young of both sexes
constitute the largest percentage of our society. In
2004, we established a Ministry of Sport that prepares
youth in the field of sport and that cooperates with
other Government bodies all over the country. That
enhances sport in Oman in many domains and helps to
utilize the potential of youth and their ability to
communicate with other friendly and sisterly countries.
Our Ministry, on the basis of that noble objective,
has a vision of establishing a sports system that ensures
optimal use of technical, human and material resources
in the field of competitive sport and sport for all. The
Ministry also seeks to send a clear message that
promises quality sport services and facilities through
the activation of good organization, communications,
marketing and building partnerships with relevant
institutions.
As we seek to strengthen relations among various
peoples, we will host the second Asian Beach Games in
December 2010, to be sponsored by the Olympic
Council of Asia. It will include many sports activities
with a large number of Asian countries participating in
various capacities.
Ms. Fulp (United States of America): The United
States delegation supports promoting the use of sport
to advance peace and development. My delegation
appreciates the potential of sport to contribute to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

6

Sport can foster development and peace, can build an
atmosphere of tolerance and understanding, and can
serve as a tool for education. Well-planned sporting
programmes promote cooperation, solidarity, social
inclusion and health among all of those engaged.
Throughout history, sport has played an important
role in the social, political and economic lives of
peoples and nations. Sport is a shared cultural passion
that can bring people together across the divisions of
region, race and religion. One of the great things about
sport is that it reminds us of what humanity has in
common — not what may drive us apart.
The United States recognizes the value of sport in
that way and has created an office called SportsUnited
within the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
at the Department of State. It is dedicated to
international sport programming designed to work at
the grass-roots level. Its purpose it to aid foreign youth
in discovering how success in athletics can be
translated into the development of life skills and
achievement in the classroom. SportsUnited provides
for those foreign youth exposure to American life and
culture. It also provides American youth interacting
with them the opportunity to learn about foreign
cultures and the challenges young people from other
countries face today.
Since 2002, the Department of State has funded
and organized sports programmes in more than 80
countries in all regions of the world. Those
programmes have featured activities in over 25 sports
and areas such as disability sports, managing sports
centres, recreational sports and sports management.
There is so much from the world of sport to
imagine and apply towards improving lives together,
whether across oceans, in neighbourhoods or in our
homes. For example, First Lady Michelle Obama’s
2010 “Let’s Move!” campaign against childhood
obesity is making a difference in the lives of children
and families. It encourages physical activity for youth
and is improving the quality and availability of
physical education in schools. And we are proud to
note that “Let’s Move!” is based on an exemplary
partnership between the public and private sectors that
has underpinned its success.
Sport has the power to bring us together and to
build stronger societies. One critically important way
that our societies improve is through integrating

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

women and girls fully, and sport has proven powerful
in that regard.
Recently, United States Permanent Representative
Susan Rice was recognized by the Women’s National
Basketball Association with its Inspiration Award.
Having been an athlete in school, she reminded the
gathering:
“Our daughters need role models who can inspire
them to play to the best of their abilities, to
compete to the limits of their strength, and to win
on their own terms … Sports are just simply too
important to be left to the boys. Determination and
drive are habits girls must learn early on and use
for a lifetime. These really are the fundamentals —
the skills I learned on the court — long before I
ever sat at a negotiating table.”
Another way that sport contributes to our society
is its inherent lesson of fair play. Perhaps the biggest
threat to that is the destructive practice of doping in
sport. I am pleased to note, in that regard, that in 2008
the United States signed an instrument of ratification
on the International Convention against Doping in
Sport, at the United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and
Cultural
Organization.
That
ratification
demonstrated our long-standing commitment to the
development of international anti-doping controls and
our promise to apply and facilitate the application of
appropriate anti-doping controls during competitions
held in the United States.
My delegation appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General for today’s debate (A/65/270). It
updates us usefully on progress regarding Sport for
Development and Peace, International Working Group
policy recommendations, the functioning of the United
Nations Office of Sport for Development and Peace,
the Trust Fund for Sport for Development and Peace,
and the Action Plan on Sport for Development and
Peace.
Furthermore, the United States is pleased to offer
its support for today’s draft resolution, “Sport as a
means to promote education, health, development and
peace” (A/65/L.4), under agenda item 11, “Sport for
peace and development”.
Athletes and sports accomplishments provide
powerful examples in our globalized society, more and
more each year. As I have described, the United States
has made sport part of its global outreach efforts for

10-58990

decades. That commitment goes all the way to the top.
President Obama recently invited young Russian
basketball players — boys and girls — to Washington
on a SportsUnited sports visitor programme. He invited
them to the White House court to shoot some hoops.
Diplomacy these days is not only about official
meetings in conference rooms; it is also about peopleto-people exchanges that break down barriers and build
up goodwill. Sport truly is a global language. Sport
teaches us how to work in teams. Sport builds
discipline and confidence. Sport builds upon those
values and strengths in our work here at the United
Nations, promoting development and peace through
sport.
Mr. Stone (Australia): Australia is committed to
the principles of sport for development and peace and
to the role the United Nations can play in furthering
those principles. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on this subject (A/65/270)
introduced this morning and would like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Wilfried Lemke, the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on Sport for
Development and Peace, for his efforts.
We would also like to thank Tunisia for
introducing the draft resolution (A/65/L.4) before us
today, which Australia is pleased to co-sponsor.
We would also like to thank Switzerland, and in
particular Ambassador Peter Maurer, for his role as
co-Chair, along with Ambassador Jomaa of Tunisia, of
the Group of Friends over recent years. We appreciate
Monaco’s taking over the co-chairship of the Group,
and we look forward to working with Ambassadors
Picco and Jomaa in strengthening the role of the Group
of Friends.
A growing body of research on sport for
development provides strong empirical evidence of the
direct role that sport, as a component of international
development programmes, plays in advancing human
rights, social inclusion and community development.
Apart from physical fitness and good health, sport
contributes to the development of other life skills and
attributes,
including
confidence,
self-esteem,
teamwork,
cooperation,
social
interaction,
interpersonal communication, tolerance and conflict
resolution. Sport offers a way to improve the lives of
the most marginalized and excluded children, including
girls, children from poor communities, out-of-school
and working children, and people with disabilities.

7

A/65/PV.32

Because of that, sport remains an integral tool in
Australia’s development cooperation. Through the
Australian Sports Outreach Programme, funding is
provided in more than 40 countries for sport-fordevelopment programmes at the grass-roots level.
Working with local authorities and communities,
Australia is able to increase the capacity of partners to
plan and conduct quality sport-based activities that
contribute to addressing locally identified development
priorities.
In 2010, the sport-for-development programmes
include a children’s surf life-saving education
programme in Viet Nam, increasing services to persons
with disabilities through sport in Malawi, the
establishment of youth clubs in post-conflict areas of
Sri Lanka, a programme called Kicking AIDS Out,
which uses sports analogies and games to convey
messages about HIV and AIDS to young people in the
Caribbean, and training players, coaches and
administrators to promote active sports participation
among rural women in Fiji.
Sport in Australia has always helped build the
social cohesion that binds families, communities,
regions and the nation. It brings together people of
different nationalities, religions and cultures and helps
promote tolerance and understanding.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Let me begin by
applauding the numerous delegations, especially that of
Tunisia, that have helped to promote human
development through sport and physical education
through the draft resolution that is before us today
(A/65/L.4).
Sport and physical education play an increasingly
important global role in maintaining national unity,
health and cultural ties. The culture of sport provides a
platform for social cohesion, value formation and
national spirit. It is and can continue to be a way for
different cultures to reach common ground, initiate
dialogue and form relations.
Sport does bring individuals and communities
together. For instance, the Olympic Games, apart from
showing off athletes’ incredible sporting abilities,
contribute to intercultural ties that help bridge ethnic
and cultural divides. Next year, the South Pacific
Games will again bring together the best athletes of the
Pacific islands to compete and participate in the spirit
of sport. I should add here that we have just witnessed
the successful completion of the Commonwealth

8

Games in New Delhi. I congratulate the Indian
Government and people on their successful hosting of
the event. Such sporting events provide a stage to
promote healthy forms of nationalism, spirit and unity
among countries.
Promoting physical education is also a way to
develop children’s talents and abilities to their fullest
potential. There is a growing risk of deteriorating
physical education programmes within countries. The
shrinking number of sports and physical education
programmes limits the positive impact that sports can
have in helping promote and maintain a child’s
physical and mental well-being. Physical education
programmes within schools are essential and have been
proven to enhance academic performance. Sports are a
way for young individuals to express themselves as
well as to play within a social community. They are a
way to reduce disease, boost physical health and
improve local development, and they provide
alternatives to harmful activities such as drug abuse
and crime.
We are aware of the dangers faced by sportsmen
and sportswomen, as well as by young athletes, who
encounter violence, doping, overtraining, deprivation
and other threats. Such dangers emphasize the need to
develop more effective ways to fight against doping
and destructive processes around our young athletes.
We emphasize the importance of the international
community in helping to provide funding and resources
for sports-related institutions so that such institutions
can effectively construct programmes that can help
make sport and physical education available to
everyone. The international community must work
together to provide a code of good practices to
continue to combat the dangers that young athletes
face.
By collectively working towards contributing to
sport and physical education, we can help strengthen
sport infrastructures for use as a tool for health,
education, and social and cultural development. We
call upon the international community and
international sports bodies to continue helping
developing countries, least-developed countries and
small island developing States to help build sport and
physical education. And here let me acknowledge the
presence of the representative of the International
Olympic Committee, who will speak later on.

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

Sport and physical education may be used as a
tool to further international goals, including those in
the Millennium Development Goals. Sports provide a
place to develop positive skills such as discipline,
confidence and respect. We encourage the United
Nations and participating members to find new and
innovative ways to utilize sports as a source of
communication and a way to reduce tension and
generate dialogue.
Lastly, we call on the international community,
including international sports bodies and sport-related
organizations, to partner in the development of sport
and physical education programmes. In doing so, we
are also investing in global conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding efforts.
Mr. Shanta Kumar (India): I am honoured and
privileged to participate in today’s discussion on sport
for peace and development. Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report on the item under
discussion (A/65/270).
Sports are an important element in building
character. They not only teach people to be just and fair
but also prepare them to face challenges in life. Sports,
being a most popular activity for young people, can
help to motivate young people, build teams, develop
leadership, promote volunteering and educate, apart
from ensuring fitness and healthy lifestyles. Sports also
seek to promote peace, equality and friendship among
all people and nations. In fact, it is hard to imagine a
more powerful medium than sports to inspire and bring
people together for a common purpose.
Swami Vivekananda, the great philosopher from
India, when approached by a young man to explain the
meaning of the Bhagavad Gita, is reported to have
looked at his physique and advised him first to go play
football. “Develop your body and mind”, Swamiji told
the young man, “and then you will be better fit to study
and understand the Gita”. Swamiji was clear that a
healthy body and mind were fundamental in our quest
for peace and sports — indeed, they play a critical role
towards that end.
The intrinsic linkage between sports and games
and the human quest for excellence has been
recognized ever since the inception of human
civilization. It reached its epitome in Ancient Greek
civilization, which is the progenitor of the Olympic
movement.

10-58990

Sports, games and physical fitness are an integral
component of India’s civilization, as is evident from
the existence of the highly evolved system of yoga and
a vast range of highly developed indigenous games,
including martial arts. After our independence, the
integration of physical education and sports with
formal education was emphasized in the first five-year
plan itself. Our efforts have been focused on broadbasing sports and providing modern sports
infrastructure. India adopted a national sports policy in
2001. We have also encouraged the autonomous
functioning of national sports federations and are
happy to see that today all sections of our society,
including the media and the business sector, are
actively involving themselves in the promotion of
sports.
Sports are also a most effective tool to help
achieve development objectives in the areas of health,
education, HIV/AIDS prevention, child protection and
child development. They help generate public
awareness and inspire broad, inclusive and committed
action in support of developmental agendas.
I am glad that there is substantial recognition of
the value of sports to help achieve the Millennium
Development Goals and that many sports personalities
have associated themselves with the United Nations in
creating public awareness and understanding of various
issues that affect youth and society. In this context, I am
of course particularly happy that our national cricket
icon Sachin Tendulkar is a Goodwill Ambassador for the
United Nations Environment Programme and that our
former tennis champion Vijay Amritraj was a United
Nations Messenger of Peace in 2001.
India was honoured to host the nineteenth
Commonwealth Games, which have just concluded in
Delhi.
That
two-week
mega-event
featured
participation from 71 countries across the world and
more than 7,000 athletes, who celebrated sporting
excellence, human skill and endurance and, above all,
courage and character. The Games upheld and renewed
the essential spirit of peace, equality and friendship
among all peoples and nations.
We congratulate all those countries that
successfully organized large global and regional
sporting events during the past year. We also wish
every success to all those countries that will be holding
sporting events in the coming months and years. We
believe that such mega-sporting events will strengthen

9

A/65/PV.32

the cherished ties of goodwill and understanding that
unite us as one family.
Ms. Rulumeni (South Africa): It is an honour
and privilege for South Africa to participate in this
important debate on sport for development and peace.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
this issue, entitled, “Sport for development and peace:
strengthening the partnerships” (A/65/270).
This debate comes just a few months after the
2010 Fédération internationale de football (FIFA)
World Cup, hosted for the first time on African soil.
Indeed, South Africa prides itself on having hosted a
spectacular and memorable event that has once again
underscored Africa’s renewal. South Africa was the
stage and Africa the theatre that further enhanced
Africa’s social cohesion. It was in reality an African
World Cup.
In South Africa sport played a crucial role in the
demise of the apartheid system and in the creation of a
new society after 1994. The realization that sport can
be used as a tool for reconstruction and development
has been occasioned by the spirit of unity that
prevailed during such events as the Rugby World Cup,
the African Nations Cup, the Cricket World Cup and
the recent Soccer World Cup. At the centre of South
Africa’s sport-related reconstruction and development
initiatives was our icon, Nelson Mandela. At this point
I am reminded of his words when he said,
“Sport has the power to change the world, the
power to inspire, the power to unite people in a
way that little else can. Sport can create hope
where there was once despair. It is an instrument
for
peace,
even
more
powerful
than
Governments. It breaks down racial barriers. It
laughs in the face of all kinds of discrimination.”
As declared in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1), sport has the potential to foster peace
and development as well as to contribute to an
atmosphere of tolerance and understanding. Sport has
been recognized as a powerful tool in contributing to
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). In that regard, we advocate for the
prioritization of Africa in our collective efforts,
through sport and other means, to achieve these
important and achievable goals.
Before the beginning of the World Cup, President
Jacob Zuma initiated the One Goal campaign, with a

10

view to advancing efforts towards achieving education
for all, which is the objective of MDG 2. South Africa
views sport as an important part of education. This
campaign is part of a range of national initiatives
towards achieving universal access to education.
In resolution 64/5, the Assembly also
acknowledged the role played by sport in Africa as an
instrument for the promotion of unity, solidarity, peace
and reconciliation, and the preventive campaigns
against scourges, such as HIV/AIDS, affecting the
youth of the continent. Although sport alone cannot
prevent conflict or build peace, it can contribute to
broad and more comprehensive efforts in a number of
important ways.
The fact that the African Union declared
“Building and sustaining peace through sport” as the
theme for this year’s Africa Day was a clear
recognition of the role of sport in peace and
development. Coincidentally, the African Union
declared 2010 the Year of Peace and Security. As an
active stakeholder in Africa’s peacebuilding efforts,
South Africa encourages the use of sport as a tool to
foster peace and advance Africa’s development agenda.
Since 1994, our Government has put in place a
range of progressive legislation in its pursuit to
empower women in sports. This has been inspired by
the recognition that women have a crucial role to play
in all aspects of societal development, including sport.
Women’s empowerment has been manifested by the
increasing number of women in leadership positions in
the area of sport. Equally important, we have enacted
legislation to protect and advance the empowerment of
persons with disabilities, thus providing them with the
opportunity to participate in sport with minimal or no
hindrance. As a direct response to the SecretaryGeneral’s call in his report contained in document
A/61/373, South Africa is currently involved in
legislative processes to infuse sport for development
and peace into national legislation.
South Africa welcomes the Action Plan on Sport
for Development and Peace. Accordingly, we will
implement the Action Plan at the national level in line
with internationally agreed standards. Our Government
reiterates the need for collaboration between national
and international partners, including the United
Nations system, to advance the objectives of the Action
Plan. We also welcome the efforts of the Sport for

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

Development and Peace International Working Group
and look forward to its report.
We also look forward to the summary report of
the activities around the 2010 FIFA World Cup, to be
published later this year. South Africa supports the
Assembly’s adoption of the draft resolution entitled
“Sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace” (A/65/L.4), which we will
also sponsor.
In conclusion, South Africa once again expresses
its gratitude to the United Nations, especially the
Office of Sport for Development and Peace, and to the
wider international community for all of the support
offered to us during the World Cup. We hope that this
event has permanently changed the perceptions of
many about Africa.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): In the
days just after the convening of the summit Meeting on
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), my
delegation can only welcome the recognition that
Member States have given to sports. Indeed, by
adopting the final document (resolution 65/1), the
heads of State and Government confirmed the
relevance of sport as a tool for education, development
and peace that can promote cooperation, solidarity,
tolerance, understanding, social inclusion and health at
the local, national and international levels.
The Secretary-General’s participation in the
round table on the issue of sport as a development tool,
organized on the sidelines of the summit, is further
evidence of his commitment to promote the power of
sport. This power has already helped to raise public
awareness of the problems affecting us all today, such
as HIV/AIDS, sexually communicable diseases, hunger
and all forms of violence. The power of sport also lies
in its ability to bring communities closer and to
promote essential values such as fair play and
discipline.
These important results are the culmination, on
the one hand, of the resolute action of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on Sport for Development
and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, whom we thank for
having implemented the Action Plan set out by the
General Assembly. On the other hand, these
achievements bear witness to our ability to work
together and to the importance of partnerships.

10-58990

While the contribution of sport and physical
activities to improving health no longer requires proof,
its impact on overall development should be taken into
account to inform our policies. In the context of this
session of the General Assembly marked by the
strengthening of the role of women within the United
Nations, sport has more than ever demonstrated its
ability to promote women’s empowerment. We very
much hope that the victory of Ms. Dalma Rushdi
Malhas, the first Saudi athlete to take part in the Youth
Olympic Games and whose performance we commend,
will inspire other young women to fully achieve their
potential.
The Sport for Development and Peace
International Working Group, now acting under the
stewardship of the Special Adviser, has developed the
issue of sport within the context of child and
adolescent development and has pinpointed strategic
priority areas, which we fully endorse.
The initiative “Make Your Peace”, born at the
XXI Winter Olympic Games and the X Paralympic
Winter Games in Canada, brought the values of
Olympism into homes, schools and workplaces. The
implementation of the Olympic Truce at the
Paralympic Games strengthened recognition of the
rights of people with disabilities and contributed to
social cohesion.
As my colleague from South Africa has just
pointed out, the historic holding of the Fédération
internationale de football World Cup in South Africa in
June served to pay tribute to Africa. It was also an
opportunity to highlight very important issues such as
the fight against human trafficking, racism, HIV/AIDS
and the promotion of sustainable development. In
particular, it was an opportunity to highlight the United
Nations
Development
Programme
Sustainable
Transport Project, which is being carried out in
conjunction with the Global Environment Facility, as
well as the South African campaign to green the World
Cup.
But as the Special Adviser has often stressed, the
organization of global events is not the only framework
in which we should illustrate the effectiveness and
benefits of sporting activities. He has also been able to
convince us of the impact of simple initiatives at the
grass-roots level, such as the construction of a football
field for use by the local population of Bouaké, Côte
d’Ivoire, which made it possible for them to better

11

A/65/PV.32

accept the United Nations operation in that country and
involved them and the young people in the peaceful
development of their country.
During the Fédération internationale de football
association World Cup, his Most Serene Highness
Prince Albert II and Mr. Lemke, along with the Prime
Minister of Western Cape Province Helen Zille and
Capetown Mayor Dan Plato, inaugurated a community
centre devoted to development in the municipality of
Gugulethu that seeks to integrate disadvantaged youth
in sporting activities. That programme should serve as
a model to be developed in other African cities.
This unifying characteristic of sport was also
seen in Haiti — where sport has afforded thousands of
young people an opportunity to escape the difficulties
of their daily lives — and is part of overall
reconstruction efforts on behalf of populations stricken
by natural disasters.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/65/270) is
eloquent with respect to the many initiatives
undertaken by Member States and about the different
fields in which sport may have an impact, from road
safety to birth registration. For example, a joint
programme between UNICEF, the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the International
Olympic Committee uses football to raise awareness of
the importance of obtaining civil registration. The
report also highlights the crucial importance of
partnerships involving Governments, the world of
sports, civil society and regional cooperation efforts.
The contribution of the International Olympic
Committee to our work during this session was a clear
example of this.
The Principality of Monaco will join this
common endeavour, in keeping with the unreserved
commitment of His Most Serene Highness Prince
Albert II, the recipient last month of the United
Nations prize for the Millennium Development Goals
in recognition of his involvement in support of peace
through sport.
My delegation, as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of Sport for Development and Peace, will also
continue to make its contribution to the Office of the
Special Adviser. As we succeed our Swiss colleagues
in the co-chairmanship, we wish to pay tribute to them
and express our warmest thanks for having established
this informal mechanism within the United Nations. As
His Most Serene Highness Prince Albert II has said,

12

contributing to peace is the finest battle that sport can
wage, and it is this battle that we must win together.
Mr. Solón (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin my statement by
highlighting the fact that for President Evo Morales
Ayma sport is an essential tool for attaining the
Millennium Development Goals, given the vital impact
it has on integration, peace and health, and above all
because it helps reduce crime and contributes to the
fight against drugs.
President Morales, who usually travels with a
football team accompanying him, makes sport an
element of integration among peoples, making it
possible to overcome hurdles that have often kept
neighbouring countries and peoples apart, as has been
the case in our region over the past few decades.
For us in Bolivia, sport has become the main
mechanism for developing football fields and sport
centres in a way that has never been done in previous
years. Bolivia has invested in sport because we feel
that it is the main mechanism for ensuring that young
people can be kept away from crime and drug
addiction, as well as for bolstering ties of solidarity
and fraternity. Above all, sport makes it possible to
overcome elements of discrimination and racism that
still exist in society, specifically through the promotion
of sport among young people without regard to gender,
thus ensuring that there is greater equality between
men and women.
For the Plurinational State of Bolivia, sport is a
fundamental element for peace that makes it possible
to overcome a great deal of the tension and a great
number of the conflicts that often still exist. It is
precisely through sport that it is possible to bring about
a spirit of brotherhood and fraternity, hence the
importance that we as a State and Government ascribe
to sport as a driving force for peace and development;
for we believe that a society that manages to achieve
the goal of overcoming poverty and marginalization is
also a society that above all promotes sport among its
citizens. Promoting sport means promoting health. For
us, therefore, it is also a paramount founding element
of development.
We in Bolivia have decisively embarked upon an
effort to show the world that sport at high altitudes in
no way damages human health. Over the past few
years, regrettably, we have been hostage to a number of
actions vetoing high altitude sport, specifically in

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

qualifying games for the World Cup in stadiums like
the one in the city of La Paz, which is at an altitude of
more than 3,600 metres. We have spoken out against
such discrimination. Our President himself, together
with his football team, has demonstrated that playing
above 6,000 metres, on a football field on Cerro
Sajama, in no way affects health, and that everyone
without exception must play without regard to the
altitude, climate or weather conditions in which they
may find themselves. Sport should not be subject to
any sort of discrimination.
For the Plurinational State of Bolivia, it is vital to
promote actions in support of sport in the fight against
drug addiction and drug trafficking. We are firmly
convinced that one of the great mechanisms for
ensuring that young people are kept away from drug
trafficking and drug addiction is through sport. We are
therefore great advocates of a major campaign to
promote sport in the fight against drugs.
Finally, Bolivia is resolutely committed to peace.
We believe that nothing brings people together more
closely than the practice of sport.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
observer of Palestine.
Mr. Hijazi (Palestine): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(A/65/270) and by commending the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace. We also commend the crucial role of the Sport
for Development and Peace International Working
Group in shaping the global framework of sport for
peace and development, as well as other actors for their
support for this important work.
Palestine believes that the culture of sport is an
immensely positive force for development in any
society. In this regard, we fully agree with the
UNESCO characterization of sport as a fundamental
right for all. Harnessing the positive energy inherent in
sport — which demands respect for the human values
of respect for all, including opponents, non-violence,
teamwork, acceptance of rules and fairness — makes
sport a valuable asset in any nation’s efforts towards
development and peaceful coexistence. Sport is also an
engine of economic development and social integration,
which are crucial elements of overall development.
Palestine has invested much sincere effort and
energy in this area, for we believe in the positive

10-58990

potential and the as yet unexplored development
dimension of sport. In the past three years, Palestinian
sport has truly evolved from being a luxury of the few
to an aspiration within reach of all athletes regardless
of social, economic or other difficulties.
In that short span of time, Palestine has
developed and promoted women’s teams in various
sports. Those teams have competed locally and
internationally, shifting women’s participation in
Palestine from a few exceptions to an acceptable and
encouraged area of professional and personal
opportunity. In that regard, we would like to express
our sincere appreciation for the support extended to
Palestinian sport by the international community,
particularly by the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and
Brazil. Their assistance has been invaluable and a
subject of deep appreciation from Palestinian athletes
and the Palestinian people.
Also during this period, Palestine has proudly
hosted friendly and competitive games with
international teams. These games were in fact a
testament to the progress that Palestinian sport has
achieved and a reflection of our belief in sport as an
agent of development and peaceful relations between
nations.
While we are profoundly proud of our
achievements in sport thus far, we are also deeply
troubled by the continuous difficulties our athletes and
efforts confront from the occupying Power. Our
progress has been slowed, and on some occasions
disrupted, by the various obstacles and restrictions
needlessly and punitively employed against our
athletes and our efforts at development.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to obstruct
the right of Palestinian athletes to move and travel
without hindrance. On several occasions, that punitive
policy has prevented some of our star athletes from
participating in important team practice games in the
occupied Palestinian territory and abroad. The latest
such occasion was 5 October, when the captain of the
Palestinian team, who lives in Gaza, was banned from
going to the West Bank for a match. Those restrictions
also affect our ability to bring in sports equipment or to
develop proper infrastructure, including stadiums.
Such punitive restrictions have moved officials of
the Fédération internationale de football and the Union
of European Football Associations to express their
anger and grave concern at Israel’s continued

13

A/65/PV.32

obstruction of Palestinian athletes and sports
development efforts. We commend those positions and
call on all concerned to do their utmost to curb such
practices and their negative effect on Palestinian efforts
to develop sport in general.

also to thank Mr. Wilfred Lemke, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, for the important part that he is playing in
expanding the role of sport in United Nations human
development and peacebuilding efforts.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

The IOC’s commitment to place sport at the
service of humankind is enshrined in its founding
document, the Olympic Charter. The Charter defines
Olympism as a philosophy of life that seeks to place
sport at the service of the harmonious development of
humankind, with a view to promoting a peaceful
society concerned with the preservation of human
dignity.

Development and occupation cannot possibly
coexist. Any development effort, no matter how well
planned and executed, is subject to the illogical and
punitive whims of the occupation. Occupation is a
negative force that shackles the occupied and inhibits
them from fulfilling their potential and achieving their
goals. However, in line with our commitment to the
principles and fundamental values that sport represents,
Palestine is determined to press ahead with its efforts
to develop this field as an area of boundless potential
for Palestine, its development and its national goal —
peace.
We wish this important initiative every success in
advancing the universal language, culture and values of
sport. We also hope that, as part of its State-building
efforts, Palestinian sport will continue to receive
international support and be the subject of the world’s
fraternity.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 64/3, of 19 October 2009, I
now call on the Observer for the International Olympic
Committee.
Mr. Sithole (International Olympic Committee):
On behalf of the International Olympic Committee
(IOC), I am pleased to support the adoption of draft
resolution A/65/L.4, entitled “Sport as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace”,
and to take part in this important discussion on ways to
more effectively use the power of sport to promote
development and peace. Allow me to acknowledge the
invaluable contributions of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General in elevating the role of sport as a
tool for development and peace. His annual report
(A/65/270), which has been just presented, is living
proof of that.
In our capacity as Observer to the United Nations
General Assembly, the IOC intends to further
strengthen its ties and cooperation with the United
Nations and to assist Member States and the United
Nations Administration in their endeavours. Allow me

14

The sporting movement translates that philosophy
into actions in a variety of ways, starting, of course,
with its premier event, the Olympic Games. The Games
provide a global forum for peaceful competition and
interaction in an atmosphere of fair play and mutual
respect, showing by example that we can put aside our
differences and find common ground. That ideal can be
seen in some memorable moments, as exemplified by
the actions of the young people who participated in the
inaugural Youth Olympic Games in Singapore last
month.
Much of the Olympic Movement’s development
work occurs far from the media spotlight. Last May,
we opened a new youth Olympic development centre in
Zambia. That innovative project combines sport with
educational programmes, health services and
community events. It is a good example of an effective
multiparty partnership — in this case between the
Government of the Republic of Zambia, the Zambian
National Olympic Committee and international and
national sports federations.
Many of our efforts are closely aligned with the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
For example, the promotion and
empowerment of women in and through sport and
gender equality are specifically addressed in the
Olympic Charter. The IOC has steadily increased the
participation and involvement of women in
competitions and the organization of the Olympic
Games. For the first time, women will participate in
every sport on the Olympic programme at the Games in
London in 2012.
The IOC formally acknowledged its obligation to
environmental sustainability more than 15 years ago by
adopting the environment as the third pillar of the

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

Olympic Movement, along with sport and culture. We
work closely with the United Nations Environmental
Programme to ensure that we live up to our
responsibilities in that area. We work with UNESCO,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other partners to provide value-based
education to young people and sustenance to refugees.
We work with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, UNICEF, the World Health Organization
and the Red Cross Movement to combat HIV and
AIDS, malaria and non-communicable diseases.
In many of those initiatives, sport is a catalyst for
action. It breaks down barriers between communities.
It is a magnet for young people. It helps keep them in
school and focused. It gives them mental strength and
teaches them leadership skills. They learn the true
meaning and value of teamwork and a team spirit.
Sport is not the answer to all the world’s problems.
It does not even have the leading role in addressing
those problems. We look to the United Nations,
Governments and specialized non-governmental
organizations to take the lead in promoting
development. The IOC salutes the efforts of
Governments around the world to promote development,
but we also urge them to embrace sport as a partner in
those efforts and to give sport the attention, promotion
and resources that it needs in order to effectively
contribute to national development agendas.
The IOC acknowledges that real progress is
possible with effective partnerships, as called for in
MDG 8. The Secretary-General’s report offers example
after example, from countries around the world, of
alliances that use sport in creative ways. The IOC and
sport as a whole are doing their best, but more could be
done with more consideration of sport as a factor in
human development and peace and by factoring it into
development agendas at every level.
However, we need comprehensive evaluation and
monitoring of sport programmes for human
development so that we can learn what works and what
does not. We need more research and better monitoring
tools, including widely accepted benchmarks and
standards.
Sport is a powerful tool for development and
peace. The challenge is to make the most of that tool.
The International Olympic Committee stands ready to
play its part. The IOC assures the Assembly that it will
do its best to be its greatest partner.

10-58990

The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this agenda
item.
The General Assembly will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/65/L.4, entitled “Sport as a
means to promote education, health, development and
peace”.
I should like to announce that, since the draft
resolution was submitted, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Cape Verde,
Eritrea, France, Grenada, Haiti, Hungary, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, the Netherlands, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Serbia, South Africa and Togo.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.4?
Draft resolution A/65/L.4 was adopted (resolution
65/4).
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 15
Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/269)
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/269)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/299)
Mr. Habib (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend our sincere thanks to the
President for organizing this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/65/269) on the activities
related to the declaration of 2010 as the International
Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures. That
declaration was the logical result of the growing
international awareness of the important need for a
rapprochement of cultures through dialogue, which is
an urgent issue of concern to us all. The meetings and
symposia that we have seen take place this year are
perhaps the best testament to the importance of
diversity as a source of enrichment for humankind and,
when exploited through constructive and innovative

15

A/65/PV.32

dialogue, as a fountain of creativity, modernity,
progress and advancement.
I come from Lebanon, an eastern country that has
had a unique social and political experience and a
nation that allows for dialogue and coexistence
between religions and cultures that is an example of
tolerance. Here I would like to recall the statement by
the President of Lebanon when he spoke before the
Assembly on 24 September. He affirmed that Lebanon
will always remain open to dialogue and human and
cultural interaction in a rich and creative manner, loyal
to its main message, in spite of the challenges that it
faces, in the promotion of a State of law and order and
the values of democracy, freedom and harmony on
which it is based.
This year, in accordance with our openness to
dialogue, we joined the Group of Friends of the
Alliance of Civilizations. We consider the Alliance as
an essential forum for dialogue among civilizations.
The Alliance guarantees the necessary space for
involving civil society, including women and youth,
and for exchanging experiences and building strategies
in consolidating the culture of peace.
Lebanon continues to call for rich human and
cultural interaction in a constructive and innovative
way. We believe that such dialogue begins with the
recognition of others’ identities and the religious and
cultural characteristics of each group. We believe that
fear, hostility and intimidation have no place in such an
effort.
In that regard, we welcome the tireless efforts
made by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and programmes, particularly UNESCO in the
cultural, information and technological fields, with a
view to enabling societies, especially women and
youth, to overcome ignorance and poverty and achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. We also welcome
all the symposiums that have been held and all the
early warning mechanisms that have been deployed to
pre-empt conflicts before they erupt and to deal with
root causes through the use of preventive diplomacy
and the establishment of regional and international
partnerships that work to prevent war and conflict,
which have greatly afflicted our world.
In the same context, Lebanon has always sent out
a message of dialogue, as exemplified during the
interactive dialogue that took place in the Security
Council last May under the theme “Intercultural

16

dialogue for peace and security” (see S/PV.6322). We
do this based on our belief in the importance of
dialogue as a choice and a culture, as well as our
pledge to abide by the Charter and the International
Declaration of Human Rights. We hope that
international efforts to promote dialogue among
civilizations will succeed in promoting not only a
culture of peace but also stability, peace and security in
the whole world. The Middle East as a region deserves
comprehensive and just peace based on international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative in all its aspects,
justice and what is right.
The time has come for human development. Such
development can only start with the promotion of a
culture of peace that enhances communication and
tolerance among civilizations and promotes mutual
respect among them in a responsible and transparent
manner. That should involve all stakeholders at the
governmental level in identifying priorities and
overcoming disputes and differences through dialogue
between developed and developing countries in order
to rise to the challenges faced by humankind and find
solutions to real problems in line with people’s
expectations and aspirations.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): First of all, the
delegation of Kazakhstan would like to express its
appreciation to President Deiss for the holding of this
joint debate on items 14 and 15 of the agenda, “Global
Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations” and
“Culture of Peace”.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the comprehensive report on
intercultural, interreligious and intercivilizational
dialogue (A/65/269). It provides an overview of
activities undertaken by the main United Nations
entities engaged in promoting dialogue among
civilizations, cultures and religions. Its findings and
recommendations take on great significance in our
contemporary times, when multilateralism is being
strengthened. Yet at the same time, paradoxically, there
are forces that cause schisms and unrest in society.
The report, submitted pursuant to resolutions 60/4
and 64/81, covers a wide range of themes, including
the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures, which was initiated by Kazakhstan and
supported by Member States.
We would like also to take note of the detailed
information on the Third Forum of the United Nations

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

Alliance of Civilizations, and the work done so far to
carry forward the objectives of the United Nations in
fostering global harmony and understanding through
outreach and collaboration with faith-based organizations,
as well as through communication, awareness-raising
and educational activities around the world.
Pursuant to resolution 64/81, in which the
Assembly invited the Secretary-General to organize a
special activity to celebrate the Year, a special event
was organized on 21 April 2010 at United Nations
Headquarters by the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs. The President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session and the Secretary-General
made statements.
At the meeting, different voices were heard, each
reflecting on a specific dimension of public action to
promote the rapprochement of cultures. The ViceMinister of Culture of the Republic of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Telebekov, presented the unique experience of our
country in establishing political and administrative
institutions aimed at ensuring communication and
understanding among the various cultures that create
the mosaic of Kazakhstan.
At Kazakhstan’s suggestion, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization —
UNESCO — developed an action plan for observing
the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures with a large number of events, forums and
conferences convened worldwide. The Assembly
designated UNESCO as the lead agency for the
International Year, which was launched at UNESCO
headquarters in Paris on 18 February 2010. On that
occasion, the Director-General of UNESCO convened
a high-level panel on peace and dialogue among
cultures, which was comprised of prominent political,
intellectual and religious personalities from all regions
of the world.
The focus on awareness-raising, implicit in the
goals of the Year, resulted in worldwide dissemination
of information and the organization of several
international and regional conferences, meetings and
events. To date, over 700 activities are envisaged
within the framework of the Year. The variety of
projects presented in the fields of arts, education and
youth leadership bears witness to the different forms
that dialogue and the rapprochement of cultures can
assume. Kazakhstan is of the view that regional

10-58990

organizations play a significant role in strengthening
international dialogue.
Acting as a coordinator of the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia
(CICA), Kazakhstan has developed the action plan for
implementing the CICA Catalogue of ConfidenceBuilding Measures in humanitarian issues, and also
organized a series of international conferences on
intercultural cooperation and tolerance.
More recently, the Alliance of Civilizations has
held a vast array of high-profile events on the themes
of multiculturalism and global understanding, both of
which have gained high priority on its political agenda.
The contributions of the relevant United Nations
entities provided valuable input to the report and are
highlighted in its first two sections, which are devoted
to the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures, which is being celebrated in 2010 under the
aegis of UNESCO. The third section is devoted to the
Third Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, held in
Rio de Janiero in May 2010.
In addition to the International Year for the
Rapprochement of Cultures and the Alliance of
Civilizations, the United Nations system has continued
to undertake a wide range of educational and
communication activities to achieve the Year’s
objectives.
Another valuable contribution of the United
Nations system to promoting interreligious dialogue
consists in collaboration with faith-based organizations
and engaging them in its policy and advocacy work.
Such initiatives have a double positive effect: they
bring together peoples from different faiths to discuss
issues they have in common and they help to link those
groups as partners with the United Nations and its
development objectives.
In that context, President Nursultan Nazarbayev’s
initiative to convene congresses of leaders of the
world’s traditional religions, held in Kazakhstan, has
been thriving since 2003 and has added to international
efforts to promote interreligious and intercultural
dialogue. I am convinced that Kazakhstan’s forum,
which has been widely recognized as an effective
platform to discuss the role of religious leaders in
fostering peace and other issues, will continue to
contribute in an extremely meaningful way towards

17

A/65/PV.32

developing the worldwide process of the dialogue of
civilizations.
I would like to stress that tolerance, trust, tradition
and transparency constitute the guiding principles of
Kazakhstan’s 2010 chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The key
event in that context was the OSCE High-level
Conference on Tolerance and Non-Discrimination, held
in Astana on 29 and 30 June this year. That forum
demonstrated very effectively the importance of sharing
experiences with regard to inter-ethnic and
interreligious accord, as well as the need to fulfil
commitments to promote the OSCE values of tolerance,
non-discrimination and respect for diversity. In the
wider context, the theme of tolerance will also be
highlighted during our 2011 chairmanship of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
In conclusion, let me express my confidence that
our common collective effort at all levels, from the
grass-roots to the international, will reduce mistrust
and prejudice and enhance genuine dialogue and
cooperation among our myriad cultures, thereby
fostering mutual understanding and stability in the
world.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The discussions of the General Assembly
today on the two items relating to the Global Agenda
for Dialogue among Civilizations and the Culture of
Peace take on particular importance at a time when
humankind continues to face growing trends of
inequality, occupation, oppression, conflict, violations
of human rights and other forms of hatred and racism.
Those trends reveal growing manifestations of
extremism and defamation towards the cultures and
beliefs of others. Recent public tensions resulting from
the irresponsible and intolerant campaigns calling for
attacks on Islam and Muslims, and foreigners in
general, and public reactions towards those campaigns
underline the gravity of this problem and its
implications. They also provide a strong motive for us
to redouble our efforts towards strengthening
mechanisms of dialogue and religious and cultural
tolerance among all peoples, who all without exception
share in the common heritage of humankind.
The United Arab Emirates — which believes that
dialogue among civilizations and a culture of peace are
key priorities in its global strategy for protecting
societies against all forms of violence, extremism and

18

terrorism — was one of the first countries to support
the initiative on dialogue among civilizations launched
by Turkey and Spain in 2005, as well as the initiative
launched by the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, and all other
important endeavours carried out by the United
Nations in that regard. The United Arab Emirates also
supported the Madrid Declaration of the World
Conference on Dialogue in 2008, which called for
promoting the principles of peace and dialogue among
religions, and the recent ministerial meeting of the
Alliance of Civilizations, which was held on the
margins of the general debate at the current session of
the General Assembly.
The United Arab Emirates has sought to build
bridges of confidence and partnerships with the rest of
the world through promoting a culture of dialogue,
tolerance, openness and constructive cooperation with
all countries, and regional and international groups.
Those principles have also been reflected in a series of
national legislative measures and laws that ensure
harmony and peaceful coexistence among ethnic
groups and followers of different faiths, and guarantee
their freedom to practise their religious rites and
ceremonies and express their cultural diversity in the
United Arab Emirates. That has contributed to
consolidating justice, strengthening the rule of law, and
promoting respect for human rights and stability in the
United Arab Emirates.
The efforts by the United Arab Emirates were not
limited only to the national level, but also extended to
the international level, including through the provision
of direct and indirect economic, humanitarian and
relief assistance to developing countries and countries
emerging from conflict and natural disasters. This was
done with a view to supporting efforts aimed at
achieving national reconciliation, rehabilitation and
stability in those countries, and in promoting a culture
of peace and respect for human rights. As a member of
the Intergovernmental Committee for the Safeguarding
of Intangible Cultural Heritage, under the auspices of
UNESCO, the United Arab Emirates has worked on
enhancing its multifaceted contribution to the
protection of the common heritage of mankind.
We attach great importance to the efforts of the
United Nations and other Member States to
strengthening international peace and security, the rule
of law, concepts of tolerance, understanding,
multilateralism and solidarity among peoples, and a

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

culture of peace. We emphasize that in order to achieve
all those goals, we need to start with a genuine global
partnership that aims at encouraging dialogue among
the various cultures and civilizations and at instilling
the spirit of tolerance and respect for the sacred sites of
other peoples and understanding the sensitive aspects
of their cultures, especially in our globalized age, with
its modern communication technologies that provide
unique and ever greater opportunities for connecting
and reaching people.
As we believe that dialogue among civilizations
must take various forms, including North-South
dialogue, East-West dialogue and other forms of
cultural exchange, we affirm that mutual enrichment of
any dialogue in that context must be based on equality,
objectivity and transparency. Such activities must also
include adequate measures to address any acts of
violence or discrimination based on religion, race or
sex, in order to contain their negative impact on
societies. We therefore call for the development of a
standardized global approach to deal with acts that
constitute a clear and continuing threat to peace,
security and stability in the world. Measures to
criminalize incitement of violence on religious
pretexts, including incitement to abuse or desecrate
sanctities of other religions, should also be adopted.
We also emphasize, in that regard, the need to
address attempts aimed at defaming religions and at
inciting religious hatred in general, by developing
local, regional and international strategies based on
constructive debates and dialogue among cultures and
civilizations and full respect for all beliefs and
religions. In that regard, we declare our support, which
has been continuous for the past 10 years, for the
Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations,
adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 56/6.
We also affirm our support for the declaration of 2010
as the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures, with a view to demonstrating that diversity is
a source of enrichment, creativity and innovation for
humanity.
This also leads us to realizing the importance of
demonstrating a true and serious international
determination to address the root causes of emerging
conflicts and disputes, especially the causes relating to
that oldest of conflicts, namely, the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories.

10-58990

Finally, we hope that our deliberations on the two
agenda items will lead to strengthened plans for
achieving greater understanding, rapprochement and
openness among countries and peoples, especially in
containing and addressing the most pressing regional
and international issues, including issues of security,
peace, disarmament, poverty, unemployment and
violations of human rights.
Mr. Al-Hubail (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the pleasure to convey our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for the report before us (A/65/629), which
details the achievements and activities of United
Nations bodies with respect to intercivilizational,
intercultural and interreligious dialogue. I should also
like to pay tribute to the efforts of UNESCO for having
successfully celebrated 2010 as the International Year
for the Rapprochement of Cultures. We should like to
thank the Director-General of UNESCO for her annual
report on the International Decade for a Culture of
Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World
2001-2010.
The State of Kuwait is happy to participate in this
discussion. We would like to reaffirm that the world
currently faces great challenges resulting from views
and ideologies characterized by extremism and bigotry,
held by some groups, entities and individuals in certain
countries of the world, which do not respect the
cultures of others. Such intolerance has even reached a
level where some use ideological and physical violence
to impose their views and ideas.
If we want to successfully support a
comprehensive and realistic dialogue among the
civilizations and peoples of the world, we must share a
sincere desire to combat the extremist ideas and actions
on the part of some who disparage others’ religions,
given that such ideas hamper United Nations efforts to
bring about rapprochement. Otherwise, the other side is
given new justifications for its attempts to spread its
violent ideas and convince others of the correctness of
their views.
My delegation salutes resolution 64/81, which
states, in paragraph 5, that the right to freedom of
expression carries with it duties and responsibilities
that may be subject to certain restrictions. We must
discourage incitement against religious beliefs, because
that has negative consequences for human rights. We
believe that in that regard a general evaluation is
needed of the efforts of the United Nations and

19

A/65/PV.32

non-governmental organizations, as well as of efforts
and initiatives by regional and international
organizations.
To achieve a strong and sound foundation for
dialogue among civilizations, we need to unify the
efforts and programmes of the various entities in order
to promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue
among civilizations. That will lead to the spread of the
principles of peace, tolerance and respect. We must
recall here that a dialogue or alliance among
civilizations does not mean a fusion of cultures, creeds
and faiths. Civilization is the tent that includes all
cultures and religions; the purpose of dialogue among
civilizations is to study the roots of differences and to
deal with them, while being respectful of our
differences.
The State of Kuwait supports the efforts of the
United Nations regarding an ongoing dialogue among
civilizations. As decreed by our head of State, we have
put in place a national plan of action based on our
belief in outreach to and interaction among
civilizations. We have acceded to the initiative of the
Alliance of Civilizations, joined its Group of Friends
and participated in all its forums, particularly the third,
held in Rio de Janeiro in May. Openness towards other
cultures, tolerance and interaction with others have
been part of Kuwaiti culture, intellect and ideology
from the beginning. That is enshrined in our
Constitution, which allows others to practise their
religion freely, safely and in peace, and this has
attracted people of 120 nationalities and from all
cultures and religions to live in our country in stability,
tolerance and mutual respect.
A culture of peace and coexistence, based on
outreach among civilizations, should be based on
strategic principles that give it strength and continuity,
and should help civil society, individuals and
institutions to achieve their objectives. We cite in that
connection Kuwait’s national plan of action, which has
set forth four strategic principles to help achieve its
aims. First, we should reinforce our culture of peace,
moderation
and
tolerance;
secondly,
combat
extremism, terrorism and violence; build a societal and
national consensus based on the principles and values
of outreach among civilizations; and fourthly,
cooperate with regional and international institutions,
thus laying the foundations for understanding of our
shared human concerns. Additionally, Kuwait has
established an International Centre for Compromise

20

that calls for moderation in thought and compromise in
dealing with others, which are based on the principles
of our religion. The Centre has held many conferences
and symposiums at the national, regional and
international levels.
Various specialized Government departments
have set up programmes and forums aimed at every
sector of society in order to achieve awareness of
moderation and understanding among people. We have
held and sponsored many international and regional
conferences and forums promoting an attitude of
moderation in Islam and how to spread religious
tolerance and respect for beliefs and cultural
specificities among peoples, as well as how to achieve
equality so that we may arrive at a climate of
international security in which all civilizations can live
in peace.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the culture of peace (A/65/269).
In our present world, increasing globalization, the
spread of information technologies and more frequent
exchanges among peoples of different countries have
brought civilizations ever closer to each other, creating
favourable conditions for dialogue and cooperation
among them. In the meantime, peace and development
have yet to become a reality. New global challenges
keep emerging; clashes between civilizations have
intensified; misunderstandings among religions and
cultures still exist; and religious and racial
discrimination are far from being eliminated.
Against such a background, it has become all the
more important to strengthen dialogue and cooperation
among civilizations. In recent years, the General
Assembly has held a number of high-level meetings on
intercultural and interfaith dialogue, which have
highlighted the importance and urgency of cultural
cooperation and emphasized the intrinsic links between
dialogue among civilizations and peace and
development. This momentum of cooperation should
be maintained. At the same time, we should gain
experience and learn lessons from these efforts, while
identifying effective ways and best practices for
enhancing the understanding, mutual trust and
cooperation that can ensure concrete progress in this
area.
China believes that the following three points
should be observed in conducting dialogue and

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

cooperation among civilizations. First, we should
respect each other and conduct dialogue as equals.
Diversity is a basic feature of human civilization, as
well as a common asset of human society. There are
close to 200 countries in the world. Despite their
differences in terms of social systems, levels of
development, cultures, traditions and religious beliefs,
all have contributed to human progress. It is therefore
necessary for all countries to respect and learn from
one another and live together in peace. Extremism, the
imposition of beliefs or values on others,
discrimination based on religious, racial or other
grounds, bias, and xenophobia should be firmly
rejected.
Secondly, we must work on multiple fronts in
order to achieve synergy. Culture and religion touch a
wide range of areas and involve complex issues, so
there can be no cookie-cutter approach to dialogue and
cooperation in this regard. Within the United Nations,
multiple initiatives and mechanisms, such as resolution
64/81 on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, and the Alliance of Civilizations, have been
launched. With their distinct features and advantages,
those initiatives and mechanisms should strengthen
communication and coordination among themselves.
The United Nations should play an important role as a
platform for cultural exchange and should enable the
various initiatives and mechanisms to complement
each other and grow side by side.
Thirdly, we should involve all sectors of society
and work for concrete results. Dialogue among
different civilizations is ultimately about promoting
people-to-people contact. It should thus not be limited
to the national level. Rather, civil society, academia
and the media should all be mobilized to disseminate
the message of a culture of peace to communities and
schools so as to bring the whole society on board. It is
particularly important to convey a message of
tolerance, understanding and respect to the youth so as
to build up their capacity to resist religious hatred and
discrimination. The media should conscientiously
assume their social responsibility by upholding
morality and contributing to the creation of an
atmosphere of tolerance and understanding in society.
China is a multi-ethnic and multireligious country.
The Chinese civilization has been imbued with the
concept of harmony throughout history. The Chinese
Government adheres to the policy of freedom of

10-58990

religion, fully respects its citizens’ religious beliefs and
safeguards that freedom with the Constitution and other
laws. Different religions in China coexist in harmony
and enjoy equal status. Religious and non-religious
citizens respect each other and live together in
harmony. Religious figures in China carry forward fine
traditions of patriotism, religious devotion and
philanthropy and actively participate in charity work
and other public welfare undertakings, thus contributing
to social harmony and stability.
China favours cultural diversity and believes that
different civilizations should learn from each other and
seek common ground, while shelving differences, and
should jointly contribute to the prosperity and progress
of mankind. China actively supports dialogue and
cooperation among civilizations and religions and has
hosted major events to that end, such as the AsiaEurope Meeting Interfaith Dialogue and the World
Buddhist Forum.
In two weeks’ time, Expo 2010 Shanghai will
draw to a close. As the first such global event hosted
by a developing country in the history of world expos,
it has attracted the participation of 246 countries and
international organizations and over 60 million visitors
over a period of five months. The Shanghai World
Expo offers a platform for countries to demonstrate
their cultural achievements and share development
experience, giving full expression to the diversity of
the world’s civilizations. It has become a showcase of
cultural diversity and harmony and an event of
happiness and friendship for all. The Chinese
Government will further strengthen cultural dialogue
and exchanges with other countries with a view to
contributing to the creation of a world of lasting peace,
common prosperity and harmony.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly declared the period 2001 to 2010 the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World (resolution
53/25). Today, as we face the end of the decade, we
must frankly recognize that we have not met the goals
we set for ourselves.
Cuba considers strict respect for the United
Nations Charter and its principles to be the fundamental
basis for achieving a culture of peace. Peace is not only
the absence of conflicts. Promoting a culture of peace
requires the promotion of education at all levels,

21

A/65/PV.32

sustainable economic and social development and
respect for all human rights for all people.
There cannot be a culture of peace unless
understanding, tolerance and solidarity are promoted,
along with respect for the history, diverse religions and
individual character of each nation. Achieving a culture
of peace requires respect for cultural diversity.
We watch with concern some doctrines promoting
the clash of civilizations, demonizing cultures and
religions that are thousands of years old. Any doctrine
based on racial or cultural superiority must be firmly
rejected. Equally unacceptable is the intention of some
to identify certain cultures and religions with terrorism
and violence.
To succeed in establishing a culture of peace,
clear commitments and concrete actions to promote
sustainable development and environmental protection
are necessary. Obstacles to the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination must be also eliminated.
There cannot be a culture of peace as long as the
acquisition of territories through war is not recognized
as unacceptable and some States act in ways contrary to
the United Nations Charter and international law. A
culture of peace is not promoted by threatening the
sovereignty and independence of other nations. How can
a culture of peace be achieved if, on one hand, annual
military expenditures increase at a dizzying rate —
reaching the chilling figure of $1.531 trillion — while,
on the other hand, the number of hungry people reaches
the record figure of 925 million — nearly one sixth of
the world’s population?
The introduction of the study of different cultures
and civilizations in educational curricula would be an
excellent contribution to a culture of peace. The
teaching of languages, history and the philosophies of
civilizations could be also included.

A better world is possible. As wisely stated in the
Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, “since wars begin
in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the
defences of peace must be constructed”. The solution
lies in our hands. We must act without further delay so
that a culture of peace and the Alliance among
Civilizations finally prevail over the culture of
violence and war.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report on intercultural,
interreligious
and
intercivilizational
dialogue
(A/65/269). We are also grateful for the report of the
Director-General of UNESCO on the activities carried
out during the International Decade for a Culture of
Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World,
2001-2010 (see A/65/299).
Indonesia welcomes and commends the role of
the various United Nations entities in supporting
intercultural, interreligious and intercivilizational
cooperation worldwide. Indonesia is also deeply
appreciative of the work of the Tripartite Forum on
Interfaith Cooperation for Peace and the Alliance of
Civilizations to promote a culture of peace.
Efforts to promote a culture of peace represent an
important part of the interaction among all cultures and
civilizations. Dialogue and cooperation among peoples,
cultures, religions, faiths and civilizations are essential
for the growth of a global culture of peace. There is no
doubt that much of the future of humankind depends on
peaceful coexistence and cooperation among
civilizations, cultures and religions. Unfortunately,
religious hatred and intolerance, rather than
diminishing, are on the increase.

Mass media also have an important role in
spreading human values. We must promote ethical
conduct and responsibility on the part of the media, so
that they contribute to mutual respect and dialogue
among civilizations.

In the face of the recent polarization among
peoples, as faith-based discrimination and racism were
seen to be on the rise, we continue to believe that what
unites us is much greater than what divides us. In our
view, there is always room to nurture and celebrate our
common values. It is our responsibility to ensure that
the world’s rich cultural diversity is appreciated as the
divine blessing that it is.

Cuba supports the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace and the Global Agenda
for Dialogue among Civilizations and its Programme of
Action. We also support UNESCO programmes and
practical initiatives on this topic.

That diversity is the invaluable collective heritage
of humankind, which we ought to celebrate and
treasure. In order to turn our diversity to our
advantage, we need to scale up efforts to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related

22

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

intolerance, including discrimination against persons
based on their religion and beliefs.
In our much more connected world today, action
by a small and distant group can inflict significant
damage upon all the international community. As we
saw only recently, religious radicalism by a local
religious minority leader is capable of causing
considerable damage to global interfaith harmony and
world peace.
Indonesia would therefore like to see efforts to
promote a culture of peace focusing more on the
minority elements at strategic social levels, particularly
those who lead groups of people. In that connection,
we are concerned about the absence of a multilaterally
negotiated instrument containing normative standards
that can help diffuse religious radicalism. It is an ideal
which we should work towards establishing.
Indonesia is firmly committed to promoting a
culture of peace. We keenly support initiatives that deal
with the challenges of cultural diversity, as they are
very much in line with what we are already doing in
Indonesia. Dialogue and mutual accommodation
among faiths and cultures have featured prominently in
Indonesia’s history. That is how we have woven, from
the many strands of our ethnic cultures and traditions,
the single fabric of our nationhood. In Indonesia,
dialogue is a prominent tool for ensuring harmony and
peaceful living among the various communal groups
and for ensuring stability and promoting development
at the national level.
Moreover, we empower the moderates whose
voices would otherwise be drowned by the agitation of
extremists. In Indonesia, we are also organizing
interfaith and intercultural dialogue at the regional,
interregional and global levels. We have organized
such dialogue in tandem with other Governments,
international organizations, civil society and the mass
media. Here, at the United Nations, we have
consistently supported all resolutions on the agenda
item “Culture of peace”.
Indonesia also attaches great significance to the
initiatives of Member States to promote respect for
diversity, freedom, justice and tolerance. All such
existing initiatives in interfaith, intercultural and
intercivilizational dialogue have become part of a
global network aimed at promoting peace and harmony.

10-58990

However, it is important to point out that even all
those undertakings are not enough if they remain only
within conference halls. We must therefore recognize
that, indeed, dialogue is not an end in itself. All those
dialogues going on all over the world today will
amount to nothing if they do not lead to cooperative
action at the grass-roots level.
It is our responsibility to ensure that those
dialogues lead to the development of communities that
work for the welfare of their fellow human beings,
while enlightening one another on the need for mutual
understanding and mutual appreciation. Dialogue
should foster communities that take on a positive role
in the life of the nation by encouraging and inspiring
the Government to adhere to democratic principles and
to promote and protect human rights and individual
freedoms, regardless of ethnicity or religion. It should
lead to communities that appreciate the unique
qualities and perspectives of other peoples.
If all nations can nurture such communities, then
we are well on our way to developing a global culture
of peace.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
would like to extend the gratitude of the Republic of
the Philippines to the President for his able leadership
of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. As
the community of nations moves forward in pursuit of
our common goals of lasting peace, progress and
prosperity, may I express the firm commitment of the
Philippines to work closely with him and our partners
in order to achieve our shared vision for ourselves and
our posterity.
We meet at a time of great opportunities and
many challenges. Technological developments, all
made at a breakneck pace, bring the bright promise of
our peoples being drawn ever closer together. Yet even
as we see different peoples and communities coming
together in the spirit of understanding and charity with
the message of peace and coexistence, there are those
who seek to break the bonds of goodwill that have
brought many peoples together. For those dark
elements seek to inflict pain and suffering, to foster
rancour and resentment, and to force violence and fear
upon the world.
It is regrettable that our people have to endure
violence in its many malevolent forms. Peoples are
broken further apart by those who seek to sow
confusion, doubt and suspicion. There are those who

23

A/65/PV.32

prey on the disenfranchised and the marginalized and
surreptitiously use the faith, culture and religion of
others to push and justify their own dark agenda. Faith,
culture and religion have been turned against
themselves and used to drive people to despair and to
perform acts of violence.
The Philippines joins other nations in
condemning those acts in all their forms and
manifestations. The Philippines likewise asserts that
such acts should not be associated in any way with any
culture, faith or religion.
For the Philippines and, indeed, for the rest of the
world, faith, culture and religion rightly give millions
of people hope in this world, the will to treat others
like themselves, and the impetus to work with others
towards a more inclusive and more understanding
world. That abiding belief has moved us to harness the
world community’s collective strength to further
strengthen the foundations of a world respectful of
humanity’s diversity.
Civil strife in the southern Philippines brought
out the importance of interfaith dialogue in the
promotion of understanding, peace, cooperation and
development among stakeholders. In that same spirit,
Mindanao will once again commemorate its annual
Week of Peace, begun in the mid 1990s. Our work
continues to this day, with interfaith dialogue and
reconciliation remaining key features of the Philippine
medium-term development plan.
Seeking to engage the world community in that
endeavour, in 2004 the Philippines initiated resolution
59/23, on the promotion of interreligious dialogue.
That resolution proved to be a landmark in that it
opened the portals of the United Nations to interfaith
partnerships and cooperation in the cause of justice and
peace.
Since then, we have seen a series of resolutions
on interfaith, interreligious and intercivilizational
dialogue approved by consensus: resolution 60/10,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious dialogue and
cooperation for peace”; resolutions 61/221, 62/90 and
63/22, jointly introduced by the Philippines and
Pakistan from 2006 to 2008; and resolution 64/81, also
jointly presented by the Philippines and Pakistan, on
the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
cooperation for peace.

24

The concrete outcomes of those resolutions
include the holding by the General Assembly of the
High-Level
Dialogue
on
Interreligious
and
Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace;
the designation of the Office for Economic and Social
Council Support and Coordination in the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs as the focal unit in the
Secretariat to handle, within the United Nations
system,
all
interreligious,
intercultural
and
intercivilizational matters; and the proclamation of
2010 as the International Year for the Rapprochement
of Cultures.
A core group of 16 countries, 3 United Nations
bodies and the 110-member Committee of Religious
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) at the
United Nations was formed, leading to the holding in
2005 of the Conference on Interfaith Cooperation for
Peace at United Nations Headquarters. That became the
troika of the Tripartite Forum on Interfaith Cooperation
for Peace, which has now grown to include
55 Governments, 15 United Nations agencies and 110
religious NGOs at the United Nations. It has developed
a new paradigm of understanding and cooperation,
which is described as faith-fuelled and love-inspired.
Likewise, an informal summit of like-minded
world leaders met in 2005 on the sidelines of the
General Assembly and adopted a declaration urging
efforts
for
interreligious,
intercultural
and
intercivilizational dialogue and cooperation. We have
postponed the similar informal summit scheduled for
this year until next year so that it can be immediately
preceded by a ministerial meeting.
Beyond these positive developments at the United
Nations, five Asia-Pacific Regional Interfaith
Dialogues have been held: in Jakarta; Cebu,
Philippines; Waitangi, New Zealand; Phnom Penh; and
Perth, Australia. Between regions, we have had six
interfaith dialogues in the Asia-Europe Meeting: in
Bali, Indonesia; Larnaca, Cyprus; Nanjing, China; and
in Amsterdam, Seoul and Madrid.
The following have also been held: the third
Global Inter-Media Dialogue, in Bali; the World
Conference on Dialogue, in Madrid; the sixth general
meeting of the World Public Forum “Dialogue of
Civilization”, in Rhodes, Greece; the second Alliance
of Civilizations Forum, in Istanbul, Turkey; the 2009
Parliament of the World’s Religions, in Melbourne,

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

Australia; and the third Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions, in Astana.
In a clear demonstration of its commitment to the
cause of interfaith dialogue, the Philippines hosted the
special Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) ministerial
meeting on interfaith dialogue and cooperation for
peace in Manila in December 2009. Espoused by 118
member countries of the NAM, it was the first
movement of its kind that mainstreamed civil society,
particularly the religious and faith organizations, as
governmental partners in such vital areas as peace and
development.
Those and other efforts have been documented in
a book entitled Peace through Interfaith Dialogue:
Philippine Diplomacy and the Promotion of Mutual
Understanding, Respect and Tolerance. We are pleased
to provide copies of this book to the members of the
Assembly.
In April 2010, I was honoured to join the special
event marking the commemoration of 2010 as the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures.
Held just ahead of the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which the Philippines chaired, the
event was a fitting capstone to what we have worked so
hard to achieve all these years.
But our work is not yet done. Sustaining the
momentum is vital, as is engaging all stakeholders in
the interfaith dialogue process. The push and pull
between those who stand together for dialogue,
tolerance, understanding and respect, on the one hand,
and those who seek the fall of all into the abyss of
suspicion, bigotry, confusion and violence, on the other
hand, continues. We must continue moving forward
together.
For its part, the Philippines will continue to work
closely with and consult our partners on the tabling of
another draft resolution on the agenda item on the
culture of peace. We seek to further expand interfaith
dialogue to include, inter alia, dialogue with
indigenous peoples. We must ensure that, on the road
to greater peace and development, dialogue is as
inclusive and broad as possible.
As we welcome the introduction of Jordan’s draft
resolution on the holding of World Interfaith Harmony
Week (A/65/L.5) as a reminder of our continuing duties,
we will consult with our co-sponsors on the best way

10-58990

forward on the proposal for a decade of interreligious
dialogue as we await the report of the Secretary-General
on the matter at the sixty-sixth session.
We encourage all Member States to submit their
comments on the Secretary-General’s report concerning
the issue. We also urge all Member States to participate
actively in the efforts to foster interfaith dialogue.
The road ahead of us and the journey forward
remain long. However, we are confident that we will
reach our destination, with every milestone that we
achieve. Fully resolved to turn our vision into reality,
we will forge on undeterred, learning from each other,
understanding one another and respecting others as we
respect ourselves.
Mr. Dos Santos (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express the gratitude of the Government
of Paraguay for the preparation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on agenda item 15, “Culture of peace”
(A/65/269), and his note transmitting the report of the
UNESCO Director-General (A/65/299). We are sure
they will contribute to our debate today.
The delegation of Paraguay would like to speak
once again in support of the culture of peace. We want
to resolutely cooperate to achieve the noble objective
of the United Nations and its Members: achieving a
broad and deep understanding among the various
cultures. For that, we have endorsed and will continue
to support enthusiastically the initiatives for a dialogue
between different peoples, Governments and religions.
Humankind is unique in its origins but diverse in
its cultural manifestations. The only way for it to
overcome the injustice and violence afflicting it is
through dialogue. Dialogue must be based on accepting
diversity. In violence, unlike dialogue, there is no
acceptance. There is only the elimination of different
ideas, or at least an attempt to do so. Dialogue will be
dialogue only if we accept — or better yet, tolerate —
the cultural and religious differences that identify each
community and each nation but that, ultimately, are the
inseparable elements that make up humankind.
In order to promote the dialogue between cultures
and civilizations, my delegation wishes to propose that
the United Nations proclaim 30 July of each year
World Friendship Day, to contribute to building a more
fraternal global society, thus fostering the culture of
peace, respect and mutual acceptance at the
international level, without any kind of distinction or
discrimination. This initiative, which has been a

25

A/65/PV.32

tradition in my country for over 50 years, has the
institutional support of the Government. It was
circulated in document A/64/883 at the previous
Assembly session and was announced in the Hall
during the general debate of the current session by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country as a
proposal to renew mutual appreciation and recognition
between our peoples (see A/65/PV.23).

On the other hand, respect for and understanding
of others could be considered key elements in
enhancing international cooperation. The practice of
listening to others rather than confronting or offending
them should be cultivated and promoted as a culture
among actors at all levels of international politics.
Globalization as a process can pose challenges and
create opportunities in this domain.

Appropriately, our delegation will conduct the
relevant consultations with the various countries and
regional groups in order to present shortly a draft
resolution that proclaims the World Friendship Day. I
would like to request all delegations to lend their
support to this initiative so that it will meet with
success.

Repressive measures in the increasingly
globalized world could take the form of disinformation
through the global media and modern communication
technologies.
Religious
intolerance,
including
Islamophobia, created as a result of aggressive media
policies, seeks to demonize particular cultures and
religions and can lead ultimately to hatred and
exclusion. This should be prevented through an
innovative and alternative plan for international
cooperation among all nations.

Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): We are
here today for a joint debate on two interrelated agenda
items in order to follow up on the progress of our work
on the enhanced promotion of a culture of peace and
the Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations
through
interreligious,
intercultural
and
intercivilizational dialogue and cooperation. Let me
thank the Secretary-General and the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) for all of their
efforts to prepare the two thought-provoking reports
contained in documents A/65/269 and A/65/299 on
these two very significant items on the agenda of the
General Assembly.
Cultural diversity as the centrepiece of the two
agenda items — “Global Agenda for Dialogue among
Civilizations” and “Culture of peace” — is thoroughly
discussed and reflected in these two reports as a real
and basic fact of today’s regional and international
relations. Such a fundamental fact should not be seen
as a barrier to our collective endeavour to advance
dialogue and understanding.
Respect for cultural diversity at the national and
international levels and recognition of the fact that
cultural diversity is a source of unity rather than
division within the international community will
indeed promote peace and security. Thus, cultural
diversity is an asset that enriches the common human
cultural heritage. Hence, continued cultural domination
through policies of cultural hegemony and efforts to
eliminate cultural identities through the globalization
process will result in major setbacks to the promotion
of human rights, international cooperation and the
mutual enrichment of the cultural life of humankind.

26

We believe that diversity is necessary for
humankind to flourish. We should resist the
perceptions and temptations that set individual against
individual, group against group and nation against
nation. Above all, ways to eliminate the defamation of
religions and discrimination based on religion or belief
should be deliberated. Religious intolerance, the
spreading of hatred, xenophobia and racial
discrimination are but a few examples of issues long
faced by the international community. Many of us have
voiced our vehement condemnation of the defamation
of religions, yet we have continued to witness instances
of poisonous actions against certain religions and their
sacred books, beliefs and followers. The recent attempt
to put the Koran, the most sacred book of each and
every one of the more than 1.6 billion Muslims of the
world, into a fire was a clear example of such a crime.
Such actions should be duly dealt with by States.
This alarming act was also a warning against the
rising trend of discriminatory national laws and
policies adopted and implemented against any religion.
Attempts to stigmatize groups of people — in
particular, people of certain ethnicities and religious
minorities — on the basis of their religion under
various pretexts related to issues of security and illegal
immigration are among the major obstacles to our
approach to respect cultural diversity.
One way to respond could be to enhance the
cultural policies of Member States at the national and
regional levels in order to strengthen respect for
cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue in practical

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

terms. The Non-Aligned Movement Centre for Human
Rights and Cultural Diversity in Tehran has been
established and is actively contributing to the
promotion of such an idea.
Besides honouring the events marking the
commemoration of 2010 as the International Year for
the Rapprochement of Cultures, one of the other
practical achievements in the process of promoting
cultural diversity as a means of cooperation to enhance
peace among different nations is respect for traditional
common cultures.
On 23 February, the General Assembly
unanimously adopted resolution 64/253, entitled
“International Day of Nowruz”. The resolution was the
fruit of joint efforts by eight Member States, including
the Islamic Republic of Iran. While the resolution
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter, in
particular the achievements of international cooperation
in the economic, social and cultural fields — including,
inter alia, resolution 56/6, on the Global Agenda for
Dialogue among Civilizations; the Declaration of the
Principles of International Cultural Cooperation, and
the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity,
adopted by UNESCO — it also underlines the appeal
for greater solidarity on the basis of recognition of
cultural diversity, of awareness of the unity of
humankind and of the development of intercultural
exchanges. It emphasizes the need to achieve an
objective understanding of all civilizations and to
enhance constructive interaction and cooperative
engagement among civilizations by playing a major
role in strengthening the ties among peoples based on
mutual respect and the ideals of peace and goodneighbourliness. Nowruz traditions and rituals reflect
the ancient cultural customs of the civilizations of East
and West that have influenced those civilizations
through the interchange of human values.
Finally, let me confirm the fact that the promotion
of dialogue among civilizations and cultures is a key
component of UNESCO’s mission and activities and
has led that organization to shoulder a significant
portion of that task. With this in mind, my delegation
will spare no effort in cooperating at the next meeting
of the UNESCO High Panel on Peace and Dialogue
among Cultures, which will be convened by the
Director-General of UNESCO within the next two
months at United Nations Headquarters here in New
York to identify new avenues and modalities for future
action.

10-58990

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I thank the President for
convening this very important debate of the General
Assembly this morning. From the attendance here, one
can be absolutely sure that peace does not have as large
a following in the Assembly as the elections did a few
days ago, when there was only standing room here.
And of course, as we know, anything that is
contentious is bound to lead away from, and not
towards, peace. So, judging by the visuals here today, I
fear that we have a long way to go in pursuing this
matter of introducing the culture of peace.
I am not terribly sure whether, by not including
the culture of peace in the Millennium Development
Goals, we have done something good for this institution
or not. But, surely, this matter is very important.
We start off by citing anything that becomes
contentious as a danger to peace, but I think that there
is much more to it than that. There will always be
divisive policies, ideologies and the belief that might is
right to inflict upon others what concerns people about
their way of life. I think the greatest hindrance to
anything cogent emerging is that, when we sit in this
Hall, we all speak of our ways, our countries, our
delegations and our groups. If we continue to do that, I
am not terribly sure that peace will prevail. There may
be outward calm and there may be a lot that is not said
out of respect for each others’ feelings, but certainly
peace will not prevail in the world or in this Hall, other
than in outward appearance.
The Charter of the Organization has enunciated
the principles of practising tolerance, living together in
peace with one another as good neighbours, uniting our
strengths to maintain international peace and security
and promoting social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom. I think that the moment the
Charter spells out the concept of good neighbours, it
seems like an exclusion or preclusion of those beyond
our boundaries who consider themselves to be
impregnable or invulnerable as sovereign States.
Peace should not be just the extension of goodneighbourly relationships; it should go beyond and
exist as a culture. That is what we are saying here
today. I find that the Charter is not sufficient. It is in
fact deficient in the proclamation of what we are trying
to achieve.
In 1999, we reaffirmed our intention to continue
to work to achieve peaceful coexistence in line with the
United Nations Charter. That was a declaration based

27

A/65/PV.32

on the principles of multilateral cooperation, respect
for life, the promotion and practice of non-violence
through education, dialogue, cooperation and
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes.

culture — not just the extermination of the people, but
the burning of their famous libraries, which many now
believe to have been the largest repositories of world
science, education and history.

Now, as far as the peaceful settlement of disputes
is concerned, I am afraid that nowhere in the world —
judging from the fact that accidents taking place on
narrow streets can be the pretext for small-scale, or
even large-scale, rioting — have we really even
conceived of a culture that would promote peace
instead. And history has proven that no trauma that
follows such disputes can be resolved by a peaceful
ending.

Today we see in various parts of the world all
sorts of misunderstandings that are again based on
faith. We had a recent expression of it here in America,
where hate was again put forward in an attempt to
create Samuel Huntington’s clash of civilizations. I feel
that we are very lucky that due cognizance was taken,
and I say this with a great amount of respect for many
organizations, not only the American Government but
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, which kept
a harness on the issue and brought it to its due end.

Some of the greatest changes in history have
taken place on the backs of disputes that have changed
the way humankind thinks. They have changed the way
the Earth is progressing towards a better future. I am
afraid that that culture cannot be born out of a lack of
dispute when disputes are settled with verbiage that
cannot be understood by those who sign the
documents. These things will have to be resolved in
their own fashion. It is that resolution which leads to
change, not the words spelled out in a document.
I know that we have a common set of universal
values. Peace is the core message of all religions. It is
not war alone that challenges peace, but it is one of the
primary indicators of lack of peace. The first
introduction of war on this planet was, in fact, at the
beginning of the new age that started in the first
century, when Judaism was joined first by Christianity,
and later with Islam. The monotheistic religions on
record have produced more wars and more suffering in
history than anything else before them, yet the
profession of faith is based upon peace.
So we have to understand that it is peace that we
seek. The culture of this peace is not easily definable.
If Charles I of England had not abrogated Parliament
and sent the Rump Parliament home, the changes that
brought democracy and the Commonwealth to England
might never have taken place. Yet from that catharsis
and that trauma grew a very serious pledge to steer the
world towards better peace.
Unfortunately, religion keeps a strong grip on
hate. Hate is a very strong weapon in the hands of
different faiths, and it is being used mercilessly. The
complete killing of the Mayan culture in Central
America was based not on a profession of peace and
love, but upon hate and the extermination of an entire

28

We need to stand together to decry those who, in
the name of faith, extend agendas that are no longer
acceptable to the people of this world. Finding
common ground is certainly important, but I feel that,
more than that, among the great things that are needed,
one would be education. A second would be an easily
available, honest and sincere approach to justice. To
my mind, the third would be the acceptance of a
common agenda in all constitutions of the world that
profess and express the need for a culture of peace as a
preamble and a necessity — not mere lip service, but
an understanding of its implications. We should pass it
into law.
I would say that, when we co-sponsored interfaith
harmony in the General Assembly with the Philippines;
when we speak in many ways in the Assembly; and, of
late, when I see my colleagues from the Indian desk
sitting here, we have gone a long way in trying to
promote understanding. That understanding manifested
itself beautifully in the recent tennis finals of the most
senior tournament in the world today, the US Open,
where it was important, I believe, for India and
Pakistan to show the world that we could move
towards peace as well.
We recognize the growing need to promote
harmony in all its manifestations, and we believe that
we must take away challenge and replace it with
acceptance. We should take away harassment and
replace it with tolerance. We should take away hatred
and bring it towards understanding. Cooperation, not
the clash of civilizations, must be the paradigm for our
future on this planet. In order to make this world a
better place for our children, we should share the
responsibility to highlight and propagate our common

10-58990

A/65/PV.32

values of peace, tolerance, equality and sharing —
which we have forgotten — and a respect for humanity.
We should encourage the next generation to use
education and exchange not only to adapt to modernity,

10-58990

but to use modernity and technology to change the
world into a better and more peaceful place for all.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

29
