S/PRST/2006/53

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5595th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Chad and the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern regarding the increase
in military activities of armed groups in eastern Chad.
“The Security Council strongly condemns all attempts at destabilization
by force, including the recent offensive carried out by these groups in the
Biltine and the Ouaddei, and supports the statement of the President of the
Commission of the African Union that those attacks against Chad are a blatant
violation of the principles stated in the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
including respect for the territorial integrity and unity of Member States. The
Security Council reaffirms that any attempt to seize power by force is
unacceptable. It recalls the importance of an open political dialogue based on
constitutional provisions to foster national reconciliation and durable peace in
the country.
“The Security Council expresses its concern regarding the threat that the
increase in military activities of armed groups in eastern Chad poses for the
safety of the civilian population and of humanitarian personnel and the
maintenance of their operations in the eastern part of the country. It reiterates
that the presence of a large number of refugees places a heavy burden on the
host country and for the local communities, and emphasizes the need for
humanitarian aid to continue reaching the people in need of assistance without
any hindrance. It calls on the Government of Chad to do all it can to protect its
civilian population.
“The Security Council reaffirms its deep concern about the worsening
security situation in Darfur. It stresses that a peaceful settlement to the conflict
in Darfur, in accordance with the Darfur Peace Agreement and relevant
Security Council resolutions, will contribute to restoring security and stability
in the region, in particular in Chad and the Central African Republic, and
reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of all States in the region.
“The Security Council expresses its concern over the continuing tensions
between Chad and the Sudan, urges the two States to abide fully by the

06-66478 (E) 151206

*0666478*

S/PRST/2006/53

obligations they assumed with regard to respect for and securing of their
common border in the 8 February 2006 Tripoli Agreement and in subsequent
agreements concluded between them, and once again urges the States of the
region to cooperate with a view to ensuring their common stability.
“The Security Council recalls that it looks forward to a prompt report of
the Secretary-General with recommendations, as requested in previous
relevant Security Council resolutions, focusing on ways of improving security
conditions on the Chad side of the border with the Sudan and the monitoring
of trans-border activities between Chad, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic, bearing in mind the need to foster regional peace and stability.”

2

06-66478
