UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/495
26 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 26 JUNE 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to bring to your attention the attached letters addressed
to me by the President of the Republic of the Congo, Mr. Pascal Lissouba, and
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, on the question of the deployment of an inter-African
force in Brazzaville.
I should be grateful if you would be kind enough to bring these letters to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-17619 (E)

260697

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/495
English
Page 2

Annex I
[Original:

French]

Letter dated 24 June 1997 from the President of the Congo
addressed to the Secretary-General

I should like to recall our conversation and, more particularly, the
information which I gave you about the risks of destabilization facing my
country, in the light of which I requested your assistance at Harare.
The Congo therefore awaits with interest and impatience any action that
might be taken in response to the request by the International Mediation
Committee, headed by President Omar Bongo, Head of State of Gabon - a request
which I firmly support - for the deployment of an inter-African peacekeeping
force and, in particular, for:
-

the securing of polling stations during the presidential elections;

-

the decommissioning of weapons, particularly the neutralization of
heavy weapons.

I am counting on the Security Council to respond promptly to this request
and wish to convey to you the thanks of the entire Congolese people and the
renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

(Signed)

Pascal LISSOUBA

/...

S/1997/495
English
Page 3

Annex II
[Original:

English]

Letter dated 23 June 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity addressed to
the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the Central Organ of the Organization
of African Unity Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution
met this afternoon to consider the prevailing situation in the Republic of the
Congo. The session especially focused on the need to maintain and consolidate
the ceasefire in Brazzaville and to create conditions for a political solution
to the crisis. In this respect, the Central Organ specifically considered the
initiative of President Omar Bongo of the Republic of Gabon requesting the
Security Council to authorize a speedy deployment of an inter-African force in
Brazzaville.
I am sending you herewith a copy of the communiqué issued by the Central
Organ at the end of its deliberations. As you would note, the Central Organ
fully supported the request by President Bongo. In this connection, I wish to
highlight especially the following paragraphs of the communiqué:
"Reiterated its appeal for the establishment and maintenance of a
lasting ceasefire, and called on the parties to exercise maximum restraint;
"Fully supported the request by the President of Gabon on behalf of
the International Mediation Committee for the Security Council to authorize
the rapid deployment of an inter-African force in Brazzaville, and
requested the Security Council to facilitate such a deployment without
delay;
"Appealed to all African States, especially those with the relevant
capability, to make available contingents which can serve as part of the
proposed inter-African force, or provide logistical support for such a
force;
"Called on the parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the
International Mediation Committee and with the force by, inter alia,
committing themselves to a ceasefire and to a political solution to the
dispute;
"Requested the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations to undertake urgent
consultations within and outside Africa to ensure maximum support for the
implementation of this initiative."
I should be grateful if you would bring the contents of the present letter
and the attached communiqué to the attention of the President and members of the
Security Council. I would further appreciate it if you would have them
circulated as a document of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Salim Ahmed SALIM
/...

S/1997/495
English
Page 4

Enclosure
Communiqué issued by the thirty-fourth ordinary session of the
Central Organ of the Organization of African Unity Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, at the
ambassadorial level, held on 23 June 1997

The Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution met at ambassadorial level, at Addis Ababa, on 23 June 1997 at
15.00 hours to examine the serious situation prevailing in the Republic of the
Congo and the efforts deployed so far to resolve the crisis. The session was
held under the chairmanship of Mr. T. A. G. Makombe, the Permanent
Representative of Zimbabwe to the OAU and representative of the current
Chairman.
The Central Organ was extensively briefed by the Secretary-General on the
outcome of the recent meeting of the International Mediation Committee and the
communication sent by Mr. El Hadj Omar Bongo, President of the Republic of
Gabon, to the current Chairman of OAU and the Secretary-General, as well as to
the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, on the situation in the Republic of the Congo, and, in particular, the
request for the deployment of an inter-African force in Brazzaville. The
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Congo to OAU also apprised the
session of the latest situation in his country.
At the end of its deliberations, the Central Organ:
Reiterated its appeal for the establishment and maintenance of a lasting
ceasefire, and called on the parties to exercise maximum restraint;
Reaffirmed its full support for the efforts being made by the International
Mediation Committee under the leadership of President Omar Bongo of the Republic
of Gabon;
Fully supported the request by the President of Gabon on behalf of the
International Mediation Committee for the Security Council to authorize the
rapid deployment of an inter-African force in Brazzaville, and requested the
Security Council to facilitate such a deployment without delay;
Appealed to all African States, especially those with the relevant
capability, to make available contingents which can serve as part of the
proposed inter-African force, or provide logistical support for such a force;
Called on the parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the
International Mediation Committee and with the force by, inter alia, committing
themselves to a ceasefire and to a political solution to the dispute;
Requested the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to undertake urgent consultations
within and outside Africa to ensure maximum support for the implementation of
this initiative;
/...

S/1997/495
English
Page 5

Expressed deep appreciation to the humanitarian agencies for the work they
are doing under extremely difficult circumstances, and appealed to the
international community to extend urgent humanitarian assistance to all those in
need;
Decided to remain seized of the crisis in the Republic of the Congo, and
requested the Secretary-General to continue to monitor very closely the
developments in that country.

-----
