S/PRST/2014/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7334th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 December 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the grave security
situation in parts of Central Africa within the remit of the UN Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA), in particular the ongoing crisis in the Central
African Republic (CAR) and its regional impact, the continuing threat of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), and the expansion of Boko Haram terrorist
activities into countries in the sub-region. The Council also expresses its
continuing concern regarding maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, the
illegal wildlife trade and transnational organised crime. The Council welcomes
the local and parliamentary elections held in the sub-region and stressed the
need for upcoming elections in the region to be held in a timely, transparent
and inclusive manner according to their constitutions, and encouraged
UNOCA to continue to support States in this regard including through the
promotion of women’s political participation.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of the appalling
attacks, war crimes and crimes against humanity carried out by the LRA and
its violations of international humanitarian law and abuses of human rights,
including the LRA’s recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, killing
and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and other sexual violence, and abductions.
The Council demands an immediate end to all attacks by the LRA and urges
the LRA to release all those abducted, and to disarm and demobilis e. The
Council welcomes the progress made with regard to ending LRA war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Central Africa and reiterates its resolve to
maintain the current momentum until a permanent end to the threat posed by
the LRA has been achieved.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) for Central Africa and head of
UNOCA, Abdoulaye Bathily, and outgoing African Union (AU) Special Envoy
on the LRA Issue Francisco Madeira to strengthen regional cooperation and
facilitate continued AU-Regional Task Force (AU-RTF) operations in the
region. The Council commends Francisco Madeira for his leadership and
welcomes the recent appointment of Lieutenant General Jackson Kiprono
Tuwei (Rtd.) as the new AU Special Envoy for the LRA Issue. The Council
14-66928 (E)

101214

*1466928*

S/PRST/2014/25

urges UNOCA, in its coordination role, as well as the United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions in the region and other relevant United Nations
presences to enhance their efforts in support of the implementation of the
United Nations Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the
Activities of the LRA (the UN strategy), as appropriate and within the limits of
their mandates and capacities. The Council encourages the Secretar y-General
to optimise UNOCA’s efforts in this regard, including through the use of staff
and provision of support to counter-LRA efforts.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA (AU RCI-LRA), and strongly
encourages LRA affected and neighbouring states to cooperate with the AU RTF, in order to end the LRA threat. The Council commends the significant
progress made by the AU-RTF and its troop contributing countries, and pays
tribute to the important role played by the Uganda Peoples ’ Defence Forces in
tackling the LRA threat. The Council urges all regional governments to fulfil
their commitments under the AU RCI-LRA. The Council notes the importance
of continued international support for the AU-RTF’s operations, logistics, and
headquarters. In this regard, the Council welcomes the continued advisory and
logistical support provided by the United States as well as funding provided by
the European Union. The Council underlines the need for all military action
against the LRA to be conducted in compliance with international law,
including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
applicable, and to minimise the risk of harm to civilians in all areas of
operation and to take into account the association of children with the LRA.
The Council also reiterates its encouragement to deploy child protection
advisers within the AU-RTF.
“The Security Council expresses concern with the statements in the
Secretary-General report on UNOCA and the LRA (S/2014/812) that the bulk
of the LRA has moved from CAR to the northeast of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC), but continues to carry out attacks against communities i n
the east of CAR. The Council calls upon the affected states to ensure that the
LRA does not find safe haven in their territory, in accordance with
international law. The Council takes note that the presence of some senior
LRA leaders in the disputed Kafia Kingi enclave, on the border between CAR,
South Sudan and Sudan continues to be reported. The Council takes note that
the Government of Sudan has denied this. The Council welcomes the
invitation extended to the AU to verify reports of LRA presence in Kaf ia
Kingi, and encourages the AU Commission and the AU Peace and Security
Council to verify the allegations. The Council expresses its continued concern
that the gravity of the national crisis in the CAR and strongly condemns the
LRA’s opportunistic cooperation in CAR with other armed groups including
some ex-Séléka combatants.
“The Security Council notes the overall decline in the number, intensity
and violence of the LRA attacks, killings and abductions and the decrease in
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs’ (OCHA’s)
estimate of the number of people displaced by the LRA threat, from 159,927 in
March 2014 to 131, 090 in September 2014. The Council commends efforts by
international donors to provide humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected
populations in the CAR, the DRC and the Republic of South Sudan but notes

2/5

14-66928

S/PRST/2014/25

with concern that renewed efforts are urgently needed to provide humanitarian
assistance to LRA affected populations. The Council reaffirms its call for all
parties to allow safe and unhindered humanitarian access, consistent with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law and the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken to deliver an e nhanced,
comprehensive, and more regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to victims of sexual violence and other attacks and urges
further progress in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in
the LRA-affected region to protect civilians.
“The Security Council urges the UN Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the UN
Organisation Stabilization Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO), a nd the UN-AU
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), as relevant and in accordance with their
mandates, to cooperate and share information related to the regional threat of
the LRA in a timely manner, and to share relevant information with regional
governments, with non-governmental organizations and relevant partners, to
enhance cross-border cooperation in order to better anticipate and respond to
LRA movements. The Council emphasises the need for operational
coordination and information-sharing between the AU-RTF and all relevant
UN and AU missions, in the context of their protection of civilians activities,
human rights monitoring, implementation of Disarmament, Demobilization,
Repatriation, Reintegration and Resettlement (DDRRR) programmes, and
counter-LRA operations, as appropriate and in accordance with their mandates.
“The Security Council strongly reiterates its calls for the UN, AU and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), to continue to work
together, including through joint field assessme nts, to further develop and
maintain a common operating picture of the LRA’s current capabilities and
areas of operation, as well as to investigate the LRA’s logistical networks and
possible sources of military support and illicit financing, including alle ged
involvement in wildlife poaching and related illicit smuggling. The Council
expresses its concern at the link between illicit trafficking in wildlife and
financing of armed groups in the sub-region, including the LRA, and, in this
regard, encourages UNOCA to continue to support the development of a
coherent and concerted sub-regional approach to address this disturbing
phenomenon.
“The Security Council urges MONUSCO and MINUSCA, and other
United Nations actors in the LRA-affected region to continue to work with
regional
forces,
national
governments,
international
actors
and
non-governmental organisations, as appropriate, to develop a common
approach to the promotion of defections and support for DDRRR efforts across
the LRA-affected area. The Council highlights the importance of programmes
in encouraging defections and in support of the release, return and successful
reintegration of men, women and children abducted by the LRA, in particular
those that target community acceptance of such individuals, in particular
children.

14-66928

3/5

S/PRST/2014/25

“The Security Council encourages donors to increase funding for early
recovery projects to help affected communities restore stability and rebuild
their livelihoods as the LRA threat begins to recede. The Council requests that
UNOCA work with the AU, World Bank, the UN Development Program, the
UN Children’s Fund and other international experts to develop a development
framework for international efforts to promote the long-term stabilization of
formerly LRA-affected areas in South Sudan, the DRC, and the CAR,
including through early recovery projects and programs to strengthen
community cohesion.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the swift and full
implementation of the conclusions of the working group on children and
armed conflict concerning the situation of children and armed conflict affected
by the LRA. In this regard, the Council encourages those countries affected by
the LRA which have not yet done so to establish Standard Operating
Procedures for the reception and handover of LRA children to civilian child
protection actors.
“The Security Council recalls that the International Criminal Court ’s
arrest warrants for LRA leaders, including Joseph Kony on charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder, rape cruel treatment,
intentionally directing attacks against a civilian population and forced
enlistment of children, have yet to be executed, and calls upon all States to
cooperate with relevant national governments and the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with their respective obligations, in order to execute
those warrants, and to bring to justice those responsible.
“The Security Council commends the role of the ECCAS Heads of States
in the ECCAS-led international mediation process in CAR and welcomes the
designation by the Secretary-General of SRSG Bathily to support the process.
The Council commends SRSG Bathily for his diplomatic efforts, in
collaboration with the ECCAS mediator, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of
the Republic of Congo, the African Union Special Envoy for the CAR,
Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, as well as the SRSG for the CAR, Lieutenant
General (Retd) Babacar Gaye. In particular, the Council welcomes the signing
of the Brazzaville Agreement in July 2014. The Council encourages SRSG
Bathily and his Office to continue supporting these efforts and to support
MINUSCA, and the Transition process in the CAR through the international
mediation process.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern at the terrorist attacks
conducted by Boko Haram since 2009, which have caused large-scale and
devastating loss of life and represent a threat to the stability and peace of West
and Central Africa. In particular, the Council strongly condemns the continued
increase in attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group in Nigeria, along the
Nigeria-Cameroon border, in the northern provinces of Cameroon and attacks
near the Nigeria-Chad border. The Council expresses concern that the
activities of Boko Haram continue to have adverse humanitarian impact on
West and Central Africa including the displacement of an estimated 80,000
Nigerians into neighbouring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. The Council
commends the initiative of the Heads of States of the Lake Chad Basin region
and the Republic of Benin to enhance cooperation, in line with the outcomes

4/5

14-66928

S/PRST/2014/25

of the Paris Summit, then follow-up London and Abuja Summits and the
meeting in Niamey, in order to tackle the threat posed by Boko Haram to the
region. The Council calls on UNOCA to continue its collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), in order to continue to
support, as appropriate, the states of the Lake Chad Basin region to address the
impact of the threat on peace and security, including the political,
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the sub-region. The Council
underlines the need for all actions to counter Boko Haram to be conducted in
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law.
“The Security Council commends UNOCA’s support for regional
anti-piracy efforts, in cooperation with UNOWA, to address maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea that continues to affect States of Central and
West Africa. The Council encourages UNOCA to continue to assist the r egion
in implementing the decisions of the Yaoundé summit, and in the
establishment of a regional information-sharing architecture.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed on the activities of UNOCA, progress made in co nducting
assessments of the LRA’s evolving area of operations and logistical and
support networks, and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and relevant United Nations agencies to implement the UN ’s
Regional Strategy, including through a single report on the situation in Central
Africa and UNOCA’s activities to be submitted before 15 May 2015.”

14-66928

5/5
