S/2020/597

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 29 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
Executive Director, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Ms. Shaharzad
Akbar, Chairperson, Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Afghanistan”, held on
Thursday, 25 June 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-08698 (E) 010720 130820

*2008698*

S/2020/597

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons
I am delighted to address the Council today from Kabul. It is truly an honour
to serve as the Special Representative for the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I assumed my duties
at an important — some even say historic — moment in Afghanistan.
During my first months on the job, I engaged with a range of interlocutors
from across the political spectrum and from civil society. They all delivered one
clear message: Afghanistan now has the unique opportunity to turn the corner to a
brighter, more stable future after four decades of war. Many stand ready to support
them. And yet, as we all know, this moment of emerging hope comes at a time of
an unprecedented global pandemic that threatens to unravel many of the hard-won
socioeconomic gains.
Afghanistan has made immense progress in recent years. I am deeply impressed
by the strength and courage of the country’s youth. I met many inspiring young
people during my three years as an ambassador for Canada, and I am delighted to
reconnect with many of them in their new positions as Government and civil society
leaders. We are privileged to be hearing from two of them today — Ambassador
Raz, who has already made her mark in New York, and Ms. Akbar, Chairperson
of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, with whom I had the
honour recently to lead a panel on women’s involvement in the peace efforts. Both
Ambassador Raz and Chairperson Akbar are part of this new generation committed
to creating a peaceful and self-reliant country, respectful of human rights for all.
Inspired by what I see, I am further committed to using my voice and platform to
champion them, to promote human rights and women’s rights and to put those rights
at the core of our work in Afghanistan.
Another important gain made in recent years that is particularly tangible is
Afghanistan’s free and vibrant media sector. Afghanistan is considered one of the
most dangerous countries for journalists. Yet they persist in their essential work of
holding those with authority accountable. They too are inspiring.
Afghanistan has also made significant strides in improving the living
conditions of many of its citizens over the past two decades. Maternal mortality
was reduced by 66 per cent over a 15-year period, and child mortality decreased by
half. The expansion in coverage of public-health facilities nearly doubled during that
same period. There has been progress. These facts are incontrovertible.
However, I am also fully cognizant that this progress was hard-won and
remains fragile. Too many Afghans still face daily struggles for survival. And when
it comes to civilian casualties, Afghanistan remains one of the deadliest conflicts
in the world. The United States-Taliban agreement and subsequent reductions of
violence have given only brief respites from the all-too-familiar carnage. Particularly
egregious were the recent deliberate attacks against health-care facilities, at a time
when all people and all resources need to be focused on combating the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The recent 12 May attack against a maternity ward
in western Kabul was particularly outrageous and established a new low. That was
truly a moment when new life was taken from the womb. The perpetrators must be
found and held accountable.
I am also deeply concerned about the ongoing threat to civilians posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province. That was again demonstrated

2/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

by the recent suicide attack in Nangarhar province at a funeral ceremony, which
resulted in at least 29 civilians killed and many more injured.
Afghanistan also remains the deadliest conflict in the world for children. Last
year alone, 874 children lost their lives as a result of the conflict, and many more
were injured. It grieves me to say that the number of children out of school has not
dropped. Instead, it rose over the past eight years. If there ever was a call to prayer
for peace, surely it would echo the voices of those children.
Like so many countries, Afghanistan continues to be plagued by corruption,
which corrodes the confidence of the population and the donor community and fuels
the ongoing conflict. In spite of progress made in previous years in anti-corruption
reforms, that progress slowed in the past year, with key institutional reforms being
neglected, including the establishment of an all-too-important independent anticorruption commission. The apparent impunity of well-connected political figures
remains a major issue. Additional progress in the fight against corruption is therefore
crucial as the 2020 pledging conference on Afghanistan approaches.
More than ever, these compounding challenges facing the country, including
the COVID-19 health and humanitarian crises, require determined and united
leadership. In that context, I welcome the political agreement reached between
President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, which shows their determination and resolve to
place the nation first. In that spirit of cooperation, I expect to hear in the next few
days the announcement of a representative Cabinet and the formation of inclusive
peace structures.
Despite those manifold challenges, this is the time for continued and concerted
support for Afghanistan. As we pass the midpoint of Afghanistan’s transformation
decade, we enter what could be the most transformative phase as the two parties to
the peace talks move towards a new and lasting political settlement that must build
on the gains of the past and set the foundation for a more prosperous future.
I am cautiously optimistic that the talks between the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban negotiation teams will indeed start in the next few
weeks in Doha, during the month of July. As the two sides embark on what will likely
be a long and complex series of talks, I have encouraged them to show the necessary
flexibility and foresight, the commitment to peace and, most important, enough
compassion for their people to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion.
The formal announcement of a three-day ceasefire for Eid Al-Fitr by the
Taliban and the Government led to a welcome and much-needed reduction of
violence, which, as the Council knows, is essential to ensuring an environment
conducive to peace talks and to paving the way for an eventual permanent ceasefire.
But the recent spiralling levels of violence threaten that process. So, at this point, it
is incumbent on all countries that support peace to use their influence and call for a
reduction in violence.
On a more positive note, I want to highlight the commitment shown by both
sides in the recent challenging issue of prisoner releases. This is an important
confidence-building measure that has created momentum towards negotiations. As I
speak, we are in the final stages, and it is noteworthy that both sides have agreed that
talks could start within a week of the completion of the prisoner releases. However,
that must go hand in hand with a reduction in violence.
I would like to recognize the Governments of the United States, Qatar and
a number of other regional partners for their efforts in bringing the parties to this
point. We all look forward to the formal commencement of negotiations. The United
Nations stands ready to support these direct talks, as necessary, and I have been in
20-086983/29

S/2020/597

discussion with both sides to identify and address their needs going forward. We are
now working very closely with a number of countries to build a support network for
the talks and for the parties, as needed.
As we know, the best chance for a durable settlement rests on broad consensus
reflecting the aspirations and concerns of all citizens. We understand that both sides
have now reached out to various constituencies to seek their views on peace. It is
indeed crucial to develop inclusive structures for peace talks that allow the meaningful
participation of women, youth, minorities and victims of war. It is important that the
rights of victims be addressed during negotiations and that reconciliation strategies
be considered.
Allow me to highlight another encouraging indicator for peace. I am seeing
and hearing strong resolve from countries of the region to support Afghanistan in
its quest towards a peaceful settlement. The region’s active engagement with, and
support of, the peace process will be essential. Both the Afghan people and the
region as a whole have much to gain from peace and stability. I have already held a
series of engagements with partners from the region and beyond, and I am confident
that together we will foster a constructive atmosphere for the advancement of the
peace process. Support from the region is also available to advance strong economic
and trade cooperation and connectivity as Afghanistan moves into a new period of
stabilization and towards greater self-reliance.
While peace materializes on the horizon, COVID-19 is casting a huge
shadow over Afghan daily life. Under the leadership of the Afghan Government,
the United Nations is supporting a coordinated response to fight this epidemic.
That includes the establishment of a network of laboratories across the country and
the provision of personal protective equipment to the Ministry of Public Health for
health-care providers.
Sadly, as in most crises, women and girls are disproportionately impacted.
Lockdowns further limit their mobility and increase the risk of domestic violence.
The United Nations and its partners continue to provide services to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence and support reproductive health care.
In the light of the scale of the crisis and the crippling economic consequences,
the humanitarian response plan has been updated to incorporate the COVID-19
requirements for 2020, reflecting the increased number of people in need. In total,
humanitarian partners require $1.1 billion to provide immediate humanitarian
assistance. I appreciate the contributions already received and count on the continued
generosity of the international community to enable us to pursue this essential
response with the Afghan Government.
The socioeconomic impact of weeks of lockdown, reduced economic activity
and loss of remittances will be deep and long-lasting. Afghanistan faces the
daunting challenge of seeking continued international financial support at a time
of unprecedented financial uncertainty, including in many of the traditional donor
capitals. Therefore, we are working in close partnership with the Governments of
Afghanistan and Finland to prepare for the upcoming pledging conference and to
build support for ensuring sustainable resources for Afghanistan’s future. That
conference and the peace talks should be mutually reinforcing. I call for the robust
engagement of all stakeholders in preparing for the conference so that we can help
Afghanistan bring the gains of the past into the future on this new peace landscape.
However, the global pandemic also poses unique challenges for our own
operational posture and has limited our ability to fully deliver on our mandate.
We have therefore adopted a range of measures to safeguard the health and wellbeing of our staff while sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities
4/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

throughout the country. That of course includes redoubling peace negotiations
efforts, intensifying efforts to support the Afghan Government in its COVID-19
response and continuing our leading human rights activities. Nevertheless, national
lockdowns and disruptions to international travel have affected many of our
colleagues. I am very grateful to the Governments that facilitated the rotational
movement of critical staff and recently supported us with medical evacuations. Put
simply, they helped us save lives.
In conclusion, I reiterate that COVID-19 is not just a health crisis, it is a
multidimensional crisis impacting an already fragile country. By working together,
we can overcome COVID-19 and support Afghanistan at the beginning of its nascent
peace process so that its people can finally achieve the lasting peace they deserve.
The United Nations will continue to stand in partnership with the Afghan
people in this time of unprecedented challenge and fragile hope. I am honoured to be
part of the ongoing support efforts in the crucial months ahead. The Afghan people
will look to the Council for guidance, support and unity as they chart their way
forward on their long road to peace.

20-086985/29

S/2020/597

Annex II
Statement by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly
[Original: English and French]
It is indeed an honour to join the Council today, and I thank the presidency of
France for this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I welcome this important
opportunity to share with the Council the activities of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) that promote stability in our partner country Afghanistan.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has laid bare the fragility of our systems
and institutions everywhere in the world, exposing stark disparities in social
protection. For Afghanistan, the pandemic — compounding the current conflict,
hunger, droughts and floods — is a burden too terrible to bear. Illicit drugs threaten
to further compound those challenges.
Earlier today here in Vienna, I issued the UNODC World Drug Report 2020.
The findings are sobering. Afghanistan remains the world’s biggest producer of
opium, and production remains at record levels. Despite significant decreases in
cultivation, which dropped by 38 per cent to 163,000 hectares last year, at 6,400 tons,
production remained roughly at the same level as it was previously owing to high
opium yields.
The evidence so far suggests that opium poppy cultivation and drug trafficking
have continued unabated despite COVID-19 and related travel restrictions. Labour
shortfalls observed at the start of the harvest in the western and southern provinces
were quickly addressed by engaging women living in poppy-growing households to
lance the opium-poppy crop.
The farmers compelled by poverty to grow opium poppy have seen their
precarious incomes decline further, as the farm-gate value of opium production
plunged by 33 per cent for the second consecutive year. The 33 per cent decrease
follows a similar drop in opium prices, which are at the lowest level since systematic
monitoring began, reflecting abundant supply. The illicit opiate economy is expected
to continue fuelling instability and insurgency as well as funding terrorist groups.
The availability of trafficked weapons, which supports the drug trade and
terrorism in the country and the subregion, is making matters much worse. One in
three households in Afghanistan has been affected by drug use, and up to 850,000
women are estimated to use drugs. At the same time, the availability of evidencebased drug-use prevention remains limited. There are 107 drug treatment centres
in the country, including nine for women and children, with limited capacity for
outpatient and outreach programmes, or for longer-term recovery support. Due
to funding shortages and the conclusion of an UNODC project, five of the nine
treatment centres for women and children, in five provinces, were forced to close this
year. This is extremely concerning as amphetamine-type stimulants have emerged
as a serious problem.
While opium and opioids remain the most frequently used substances, use
of methamphetamine is now being reported in nearly all provinces. Large-scale
manufacturing of methamphetamine is emerging in Afghanistan. Seizures in and
outside the country also confirm the scale of this new threat. Only four grams of
methamphetamine were seized in Afghanistan in 2008, while in 2019 total seizures
reached 1.25 tons.
The challenges I have briefly outlined are immense, and it will take the
political will of Afghanistan, cooperation with its neighbours and the support of the
international community to find lasting solutions. I would like to acknowledge the
6/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

efforts undertaken by Afghan law enforcement authorities to contain the trafficking
threat, including through the mobile detection teams and precursor control units
created with UNODC support. UNODC also helped to establish airport interdiction
units, which assisted a controlled delivery operation that resulted in the seizure of
seven kilograms of heroin. A follow-up investigation in India led to the seizure of
300 kilograms of heroin.
Similar successes have been achieved through the port control units established
under the global Container Control Programme of the World Customs Organization
and UNODC. This demonstrates how a small seizure can trigger bigger operational
successes if the advanced investigative techniques that UNODC promotes can be
deployed. The question for the future remains: how we can scale up such success
stories and have a real impact?
The same holds true for UNODC alternative development initiatives, which
we are pursuing in 66 of 407 districts. In the last two years, we have helped to
create over 18,000 new jobs, including 7,600 for women, and nearly 2,000 hectares
of agricultural land have been brought under licit cultivation. Nevertheless, these
efforts to create sustainable licit incomes face serious constraints, as many opiumgrowing areas remain outside the influence of the Government.
The COVID-19 crisis has heightened many risks and vulnerabilities and
could further drive illicit opium-poppy cultivation if we cannot take urgent action.
First and foremost, we need to ensure that counter-narcotics policies are situated
in broader development and security strategies, that such action is sustainably
resourced by donors and reinforced by regional cooperation, and that it is tailored to
meet emerging threats.
UNODC stands ready to expand alternative development initiatives as the
security situation and resources allow, and I would like to highlight the contribution
alternative development can make in putting women and girls at the centre of the
COVID-19-response and recovery efforts, as called for in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/549). Our Office is ready to step up the integrated support we offer
to Afghanistan to prevent and tackle drug trafficking and related organized crime
and corruption, including in addressing illicit firearms, money laundering and
financing of terrorism. I also appeal to the international community for increased
support to help Afghanistan provide evidence-based prevention, treatment and other
services for drug use and related diseases, in line with global commitments.
Political will and donor support in Afghanistan must be matched with renewed
investment in regional cooperation. UNODC supports several regional initiatives
and mechanisms and urges Afghanistan and its neighbours to make best use of them
to strengthen regional action. I hope we can rely on the support of Security Council
members to help us reinvigorate regional cooperation.
Finally, in scaling up and sustaining assistance to Afghanistan to address
both supply and demand, our action must be tailored to address the emerging threat
of synthetic drugs, which poses new dangers to the country, the region and the
world at large. I would like to thank President Ashraf Ghani for his attention to
the importance of counter-narcotics for the future of Afghanistan, and I welcome
his decision to establish and personally chair the High Commission for CounterNarcotics and Intoxicants.
I offer UNODC’s full support through our integrated country, regional and
interregional approach, and I urge the authorities to ensure that counter-narcotic
operations will continue throughout the peace process. In this way, they will be
contributing to the achievement of a durable peace. UNODC stands with the people
of Afghanistan, and I am committed to working with all our partners to forge new
paths of cooperation so as to help Afghanistan build back better.
20-086987/29

S/2020/597

Annex III
Statement by the Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, Shaharzad Akbar
I am grateful for this opportunity to address the Security Council. I would
like to thank France, as President of the Council this month, for inviting me to share
my perspectives on human rights in Afghanistan and on the Afghan peace process.
The response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has affected
human rights around the world. In Afghanistan, the pandemic has made several
segments of the population more vulnerable, including the poor and daily wagers,
women and children, detainees, people with disabilities and the elderly, and has
led to concerns about increasing poverty. Aware of the multidimensional impact
of COVID-19 on human rights, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission has adapted measures to enable us to continue monitoring and
following up on violations of the human rights of women, advocating for children’s
access to vaccination and education, monitoring detainees’ right to health and safety,
calling for transparency, access to information, the right to protest and freedom
from restraint by police, and actively participating in the provincial COVID-19
response committees in different parts of Afghanistan with a view to informing
local Government authorities about human rights aspects of response measures.
As Afghanistan faces the challenge of tackling the pandemic, the conflict
rages on, despite repeated calls for a comprehensive ceasefire, taking a huge toll on
the population with alarming number of civilian causalities and a worrisome trend of
targeted assassinations. This conflict has raged in various guises for over 40 years.
Today Afghans continue to suffer death or serious harm through a variety of
types of violence including, but not limited to, suicide attacks, air strikes and night
raids. Civilians experience violence while praying in mosques and gurdwaras, while
at work, in farms, factories or at the office, while travelling to visit relatives or on the
way to work, or while studying in primary and secondary schools in preparation for
a better future. Mothers have been targeted by gunmen while giving birth.
I want to draw attention to the extraordinary levels of violence civilians face,
and the extraordinary degree to which civilians continue to be harmed. The peace
process must begin with recognition of the degree of harm and suffering civilians
face, and we must all work to bring about a comprehensive ceasefire as quickly
as possible.
Aware of the devastating impact of the conflict on human rights, the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission has called for a comprehensive
ceasefire, launched our “put down the guns” campaign and welcomed steps to enable
intra-Afghan negotiations. As an impartial, independent entity mandated to protect
the rights of all Afghans, the Commission wants to play a clear role in the peace
process in order to enable us to provide expert input into the discussions about
human rights for both negotiating sides, namely, the Republic of Afghanistan and
the Taliban, and to monitor respect for human rights in various stages of the process.
The Commission’s work and advocacy on the peace process focuses on
contributing to an inclusive process, a durable outcome and mechanisms for the
preservation and expansion of human rights. The Commission and the broader
Afghan civil society and public are calling for transparency, victim-centred justice,
accountability and the meaningful inclusion of women and minorities in the process.
We are also calling for specific measures acknowledging the voice and rights of
victims to be endorsed by both sides.

8/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

To this end, the Commission has raised the issue of victims’ rights and
accountability in relation to prisoner exchange, is continuously engaging with the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’s negotiation team, has reached out to the Taliban on
human rights issues and has put forward four concrete mechanisms to enable broader
public participation in the peace process. The mechanisms for the consideration of
both negotiating teams include victims’ testimonies, ongoing consultation with a
select reference group of civil society and human rights activists, the negotiation
teams’ openness to receiving specific proposals and expertise, and nationwide
consultation and outreach on human rights and victims’ issues. The aim of these
mechanisms is to bring the issue of victim-centred justice to the fore, which we
believe is essential for achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Afghans have long suffered from the conflict, and the country’s progress and
prosperity has been paralysed by the ongoing war, which has impeded our potential
to be a peaceful and contributing member of the global community. Like many
Afghans, I experienced war and migration as a child, and I am now raising my son in
a war-torn country. In the past 19 years, Afghans have made strides in our struggle
to secure the basic human rights involved in leading dignified lives as equal citizens
who can hold their Government accountable. Much remains to be accomplished, and
the progress has been uneven. However, peace should provide an opportunity for
expansion of access to human rights and should not lead to backsliding.
To end the conflict in Afghanistan, we have a much-needed sense of urgency,
but we also need to acknowledge that only an inclusive process with human rights at
its heart can lead to lasting peace and prevent a return to conflict. Any compromise
on the basic human rights of Afghans will not lead to peace. To achieve lasting
peace, we will need the United Nations and the global human rights community to
stand with Afghans to stop the violence, preserve human rights — particularly the
rights of women and minorities — and ensure that the voices of victims will be heard
and that their demands will not be overlooked.

20-086989/29

S/2020/597

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
I too want to welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lyons to the Security Council. We congratulate her on taking up her post; she
can count on our full support. We also thank Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their
informative briefings.
We welcome the political agreement in Kabul. This needs to pave the way,
without delay, to the formation of a fully-fledged Government and to intra-Afghan
negotiations. Confidence-building measures, such as prisoner releases, are useful
tools for building trust between parties. However, the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan was, and is not, party to the United States-Taliban agreement.
Ideally, a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire accompanies the start of
negotiations. At the very least, it should be the outcome of those talks. I reiterate
the importance of the full and meaningful participation of women of diverse
backgrounds in peace talks. Current female participation should be scaled up, and
any future agreement must guarantee the rights of women and girls.
While the Eid Al-Fitr ceasefire was a welcome development, the civilian toll
of the conflict remains staggering. We call on all sides to immediately address this
unacceptable suffering. I stress the importance of accountability and for bringing
those responsible to justice. We take note of the opening of an investigation by the
International Criminal Court. Moreover, resolution 2513 (2020) clearly stipulates
the start of intra-Afghan negotiations and violence reduction by the Taliban as
conditions for any review of listings under the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011).
We sincerely regret the continued deliberate attacks on health-care personnel
and facilities, particularly during the coronavirus disease crisis, as reported by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. These attacks violate
international humanitarian law and constitute war crimes. On 12 May, it became
tragically clear that in Afghanistan even newborns are not spared the horrors of war.
We call upon the Government to conduct a thorough investigation into the attack on
the Kabul maternity hospital and to hold the perpetrators to account. Sadly, Doctors
Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières suspended its operations there out of fear
of further violence.
The conflict in Afghanistan is the world’s deadliest for children, who are
nevertheless granted special protection under international humanitarian law. We
are deeply concerned at the scale and severity of grave violations of children’s rights
in the country and thank all delegations for unanimously adopting conclusions
on children and armed conflict. We urge all parties to swiftly implement the
recommendations of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Belgium reaffirms its steadfast commitment to the Afghan people. We are
contributing through bilateral and multilateral channels to the implementation of
the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), the Afghan National Army Trust
Fund and NATO’s Resolute Support Mission. I want to emphasize that, in line with
the conclusions of the Council of the European Union adopted last month, future
support will be determined by the level of commitment of the Afghan authorities to
good governance and human rights.
A just peace must be inclusive of all Afghans, including women, youth
and minorities.
10/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex V
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah
Lyons, Ms. Fathi Waly and Ms. Akbar for their briefings.
The Dominican Republic commends, and reiterates its support for, the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), especially during
this challenging time.
The peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. We
congratulate the efforts of the parties concerned in promoting the political dialogue
and peace process and welcome the political agreement between the United States
and the Taliban. As expressed on different occasions by the Council, Afghanistan
has no alternative but a political solution.
The Dominican Republic calls for inclusive representation of all sides in the
negotiations. It is essential that women participate directly and meaningfully in the
peace talks at all decision-making levels.
We remain deeply concerned about the volatile security situation, especially
the number of casualties attributed to the Taliban in the southern region. Furthermore,
we condemn any sort of attack perpetrated against health-care facilities. Medical
services must not be hampered by conflict. In this regard, it is of the utmost
importance to reduce violence and establish a ceasefire to protect the civilian
population, in particular women and children. The Dominican Republic reiterates
that the parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties.
The economy and social development remain challenging. The country is
facing harsh economic conditions during the pandemic. If Afghanistan does not have
a solid foundation, it cannot have lasting and sustained prosperity. Resolution 2513
(2020) calls for the promotion of regional cooperation and connectivity.
Afghanistan carries the terrible burden of being the world’s deadliest conflict
for children. And now, with coronavirus disease (COVID-19), women are at greater
risk from a surge in gender-based violence. The humanitarian situation must improve.
Before COVID-19, 9.4 million Afghans required humanitarian assistance. We call on
all parties to fully exercise their role to ensure the delivery of humanitarian support,
more so now during the pandemic.
Before concluding, I call on the international community to remain engaged
and continue to support Afghanistan, in accordance with the commitment to the
ongoing transformation decade, 2015 to 2024.
Finally, we wish to acknowledge the important role played by UNAMA in
promoting peace in the country through outstanding contributions in areas such as
human rights, particularly for women. That progress must be maintained.

20-0869811/29

S/2020/597

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson.
I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons for her significant work and
comprehensive briefing to the Council and wish her much success in her upcoming
years in a challenging role as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to thank the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly, for her proficient presentation and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar
for giving a bold and realistic explanation of the situation in Afghanistan.
I would like to commend UNAMA on its activity and engagement under
challenging conditions in support of the Government and the people of Afghanistan
in several areas, in particular the women, peace and security agenda, transitional
justice, the inclusion of civil society, as well as on its provision of coordination,
advice and assistance to protect human rights during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) crisis. Estonia strongly supports these efforts and is always open to
exploring ways in which the United Nations, including the Security Council, may
further assist UNAMA’s endeavours.
We consider the political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah
as an important step in strengthening the republic and progressing towards
reconciliation and sustainable peace. We expect the Government of Afghanistan to
stay the course of accountable governance and to ensure the meaningful participation
of a diverse and inclusive negotiating team for the intra-Afghan negotiation. We are
therefore glad that the 21-member negotiating team comprises representatives from
various political and social constituencies, including four women. This shows some
progress and, to a degree, attests to women’s participation in the peace process. And
so we regret that the Taliban has questioned the inclusiveness of the team.
We urge the Government and all Afghan actors and armed groups, particularly
the Taliban, to seize the current historic opportunity for peace and reconciliation and
to commit actively to an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process,
while making sure that any effort pertaining to the peace process does not erode the
human rights and fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution.
The achievements of the past 19 years, for which Afghans and the international
community, including Estonia, have made enormous sacrifices, must be retained and
further enhanced.
We are deeply concerned as the security situation on the ground remains
violent and unpredictable. High-profile attacks by anti-Government elements have
continued. According to the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/549), there
were 3,422 armed clashes during the reporting period. The conflict remains one of
the deadliest in the world, with 417 child casualties, including 152 killed and 265
maimed, in the first quarter of the year. We deplore in the strongest terms the attacks
against children. We call on all parties to reduce violence immediately and establish
a humanitarian ceasefire in order to protect all civilians, in particular women and
children, and to focus efforts on tackling the COVID-19 pandemic, in which healthcare personnel remain on the front line, risking their own lives to save others. There
is absolutely no excuse for the deliberate attacks on health-care personnel and
facilities by either the Taliban or the Afghan national security forces. We strongly
condemn the attacks, including threats, abductions and the horrific attack on the
Dasht-e-Barchi hospital in Kabul on 12 May. It is essential that crimes such as these
are investigated and that perpetrators are held accountable.

12/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

The spread of COVID-19 is having a devastating impact on women and girls
owing to the increased level of domestic violence caused by lockdown measures. In
this regard, we appreciate the European Union-United Nations Spotlight Initiative
aiming to highlight the risks of increased domestic violence and to raise awareness
of sexual and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Afghanistan has come a long way
with the help of the international community, including the United Nations, the
European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and many nations around
the world. Yet, serious challenges remain. Therefore, once again, we call on all sides
to act swiftly, build confidence, start the intra-Afghan negotiations without delay
and fulfil their commitments to working towards a long-term reduction in violence
and the establishment of peace. We need to see a comprehensive peace agreement
that ends the violence for good.

20-0869813/29

S/2020/597

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Anne Gueguen
[Original: English and French]
I thank the speakers for their presentations. As we tirelessly advocate for
the full participation of Afghan women in the peace process and in public life,
I am pleased that the Council is being briefed by women whose experience and
contribution to peace and security, in Afghanistan and elsewhere, are great.
The hope raised by the 29 February agreements is rekindled. After a difficult
period, there are encouraging signs that the start of inter-Afghan negotiations now
seems possible again. The agreement of 17 May is one of those signs; it has made
it possible to overcome the political deadlock. The first steps towards the release
of prisoners and the implementation of the agreements are a second such sign.
Restoring trust between the various partners is essential. But we must not stop there.
Almost four months after the February agreements, much remains to be done, and
discussions must begin as soon as possible.
The conflict in Afghanistan continues to claim the lives of many civilians,
especially women and children. The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire
must be implemented. This violence, combined with attacks on health facilities,
is hampering the response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. France reiterates
its strong condemnation of the attacks on the Dasht-e-Barchi maternity hospital,
as well as those against Afghan security forces on 17 June and on a funeral in
Nangarhar province. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, and first and foremost of children, must be a top priority, and
all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Reducing violence is imperative. Peace will depend on the fulfilment of each party’s
commitments, including commitments to reduce violence and combat terrorism. The
Afghan authorities have pledged to do so; the Taliban must now do their part. The
fight against impunity and respect for justice by all actors are also the sine qua non
condition for lasting peace.
Women have paid the heaviest price in this pandemic. Many have lost their
jobs or are victims of gender-based, sexual or domestic violence. Our collective
priority must be to support them. Tomorrow’s Afghanistan must be built with the
whole of society, building on the gains made in terms of democracy and human
rights for all, without discrimination. We cannot accept any backtracking. The full
and active participation of women in the peace process is an indispensable condition
for its long-term success.
Among the threats to Afghanistan’s security, drugs, along with terrorism, are
among those whose seriousness prevents lasting peace. Yet, Ms. Waly’s presentation
showed that drug production, despite years of struggle, is on the rise and diversifying.
It has devastating effects on Afghan society and global security. It is also a major
source of financing for terrorism. For all these reasons, the international community
and the Afghan authorities must continue to show unfailing determination to combat
those two scourges.
The resolute commitment of Afghanistan’s partners to standing at its side
is indispensable to a lasting peace. France will be there, as always. I welcome the
essential role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations in Afghanistan and call on all to support the stabilization of Afghanistan
and to contribute positively to the establishment of lasting peace in the country.
14/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
I would like to thank our briefers, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and Ms. Akbar, for their informative briefings and assessments. It is always great to
see the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan in the Council.
I would also like to extend a particularly warm welcome to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons in her new job. She is indeed
taking up her duties in a particularly crucial year for Afghanistan. As she said, there
is coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the challenge it represents to the prospect of
the nascent peace talks. There is also the 2020 pledging conference, which will be
so crucial. So, we wish her every success and assure her that we will do anything we
can to support her in her important job.
Let me start with some condolences, because the recent weeks in Afghanistan
have been among the most gruesome of the last two decades. The attacks on a
maternity ward and on a funeral in May were terribly shocking. We did right to
condemn them as a Council. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims.
The overall level of violence, with continued Taliban attacks — more than
90 attacks a day — is extremely worrying. The attacks go against the spirit of the
29 February agreement between the Taliban and the United States. Violence must
be reduced and eventually end for intra-Afghan negotiations to start. We reiterate
that all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. Recent
reports have indicated that Afghanistan is the deadliest conflict for children on the
globe. The perpetrators must know that they will be held accountable for their brutal,
cynical acts.
We also reiterate the importance of a sustainable peace, which can only be
achieved through a negotiated and inclusive political settlement, owned and led by
the people of Afghanistan, including its women. This will require flexibility on all
sides. Any talks and negotiations need to build on what has already been achieved.
Women must be equally and meaningfully represented in the negotiation team.
We highly appreciate all steps taken to move that process forward, namely
the direct talks between the conflict parties to implement the exchange of prisoners
and hostages. While some steps have yet to be taken, we welcome the plans to
start intra-Afghan negotiations soon. Such an arduous process needs a united
international support effort. We need to encourage both sides to take constructive and
confidence-building steps. Germany will continue its work to support the process
in close cooperation with its partners, including our co-penholder Indonesia, as well
as Norway, Uzbekistan and, especially, Qatar. We highly recommend the United
Nations take an active role in the process.
We commend the important role that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan is playing to coordinate international assistance, particularly during
the pandemic, but also to monitor the situation on the ground and engage with
conflict parties to bring the peace process forward. The members of the Council
should continue to lend their support to this vital Mission. Germany will soon be
engaging with all Council members to renew its mandate.
Afghanistan is severely affected by the COVID-19 crisis. The official
number of 30,000 cases can only be the tip of the iceberg. Ending the violence is of
paramount importance. In March, the Security Council urged the conflict parties to
20-0869815/29

S/2020/597

heed the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. We reaffirm that call today.
There are also worrying reports about attacks on health facilities and health workers.
During the current pandemic, those facilities are even more relevant. They must not
be targeted.
Afghanistan needs continued and reliable international assistance to address
the immediate humanitarian needs and the long-term economic and social challenges.
We highly appreciate the coordinating role of United Nations organizations, through
which we channel most of our immediate aid to fight the pandemic in Afghanistan. For
effective implementation, the close cooperation of the Government of Afghanistan
with the United Nations and other international agencies is paramount. We urge
all sides to cooperate with the relevant United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders in the COVID-19 response.
The 2020 Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, co-hosted by
Finland and Afghanistan, is a milestone for the continuous support to the country.
Continued funding is vital if we want to minimize the risk of jeopardizing the
progress achieved over the past 19 years. Such a commitment will be based on the
joint understanding that Afghanistan will continue on the path of reforms.

16/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
We thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their insightful
briefings. We also welcome Ms. Deborah Lyons as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). She may rest assured that Indonesia will continue
to support her and UNAMA. I also welcome my sister, Ambassador Adela Raz, to
this video-teleconference.
The beauty of speaking after my co-penholder from Germany is that my
work is much easier, since he has alluded to our joint efforts to help Afghanistan in
achieving peace. I think many points have been stated by my co-penholder, Germany,
so I will just add a few additional points.
Since the last briefing on UNAMA in March (see S/2020/274), we have
witnessed greater energy put in by domestic, regional and international stakeholders
to push forward the Afghan peace process. These common efforts speak to the
necessity of continued cooperation in staying firmly on the path to peace, which the
people of Afghanistan eagerly await. The opportunity is here. Let us intensify the
momentum to capitalize on it.
Having listened to the briefers, Indonesia underlines the following.
First is safeguarding the peace process and nurturing reconciliation. Indonesia
welcomes the political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah. We
hope that the Cabinet will form soon so as to also streamline a strengthened response
against the coronavirus disease, which is exacerbating the challenges.
The political agreement augurs well for a united stand in intra-Afghan peace
negotiations too. The intra-Afghan negotiations should follow without delay. All
parties must avoid any provocations that could hamper the talks. The enhancement
of mutual trust and understanding by putting only the well-being and long-term
interests of ordinary Afghans as the top priority is crucial. Indonesia encourages
continued confidence-building in that regard, and we welcome the prisoner releases
by the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban.
Indonesia stands ready to further support the peace process. We will also be
relentless with our ongoing assistance programmes to enhance women’s participation
in nation-building and various public-sector capacities.
The second issue is ending violence and strengthening the protection of
civilians. We are deeply concerned that the Afghan conflict remains extremely
devastating for civilians and children. We are saddened to hear the report of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons just now that children have
been victims of barbaric attacks. It must stop. Terrorism and attacks are exacting
a heartbreaking toll on humanitarian, media and human-rights workers too. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/549) also mentions increased violence
against women.
The violence must stop, and it must stop now. Indonesia urges the Government
to intensify the protection of civilians by holding the violators fully accountable.
Combating narcotics is also essential to cutting the terrorists’ financing. Increased
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant
agencies is important.

20-0869817/29

S/2020/597

Violence to further one’s political agenda is counter-productive. It also leaves
deep psychological impacts, with a lingering resentment in generations whose
support is essential to nation-building.
Third is the role of Afghan women and preserving human rights. Indonesia
welcomes greater women’s representation in various public institutions over recent
years. The inclusion of four women in the team for the intra-Afghan peace negotiation
is also encouraging.
Indonesia is a firm believer that the meaningful participation of women is
indispensable for reconciliation and enduring peace. Our Foreign Minister also
emphasized that when female leaders from Indonesia exchanged best practices with
Afghan women in Kabul last February. Through the recent launch of the AfghanistanIndonesia women solidarity network and other avenues, Indonesia will remain
focused on enhancing Afghan women’s participation in the Afghan peace process.
It is important that the Security Council also monitor Afghanistan’s
constitutional gains concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
country must be assisted in order to not revert backwards.
Let me close by underscoring Indonesia’s long-standing position of supporting
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We pray to have a violence-free,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan. Insha’Allah, with the singlemindedness and good
faith of all sides, we will witness that soon.

18/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex X
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons,
for her observations and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. UNAMA
plays an important role in coordinating international assistance to this country.
The Russian Federation supports its mandate and activities. We welcome the first
briefing by Ms. Lyons in the Security Council and wish her every success.
We have also listened attentively to the assessments of the Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly. We
thank the Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, for her respective briefing.
We have studied carefully the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/549) about the activities and efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
The key issue that is on the radar today is the peace process. The Russian
Federation consistently supports the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
in Afghanistan. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General has rightly
mentioned, one of the crucial factors in starting intra-Afghan negotiations — and
definitely not the easiest one — is the prisoner releases. We emphasize that this issue
remains one of the key preconditions vital for future peace talks. We note several
positive steps taken by the Government and the Taliban in that regard and call for the
rapid release of the remaining prisoners in the coming days.
We affirm our principled position that the upcoming Afghan peace process
should be inclusive. All efforts should be focused on promoting national reconciliation,
which will lead to the end of the long-standing war in the country and the revival of a
peaceful, united and independent State, free of terrorism and drug crime.
We have no illusions that direct intra-Afghan talks might be complicated
and protracted, especially given the different understanding of the future political
architecture of Afghanistan by both sides. Russia has always stood and still stands
ready to facilitate negotiations. Enabling the Afghan parties to find an agreement
that is acceptable to all and establishing a sustainable peace in the country are at the
heart of our efforts within the troika plus Pakistan, which remains a very important
driving force for the peace process in Afghanistan. For that reason, we also actively
participated in the four-party virtual conference of the Special Representatives of
the Russian Federation, China, Iran and Pakistan on Afghanistan on 18 May 2020
and in the trilateral virtual meeting of the Russian Federation, the United States and
Afghanistan on 15 June 2020.
We truly believe that the regional actors can and should play their substantive
role in promoting the peace process. The regional players and neighbours will
undoubtedly be the first beneficiaries of the resolution of this protracted conflict in
Afghanistan. Their cooperation and assistance are crucial to Afghanistan’s peace,
stability and development. In that regard, we emphasize that the Moscow format,
which has under its umbrella all key participants, including Afghanistan itself, can
play a crucial role.
Against that backdrop, the security situation in Afghanistan remains volatile.
It is worsened by the activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in the country. We fully condemn the recent barbaric and cowardly terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Nangarhar, which resulted in a high number of victims and
for which ISIL-Khorasan claimed responsibility. The continued presence of ISIL
20-0869819/29

S/2020/597

in Afghanistan is still of serious concern to us. This represents a real threat to the
security of both Afghanistan and its neighbours, the countries of Central Asia and
Russia’s southern regions. We strongly believe that underestimating this problem
is unacceptable. We urge all sides in Afghanistan to take decisive action against
Al-Qaida, ISIL, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan
and other international terrorist organizations operating against regional countries.
We are also intensively monitoring developments regarding the fight against
drug trafficking in Afghanistan. In that regard, we support your intention, Madam
President, to focus today’s meeting on the counter-narcotics issue. This threat remains
a serious concern for the country, as well as for the region and the whole world.
Drug production and drug trafficking are sources of significant financial support for
terrorism. We call for all sides to completely eradicate this problem in the country.
We are ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the collective efforts against this
threat, including through our active participation in UNODC, as well as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Needless to say, Afghanistan is at a crucial juncture and needs the full support
and attention of the international community, especially against the backdrop of
the coronavirus disease pandemic situation. Appropriate regional cooperation and
international assistance, as well as the joint efforts of the regional and international
players, will remain imperative in order to achieve lasting peace and stability in
the country.

20/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I too thank our briefers — Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) Deborah Lyons: Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime Ghada Fathi Waly; and Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission Shaharzad Akbar — for their passionate, comprehensive
and insightful presentations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains firmly committed to supporting
Afghanistan on the path to stability and peace. We welcome the efforts of
President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, which culminated in the signing of a powersharing agreement on 17 May, aimed at ending the months-long political impasse
in Afghanistan. This agreement helps to deepen the public support for the future
intra-Afghan negotiations and broaden the understanding and support of the
outcome. In our view, unity and cooperation through inclusive national dialogue and
leadership are necessary to address the needs and challenges faced by the country.
We also believe that intra-Afghan talks should include women and young people, who
are essential to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process and fundamental to
an inclusive negotiated political settlement.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply concerned by the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. According to the report (S/2020/549), the
spread of the coronavirus disease has had serious implications for the humanitarian
situation in view of continued conflict-related displacement, population returns,
poverty and food insecurity. My delegation calls on the international humanitarian
community and national partners to renew their commitment to the humanitarian
needs of people in Afghanistan.
Additionally, the armed conflict remains the deadliest for children. There
have been reports of sexual violence against children and incidents of attacks
against schools and protected personnel. We agree wholeheartedly with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons that if ever there was a prayer for
peace, it would most certainly echo the voices of these children. In that connection,
we reiterate our call for the greater protection of civilians, particularly women,
children and displaced persons, and for respect for international human rights law.
Turning to the 2020 pledging conference on Afghanistan scheduled for later
this year, we encourage the international community and the Afghan Government
to renew their commitments to the mutual objectives to coordinate development
cooperation in Afghanistan. We urge greater support for the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework to promote inclusivity, resilience and
sustainability in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
I feel compelled to highlight a significant fact that is not mentioned in the
report of the Secretary General. The situation in Afghanistan, which has been
affected by years of war, is further compounded by the fact that this is one of the
most climate-vulnerable countries in the world and the environmental impacts of
war and the resultant damage to critical infrastructure have made it one of the least
equipped to handle these challenges. The consequences of flooding, drought and
lack of irrigation for crops contribute to continued instability in Afghanistan. We
call on major emitters and all Member States to significantly reduce their emissions
in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement. We further call on Member States to
fulfil their responsibilities regarding climate finance for adaptation and loss and
damage caused by climate change.
20-0869821/29

S/2020/597

We can only call on Afghans to address what is within their power and control.
The impact of human-induced climate change on this country is palpable and caused
by external forces far beyond its borders. Climate change is one in a deadly mix of
factors at play, but it is too often overlooked. This truth, as inconvenient as it may be,
must be acknowledged so that we may comprehensively address the climate-induced
security risks that undermine stability in Afghanistan. Without action on this front,
lasting peace may remain elusive.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNAMA and our commitment to a
successful and sustainable Afghan peace process.

22/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
We wish to welcome Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), to the Security Council, and we thank her for her briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan and the work of UNAMA.
We also thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, for their briefings. We further extend a
warm welcome to Ambassador Adela Raz to this video-teleconference meeting of
the Council.
Allow me to begin by congratulating and commending the political leaders of
Afghanistan for placing the national interest of their country above their personal
interests, which has resulted in the formation of a Government.
Equally, we wish to commend the crucial mediation role played by both
domestic and international stakeholders in placing Afghanistan on a path to peace.
Accordingly, we welcome the agreement reached in that regard, and we hope that the
parties can build on these positive developments by injecting renewed impetus and
support for the start of the intra-Afghan peace talks.
South Africa calls on all parties to urgently work towards commencing
the intra-Afghan peace talks as soon as the conditions and coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) restrictions allow. In the interim, it is important to state that a ceasefire
remains a critical enabler of such talks and a catalyst for lasting peace and security
for all Afghan people. South Africa wishes to reiterate, again, the importance of an
inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process, taking on board the voices of
all sectors of society. This includes hearing the strong voices of women, who have
remained steadfast in their commitment to participating in the peace process and
playing an active role in contributing to a peaceful Afghan society.
South Africa is proud to be among the 170 signatories to the statement of
support for Secretary-General Guterres’ appeal for a global ceasefire to combat the
COVID-19 pandemic and we reiterate that call in support of the people of Afghanistan.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2020/549), the
impact of COVID-19, together with sustained conflict, food insecurity and fragile
infrastructure, has increased the suffering of the Afghan people.
My delegation appreciates the measures enacted by both the Government
of Afghanistan and UNAMA to limit the spread of the virus, and calls on the
international community to support Afghanistan in ensuring that the necessary
equipment and medical supplies are available to those in need.
South Africa is most concerned about the circumstances of Afghan children,
many of whom have seen the worst humanity has to offer. As detailed by the
Secretary-General, “the armed conflict in Afghanistan remains the deadliest
conflict in the world for children”. The scale, severity and recurrence of violations
and abuses endured by children in Afghanistan — particularly the high levels of
killing and maiming, the recruitment and use of children in conflict, acts of sexual
violence against children, the targeting of schools and hospitals and the denial of
humanitarian access — must be stopped.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations
under international human rights law as well as international humanitarian law. All
20-0869823/29

S/2020/597

those responsible for committing or conducting acts of grave violations, particularly
against children, in Afghanistan should be brought to justice and held accountable
for their actions.
Let me now also state South Africa’s strong condemnation of the heinous
acts of terrorism, including the attacks on a Sikh temple and a maternity hospital in
Kabul, that occurred during the reporting period. The perpetrators of these and other
terrorist acts must be brought to justice for peace to prevail.
In conclusion, allow me to extend my appreciation to the leadership, troops
and personnel of UNAMA, all of whom operate in a challenging environment.
UNAMA’s continued engagement with national, regional and international
stakeholders in seeking an end to the violence, its work in support of a ceasefire
as well as in promoting the intra-Afghan negotiations, and its encouragement of
confidence-building measures are all necessary and significant components in
bringing long-term peace, security and prosperity to Afghanistan.

24/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Ms. Deborah Lyons on her
appointment as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
to thank her for her first briefing to the Council.
I also would like to thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson
of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, for their briefings.
Tunisia welcomes the power-sharing agreement reached in May between
President Ashraf Ghani and former Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, and looks
forward to the completion of the formation of the new Government and the High
Council for Peace and National Reconciliation, which has been tasked, under the
chairmanship of Abdullah Abdullah, to lead the Government’s efforts to reach a
peace deal with the Taliban.
While we regret the increasing number of attacks staged by the Taliban
against Government forces over recent weeks, we are encouraged by the recent
announcement that the two sides have agreed to start the long-awaited peace talks.
Tunisia reiterates, in this regard, its support to all international initiatives in favour
of peace efforts in Afghanistan.
We also stress the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned
political process, with the meaningful participation of women, to achieve a
sustainable solution that includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of
fundamental rights and freedoms for all in Afghanistan, especially women.
Tunisia remains deeply concerned by the high level of violence in Afghanistan
at a time when the priority should be given to protecting the population from the
dangers of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are, in this regard, particularly
appalled by the recent attacks against health-care facilities and personnel, including
the gruesome attack on a maternity ward in Kabul on 12 May, which left 24 dead,
among them newborns, mothers and nurses.
We call on all parties to heed to the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and stress the importance that they uphold international humanitarian law
and take the necessary measures to prevent civilian casualties. We also underline the
necessity to hold all those responsible for these casualties accountable.
Efforts should also be reinforced to defeat the terrorist groups that are still
active in Afghanistan by limiting and hopefully eliminating their operational and
financial capabilities. In this regard, we share the view that the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces should continue to be fully supported and that more
efforts should be made to fight drug trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit
economy and finance terrorist groups.
The Taliban should also to do its utmost to stop the attacks perpetrated by its
members and honour its counter-terrorism commitments.
Lastly, we believe that the peace process should be accompanied by an
ambitious plan to assist the Afghan Government on the economic and social levels.
The international community should step up its efforts to that end. Initiatives
to further promote regional cooperation and economic integration should also
be encouraged.

20-0869825/29

S/2020/597

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons; it is great to
see her today. I also thank Director Waly and Chairperson Akbar for their informative
briefings and their efforts to be here today.
The United States remains fully committed to assisting Afghanistan achieve a
political settlement to the conflict. Recent developments reflect the promise of peace
and the critical challenges that must be overcome to end a conflict that claims Afghan
lives every single day. The Afghan Government and the Taliban have taken important
steps toward intra-Afghan negotiations that include the Afghan government, other
Afghan leaders, including civil society and women’s groups, and the Taliban.
These talks promise the best chance of a political road map to sustainable
peace. Once they begin, we will have reached the international community’s longstated goal of an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political process. Since
we last discussed Afghanistan in the Council in March (see S/PV.8742), there have
been three significant and positive developments in Afghanistan that offer hope for
reaching this milestone.
First, the United States welcomes the agreement reached between Afghan
President Ghani and the leader of the High Council for Peace and National
Reconciliation, Mr. Abdullah. As the two set aside their differences, the formation of
an inclusive Government that can stabilize Afghanistan, advance the peace process
and tackle the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic remains essential.
Secondly, because the reduction of violence is paramount in creating the
conditions necessary for intra-Afghan negotiations, we recognize the Taliban’s
decision to observe a ceasefire during Eid, just as we recognize the Afghan
Government’s decision to reciprocate and announce its own ceasefire.
Thirdly, the Afghan Government has now released over 3,000 Taliban
prisoners, and the Taliban has released more than 500 prisoners. These are important
milestones in this confidence-building measure. Furthermore, it is significant that
the Taliban publicly committed to join intra-Afghan negotiations within one week of
the Afghan Government releasing 5,000 prisoners.
Against this backdrop of positive developments, we must be candid about the
serious challenges that remain. Since the Eid ceasefire, violence has continued to
climb, and innocent Afghans continue to bear the costs of this war, as witnessed by
recent, devastating attacks. Left unchecked, this violence could disrupt the start of
negotiations. The United States condemns all such attacks, most especially those
specifically directed against civilians and civilian objects, which violate international
humanitarian law.
Recently, there have been shocking attacks against health-care workers and
facilities. The United States condemns them and, furthermore, condemns threats to
health-care workers and the brazen use of explosives in civilian-populated areas.
The appalling 12 May attack on a Kabul hospital, which targeted its maternity ward,
killed at least 24 civilians, most of whom were female patients. Among the dead
were newborn babies. On the same day, a suicide attack at a funeral in Nangarhar,
claimed by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in Khorasan Province, killed at
least 19 civilians and injured many more. We also condemn the attack this week on
lawyers from the Office of the Attorney General and other team members working
to facilitate prisoner releases, which killed five civilians. We cannot overlook these
26/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

awful incidents, but I also want to be clear: no party should allow spoilers to deter
them from the path of peace.
The United States also recognizes that COVID-19 is having a devastating
impact on the lives of the Afghan people as the virus continues to spread across
the country. The United States continues to build on its commitment to supporting
Afghan health care and livelihoods. We have contributed $20.6 million in COVID19-related assistance to Afghanistan for critical surveillance, treatment and
prevention programming.
While mindful of the fact that practical details will need to be worked out, we
are closer to our goal of a post-conflict Afghanistan than ever before. We reiterate to
the Afghan Government and the Taliban the importance and benefits of incorporating
women’s rights and participation in all aspects of the peace process, as well as the
participation of other underrepresented groups.
This momentous opportunity should not be missed, and the Trump
Administration will continue to do its part. We call on both sides to build on the
momentum they created, with the Eid ceasefire and accelerated prisoner releases, to
reduce violence, to continue to release prisoners, and to work pragmatically towards
agreement on the modalities of negotiations.
In closing, we recognize the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in supporting the Afghan people in creating an environment conducive
to the intra-Afghan negotiations. The United States remains committed to ensuring
that terrorist organizations are never again able to use Afghanistan to threaten the
security of the United States or its allies, and we look forward to continuing our work
with Special Representative Lyons to advance peace and stability in Afghanistan.

20-0869827/29

S/2020/597

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Ms. Lyons, Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their statements.
It is interesting that all the briefers today are women. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, in this meeting.
While we continue to closely follow the situation in Afghanistan with great
interest, we would like to reiterate our support for the Afghan-led and Afghanowned inclusive peace process and for the resolution 2513 (2020), which has laid the
foundations for the pursuit of long-term peace for the country.
We welcome the recent positive developments on the political front. It is
encouraging to see the spirit of compromise displayed by President Ghani and
Mr. Abdullah in reaching the 17 May agreement. We note consistent efforts to
promote women’s participation in various aspects of the peace process, including
having nearly 20 per cent of the peace negotiations team be women.
At the same time, Viet Nam remains concerned about the security situation.
Although the numbers of security incidents and civilian casualties have decreased
compared to the previous period, the situation on the ground remains very fragile.
We strongly condemn the continued attacks of the Taliban and other terrorist groups.
We are also concerned about the increasing spread and impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) on security, peacebuilding and the socioeconomic development
of the country. Transnational crimes and drug trafficking are also issues of high
concern, which threaten the security situation.
Allow me emphasize the following three main points.
First, the most important issue now is to advance the implementation of
resolution 2513 (2020), particularly in starting the intra-Afghan negotiations. It is
critical that the talks start as soon as possible, with a permanent ceasefire as the first
goal. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other relevant stakeholders in facilitating the
negotiations. In this regard, we are encouraged to hear the reports on the possible
peace talks in the coming weeks in Doha. We also look forward to seeing further
strengthened and active participation of women in this process.
Secondly, in parallel to the peace talks, it is vital to improve the security
situation. Despite the agreement of a nationwide reduction of violence, the Taliban
has been carrying out attacks on the Afghan people, many of whom are women and
children. We are deeply concerned that during the past week, the Taliban carried out
422 attacks in 32 provinces and killed 291 Afghan security personnel. The escalation
of violence took place only a few days after the Taliban had announced a three-day
ceasefire on 23 May. At the same time, health-care personnel have been bearing the
brunt of the poor security situation. As the threat of COVID-19 remains, Viet Nam
once again urges all parties to heed the call of the Secretary-General to put an end
to the fighting, stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, and allow unhindered
access to humanitarian and health-care services.
Thirdly, the economic and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan continues to
face many challenges due to ongoing conflict, the impact of COVID-19 and natural
disasters. Long-term peace and stability require strong economic development
and sustainable livelihoods for the people. Viet Nam recognizes the efforts of the
Government in advancing socioeconomic development and addressing the COVID-19
pandemic. We call on the international community to further assist Afghanistan
in eradicating poverty, fostering post-conflict reconstruction and overcoming
28/29

20-08698

S/2020/597

the challenges resulting from COVID-19 and climate change. We also call on the
international partners, as well as UNAMA and relevant United Nations agencies,
to further provide technical support to the Afghan authorities in countering crossborder crime and drug trafficking. We would also like to emphasize the importance
of increasing protection for vulnerable groups, especially women, children and
persons with disabilities.
In conclusion, Viet Nam once again emphasizes our full support for UNAMA
and for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, as
well as for the pursuit of peace, stability and development in the country.

20-0869829/29
