S/2008/63

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 February 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 31 January 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I would like to refer to Security Council resolution 1793 (2007), by which the
Council requested me to submit for its consideration by 31 January 2008 a
completion strategy for the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL), including: (a) at least a 20 per cent reduction in staff by 31 March
2008; (b) a continued mission at 80 per cent of the strength as at 21 December 2007
until 30 June 2008; and (c) the termination of the UNIOSIL mandate by
30 September 2008. In the same resolution, the Council also requested me to ensure
that UNIOSIL maintains adequate capacity, expertise and resources to implement its
mandate of providing assistance to the 2008 local government elections and national
institutions promoting good governance and human rights, as well as supporting the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. Accordingly,
the Secretariat, in cooperation with UNIOSIL, has developed a completion strategy
that takes into account the Council’s request to ensure that the mission has sufficient
remaining capacity to complete its mandated tasks.

Completion strategy of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone
Reduction in staff by 31 March 2008
The authorized staffing strength of UNIOSIL currently stands at 309 and
comprises 85 international personnel, 199 national staff/National Professional
Officers and 25 United Nations Volunteers. In order to determine the number of staff
required to perform the remaining tasks mandated by the Council, UNIOSIL
conducted a section-by-section assessment of the remaining tasks and the personnel
required to implement them. Those tasks include assisting the Government in its
efforts to reform the Constitution, enhance democratic governance, strengthen the
security, judicial and corrections sectors, promote human rights, strengthen women’s
participation in the political process and address the root causes of the conflict as
identified by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
The mission will also continue to monitor and assess the political and security
developments in the country, support policy dialogue, promote inter-party dialogue,
facilitate the engagement of Sierra Leone with the Peacebuilding Commission and
assist the Government in the conduct of the local government elections, which are
currently scheduled for 5 July 2008.

08-22556 (E) 050208

*0822556*

S/2008/63

On the basis of the mission-wide review, it was determined that UNIOSIL
could be downsized by 62 posts, representing 20 per cent of the mission’s
authorized staffing complement, by 31 March 2008, thereby bringing its staffing
strength to 247 civilian staff. The 62 posts will comprise 15 international staff
members (4 P-3 and 11 Field Service), 43 national staff and 4 United Nations
Volunteers. Of the 15 international staff members, 4 are assigned to the mission’s
substantive sections, while 11 are assigned to its administrative and security
sections. Of the 43 national staff, 8 are from the substantive component and 35 are
from the administrative and security components. Of the four Volunteers, one is
assigned to the substantive component and three to the administrative component.
To ensure that the mission retains the requisite capacity to effectively perform
its remaining tasks, UNIOSIL is in the process of streamlining tasks within each
section. In addition, the mission will transfer some of its activities, including the
recruitment of United Nations Volunteers who will provide technical assistance to
the National Electoral Commission during the elections, to relevant United Nations
agencies.
Tasks to be performed by the remaining 80 per cent of staff
Until its mandate expires in September 2008, UNIOSIL will continue to
implement the following key tasks set out in Security Council resolutions 1620
(2005), 1734 (2006) and 1793 (2007), namely:
• Assisting the Government in the conduct of local government elections.
UNIOSIL will provide policy advice and technical and logistical assistance to
the National Electoral Commission and the Political Parties Registration
Commission. It will also assist the Government in defusing political and ethnic
tensions and in promoting dialogue among key political parties, especially in
the light of the political and ethnic divisions that were highlighted by the 2007
general elections, which may intensify in the period leading up to the local
government elections in 2008. The mission will also assist in coordinating
technical, financial and logistical support for the elections.
• Monitoring the security situation in the country and strengthening the capacity
of the national security sector. UNIOSIL will support the Government’s efforts
to strengthen the capacity of the security sector, including the Sierra Leone
Police and the Office of National Security. In its effort to assist in building the
capacity of the police to provide effective security during the local government
elections, UNIOSIL will advise and mentor the Sierra Leone Police in crowdcontrol management and polling centre responsibilities. It will also assist the
police in specialized areas such as criminal investigations, airport and border
security, civilian oversight and improving professional standards. A total of
22 United Nations police advisers are currently performing those functions.
Between March and August 2008, five police advisers will depart from the
mission without being replaced. The remaining 17 will depart by 30 September.
• Promoting transparency and accountability. UNIOSIL will promote good
governance, including through measures to combat corruption and improve
accountability. In this regard, the mission will offer policy guidance to the
Government and the Anti-Corruption Commission in the implementation of the
Sierra Leone anti-corruption strategy and its Improved Governance and
Accountability Pact. UNIOSIL will also coordinate international support for
building the capacity of Parliament.

2

08-22556

S/2008/63

• Monitoring and promoting human rights and the rule of law. UNIOSIL will
monitor and report on the human rights situation in the country and assist in
building the capacity of the National Human Rights Commission and in
reforming the judicial and corrections sectors. The mission will also support
the Government in the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and in the preparation of reports and their
submission to international treaty bodies.
• Promoting a culture of peace, dialogue and participation through United
Nations Radio. Through United Nations Radio, UNIOSIL will continue to
promote a culture of peace, dialogue and participation and encourage the
holding of peaceful, fair and transparent local elections. United Nations Radio
will also maintain its role of providing a forum for civic education, debate of
national issues and balanced reporting on events nationwide. Plans for the
transition of United Nations Radio assets into a national independent public
service broadcaster, including a proposal for funding this transition, are being
developed by UNIOSIL.
• Implementing resolution 1325 (2000). UNIOSIL will support national efforts
aimed at building the capacity of the Sierra Leonean Government and civil
society organizations to promote the empowerment of women and their
participation in the decision-making process and the local council elections.
The mission will also work closely with national stakeholders to reduce the
incidence of sexual and gender-based violence.
• Facilitating the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. In its efforts to assist
the Government in consolidating peace in Sierra Leone, UNIOSIL will
facilitate engagement between Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding
Commission through the implementation of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework adopted on 12 December 2007. The mission will also
facilitate the implementation of projects under the Peacebuilding Fund.
Termination of the mission’s mandate by 30 September 2008
Following the local government elections on 5 July 2008, UNIOSIL will
gradually draw down its remaining personnel. It is envisaged that the drawdown will
begin with substantive personnel, while the administrative and logistical staff
needed to complete the liquidation process will withdraw last. It will be important to
ensure that there is a smooth transition from UNIOSIL to the follow-on integrated
political office referred to in my fifth report on UNIOSIL (S/2007/704).
I intend to submit to the Security Council any possible additional proposals on
the mission’s drawdown, as well as on the mandate, structure and strength of the
follow-on integrated political office, in a report on UNIOSIL to be submitted in
April.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-22556

3
