General Assembly-Sixth Session

60

565 (VI). Work of the Special Committee on
information transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter 2 0
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter covering its 1951 sessions ;21
2. Approves the arrangements proposed by the Special Committee for its work in 1952. 22
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

*

* *
In accordance u>ith the terms of resolution 332 (IV) of the
General Assembly, the Fourth Committee, at its 227th meeting
on 14 EJecember 19;1, elected, on behalf of the General Assembly, two members to the Special Committee to fill the vacancies created by the expiration vf the terms of office of Mexico
an,d the Philippines.
The Staf<'s elected were: EcuADOR an.d INDONESIA.

566 (VI). Participation of Non-Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Committee on
Information Jrom Non-Self-Governing Terri•
tories 23
The General Assembly,
Considering that point 9 of the Secretary-General's
"Memorandum of points for consideration in the development of a twenty-year programme for achieving
peace through the United Nations" 24 advocates the use
of the United Nations to promote by peaceful means
the progress of dependent, colonial or semi-colonial
peoples to a position of equality with Member States
of the United Nations,
Considering that resolution 494 (V) adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 November 1950 requests the
appropriate organs of the United Nations to consider
those portions of the Secretary-General's memorandum
with which they are particularly concerned,
Considering that the report of the Special Committee
on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter 25 recommends the use of technical assistance
from the United Nations as a means of promoting the
economic advancement of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Considering that the direct association of the NonSelf-Goveming Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies is an effective

'° The General Assembly decided, by resolution 569 (VI) p.
63, that the Special Committee on Information transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter should henceforth be known
as the "Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories".
11
See Official Re cards of th.: GenPral Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 14.
" Ibid., pp. 8-9.
"The General As,embly decided, by resolution 569 (VI),
p. 63, that the Spcetal Committee on lnformation transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter d1ould henceforth he known
as the "Committee on lnformatiun from Non-Self-Governing
Territories".
"See Official Records o.f the General Assembly Fifth Session
Annexes, agenda item 60.
'
'
X~ Ibid., Sixth Session, Sul'f'lement No. 14, part one, chapter
1

means of promoting the progress of the peoples of
those Territories towards a position of equality with
Member States of the United Nations,
1. N ates that special provisions exist in the constitutions of some of the specialized agencies and of the
regional commissions of the United Nations permitting,
on the proposal of the Administering Member concerned, the admission to those agencies and commissions of Non-Self-Governing Territories as "associate
members";
2. Commends the practice referred to in the preceding paragraph ;
3. Invites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to examine the possibility
of associating the Non-Self-Governing Territories more
closely in its work and to report the results of its examination of this problem to the General Assembly at
its seventh regular session in connexion with the Assembly's consideration of the Committee's future.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

567 (VI). Future procedure for the continuation
of the study of factors which should be taken
into account in deciding whether a territory
is or is not a territory whose people have not
yet attained a full measure of self-govemment

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 334 (IV) adopted on 2
December 1949, the General Assembly invited any special committee which might be appointed on information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to
examine the factors which should be taken into account
in deciding whether any territory is or is not a territory whose people have not yet attained a full measure
of self-government,
H avi.ng examined the report on the matter prepared
by the Special Committee on Information transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter, 26
Having undertaken a revision of the above-mentioned factors,
Considering that the production of a more definitive
list of factors involves protracted and complex studies
on the basis of more complete information than was
available in 1951,
1. Decides to take as a basis the list of factors
· drawn up at the sixth session of the General Assemblv,
which list is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Invites the Members of the United Nations to
transmit in writing to the Secretary-General, by 1 May
1952, a statement of the views of their governments on
the factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether a territory is or is not a territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measure of selfgovernment;
3. Appoints an Ad Hoe Committee of ten members
comprising Australia, Belgium, Burma, Cuba, Denmark, France, Cuatc:mala, Iraq, the United States of
America and Venezuela, in order to carry out a further
study of the factors which should he taken into account
"Ibid., Suf'/'lcmcnl Nn. 14, part four.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

in deciding whether a territory is or is not a territory
whose people have not yet attained a full measure of
self-government ;
4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account all information available, including that transmitted to the Secretary-General on the rca:,;ons which
have led certain Administering Members to cease to
transmit information on certain of these territories, and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
seventh regular session ;
5. Im.:it,:s the Secretary-General to convene the Ad
H oc Committee in order that it may begin its work one
week before the opening of the 1952 session of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories. 27
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
ANNEX

Facwrs which should be taken into account in deciding whether a ferritory is or is not a territory
whose people have not yet attained a full measure of self-governm.ent
INTRODUCTION

l. The territories which are covered by Chapter XI of the
Charter are those territories whose people have not yet attained a full measure of self-government. It may be noted
that the expression "self-government" is qualified in the Charter
by the words "full measure" in the English text, "comp/element" in the French text, and "p/enitud" in the Spanish text.
2. The task of the General Assembly, at present, is to indicate the factors which should be taken into account in determining whether the result of the advancement of the people
of any given territory is such that that territory has reached
a stage of self-government where it falls outside the scope of
Article 73 e of the Charter.
3. The conclition under which the provisions of Chapter XI
of the Charter cease tu apply will be that the inhabitants of the
territory have attained, through political advancement, a full
measure of self-iovernment. The fulfilment of this condition
may be achieved by various means, involving in all cases the
expression of the free will of thl' people. The two principal
means are (a) the attainment nf independence and (b) the
union of the territory on a footing of equal status with other
component parts of the metropolitan or other country or its
association on the same conditions with the metropolitan or
other country or countries. The extent to which the provisions
of Article 73 e'. continue to apply in the case of territories which
have become neither independent nor fully integrated within
another State but which have already attained a full measure
of self-government in their internal affairs is a question which
merits f urthcr study.
4. The two principal forms of political advancement, mentioned in the above paragraph. call for the consideration of
different factors in determining whether a territory has or has
not rcadl{'d a stage Qi self-go\ ernmcnt where it falls outside
the scope of Article 73 e of the Cl,:,rtcr.
5. Accordingly, the General Assembly lists under two separate headings below the factors to be taken into account, stressini that the list cannot be regarded as exhaustive or definitin,
and that a single factor or particular combination of factors
cannot be regarded as decisive in ev,·ry case. Whether thr
peoples of a tcrritury ,liuulc! be regarded as having reached a
"The Gen\'ral Assembly decided, by resolution 569 (VI) that
the Special Committt't' ,,n Information transmitted under A~tirle
7J c uf the Cl1:lrtcr should henceforth be known as the "Committee on Information lr<Hn Nun-Seti-Governing Territories".

61

stage of self-government where there is no long,·: .i!J·., 1•!"'· ·
tion to transmit information should be solved i-, th,, light ,,f
the conditions enumerated under either of the two headmgs,
taking into account the circumstances of C'ach p.u t 1cular case,
which will need to be studie,1 separately.
6. Neverthekss, the General Assemhly considers that the
essential factors to lK· taken into accuunt in deciding whether
a Non-Self-Guverni11g Territory has attained a full measure
of self-government are the folluwing:
(i) J'olitical adi,anament: Political advancement of the population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge;
(ii) Opinion of the population: The opinion of the population
of the Territory, freely expressed hy informed and demoeratic processes, as to the status or change in status which
they desire.
7. These factors apply both to Non-Self-GoYerning Territories which have achieved independence and to Non-SelfGoverning Territories which ha \'C freely united or associated
themselves on a footmg of equal status with oth-r component
parts of the metropolitan or other country or countries. In the
latter case, however, the following factors are also essential
and should he taken into account:
(i) Legislative reprrse-ntalion: Representation without discrimination in the central legislati\'e organs on the same
basis as other inhabitants and regions;
(ii) Citizenship: Citizenship without discrimination on the
same basis as other inhabitants.

I.

FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE ATTAINMEN"I:
OF IN!JEPENf)ENCE OR OTHER SEPARATE
SYSTE.;,[ OF SFLF-GOVElWMENT

A.

GENERAL

l. Political adva11,emcnt: Political advancement of the
population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. Opinion of the p,,palotion: The opinion of the population
of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic
processes, as to the status or change in status which they desire.

B.

lNTERNATJONA!. STATUS.

l. lndepend,·nce: The attainment of independence by the
territory, or complete control over its external relations and
internal afT airs.

2. Eligibility for nz,,mbrrship in i11ternationa/ organizations:
Eligibility for membership in the United Nations or for membership or associate membership in other internati,,nal organizations; reJ.)resentation by delegates selrcted Ly the territorial
government.
3. General intenl,(Jtional rrlatiuns: Fower to enter into
direct relations of every kind with other governments and with
international institutions, anrl to negotiate, sign and ratify
international runventions.
4. Voluntary limitation of srn;ercignty., Degree to which the
sovereignty of the territory 1, lirnite<l by its own frt'e will when
that territory has attained inclepe!lde11ce or other st·parate system of sel [-government.

I. Territorial goi•crnment: l-'rcctlom from control or interference by the govrrmnent llf :11,othcr State in respect of the
internal government (kgislatm,·. excTutive, judiciary) and admini,tration of the territory
2. l'articif'ation of the f'u/•ulati,,11, Effective participation of
the population in the gO\ crnnH:nt uf the territory by means of
an adequate electoral and repre,cntative system.
J. /:((momic a11d so,·ial jurisdidi,m'· Complete autonomy in
respect of economic and social affairs,

General Aseembly-Sixth Session

62

II. FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE FREE ASSOCIATION (WHETHER IN A FEDERAL OR UNITARY
RELATIONSHIP) OF A TERRITORY ON EQUAL
STATUS WITH OTHER COMPONENT PARTS OF
THE METRlH'OLIT AN OR OTHER COUNTRY
A.

GENERAL

l. Political aavilncr.ment: Political advancement of the
population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. Opinion of the population: The opinion of the population
of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic
processes, as to the status or change in status which they desire.
3. Geographical considerations: Extent to which the relations of the territory with the capital of the central government may be affected by circumstances arising out of their respective geographical positions, such as separation by land, sea
or other natural obstacles.
4. Ethnic ilnd cu.lturaJ considerations: Extent to which the
population are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct· cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishing them from the peoples of the country with which they
freely associate themselves.
5. C onstitutiona/ considerations: Association (a) by virtue
of the constitution of the metropolitan country or (b) by virtue of a treaty or bilateral agreement affecting the status of
the territory, taking into account (i) whether the constitutional
!,;Uar:mtees extend equally to the associated territory, (ii)
whether there are constitutional fields reserved to the territory, and (iii) whether there is provision for the participation
of the territcry on a basis of equality in any changes in the
constitutional sy~tcm of the State.

B.

STATUS

I. Legislative representation: Representation without discrimination in the central legislative organs on the same basis
as other inhabitants and regions.
2. Citizenship: Citizenship without discrimination on the
same basis as other inhabitants.
3. G(JVernment officials: Appointment or election of officials
from the territory on the same basis as those from other parts
of the country.
C.

l :-in:RNAL CONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS

1. Suffrage: Universal and equal suffrage, free periodic
elections by secret ballot, freedom of choice of electoral candidates.
2. Local rights and status: Equal rights and status for the
inhabitants and local bodies of the territory as enjoyed by inhabitants and local bodies of other parts of the country.
3. Local o fficit1ls: Appointment or election of officials' in the
territory on the same basis as those in other parts of the
country.
4. Internal legislati{)n: Complete legislative autonomy of the
territory, by means of electoral and representative systems, in
all matters which in accordance with the normal terms of association are. in the case of non-unitary systems, not reserved to
the central 6overnment.

568 (VI). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolutK>n 222 (III) of 3 November 1948 rc-::i.uesting the ~.fembers concerned to
communicate information reg..J.·ding any change in the

constitutional position and status of a Non-Self-Governing Territnry, as a result of which the resµunsible
government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit information in respect of that Territory under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that it has received from the SecretaryGeneral28 a copy of the communication dated 31 August
1951 from the Netherlands Government, which states
that, in the opinion of that Government, the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam have now ceased to be NonSelf-Governing Territories within the meaning of
Article 73 e of the Charter of th<: United Nations, and
that consequently the Netherlands Government has decided to terminate the transmission to the SecretaryGeneral of information under Article 73 e concerning
these Territories,
Having regard to resolution 448 (V) of 12 December
1950, by which the General Assembly requested the
Special Committee on Information transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter to examine such information as may be transmitted and to report thereon to the
General Assembly,
I-laving regard to the information made available by
the Government of the Netherlands relating to the
Netherlands Antilles and Surinam and to the report
of the Special Committee,
Having decided 29 to appoint an Ad H oc Committee to
carry out a further study of the factors which should
be taken into account in deciding whether a territory
is or is not a territory whose people have not yet attained a full measure of self-government,
H®ing been informed that a conference among
representatives of the Netherlands, the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam on an equal footing is to be held
in March 1952 to decide upon a system of co-operation
for the common affairs of the three countries and the
establishment of a new constitutional order to replace
the present interim arrangement, 30
1. Reaffirms the statement contained jn paragraph
1 of General Assembly resolution 222 (III) welcoming
any development of self-government that may have
taken place in Territories previously enumerated as
Non-Self-Governing;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
the Netherlands for communicating full information in
compliance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 222 (III), and decides to transmit this information to the Ad H oc Committee created by resolution
567 (VI) of the General Assembly;
3. Considers that in 1952 the General Assembly
should examine the communication of the Netherlands
Government in the light of any report prepared by the
Ad H oc Committee, and taking into account whatever
new arrangements as to common affairs may be developed by the 1952 conference of representatives of
the Netherlands and of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of the next
regular session of the General Assembly the question
• See document A/C.4/200.
• See resolution 567 (VI), p. 60.
• See Official Records of the Gene,-aJ Assembly, Sixth Susio,.,
S»pplement No. 14, p. 7.
