S/PV.9192

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9192nd meeting

Tuesday, 15 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-69255 (E)
*2269255*

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

more sustained efforts in all areas, by all actors and in
all regions. For its part, UNSMIL continues to provide
technical assistance to the High National Elections
Commission to maintain readiness for elections once
political, legal and security conditions are met.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: Mr. President, I thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Libya.
Since my last briefing to the Council on 24 October
(see S/PV.9162), I have pursued my consultations with
Libyan stakeholders from all regions of the country,
which I had initiated upon arriving in Tripoli in
mid-October. During the reporting period, I engaged
repeatedly with members of the Presidential Council,
the High Council of State, and other key actors in the
political, economic and security spheres, recalling that
it was their moral and political responsibility to work
actively towards bringing the country back to peace and
stability through a Libyan-Libyan solution to the crisis.
I also encouraged them to engage in dialogue with
each other inside Libya, which would send a clear
message to the population that they are serious about
resolving their differences. It would also send a clear
message to the international community that Libyans
from all walks of life are ready to take their future
into their own hands. I made it clear that the United
Nations and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) stood ready to actively support these
meetings and that I was ready to provide them with my
good offices.
On 5 November in Tripoli, at the invitation of
the Government, I attended a simulation exercise on
securing national elections. While I welcome such a
plan as encouraging, the holding of elections requires
2/12

15/11/2022

Yesterday I led a joint mission to Sebha, in Libya’s
south, with my deputy and resident humanitarian
coordinator during which I had the opportunity to
meet local officials, tribal leaders, academics and civil
society organizations. This visit follows earlier visits I
conducted to the east and west of the country, which I
reported on previously.
Since my previous briefing, I also started to engage
with representatives of the international community on
the ground to hear their views and concerns on the way
forward in Libya. In Tripoli, I consulted with a wide
range of regional and international representatives to
exchange views and compare notes. On the margins of
the summit of the League of Arab States in Algiers, from
31 October to 1 November, I had the opportunity, as a
member of the Secretary-General’s delegation, to meet
several high-level officials from concerned countries in
the region. In its outcome document, the summit called
for an ending of the Libyan crisis through a Libyanled solution that achieves the popular aspiration for
elections as soon as possible, which I welcome. In the
coming days, I intend to follow up with visits to some
of the main external actors in the region.
There appears to be broad agreement that Libya’s
institutions are facing a serious legitimacy crisis
and that restoring that legitimacy across the board
is of paramount importance. There is also consensus
around the need to coordinate bilateral and multilateral
diplomatic initiatives and to coalesce behind the
efforts of the United Nations. The Security Council’s
unanimous support in amplifying these messages
with all interested parties will be key if we want to
move forward.
The popular aspiration for peace, stability and
legitimate institutions is clear from my interaction with
Libyans. However, there is an increasing recognition
that some institutional players are actively hindering
progress towards elections. The genuine political will
of these actors needs to be tested against reality as we
approach 24 December, the first anniversary of the
postponement of elections and the seventh anniversary
of the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement.
22-69255

15/11/2022

The situation in Libya

Further prolonging the interim period will make
the country even more vulnerable to political, economic
and security instability and could put the country
at risk of partition. We must therefore join hands in
encouraging Libyan leaders to work with resolve
towards the holding of elections as soon as possible.
I urge the Security Council to send an unequivocal
message to obstructionists that their actions will not
remain without consequences.
I am pleased to report some progress on the
security track. On 27 October in Sirte, I convened a
meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which
brought the Commission’s activity back on track.
At that joint meeting, the first for many months, the
Commission agreed to establish a subcommittee for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of armed groups, which is expected to focus on
mapping and classifying armed groups in Libya as a
key pre-DDR step.
Meanwhile, the ceasefire continues to hold despite
the ongoing escalatory rhetoric and a build-up of forces
on both sides. All parties must refrain from any steps
that could undermine the ceasefire. In that regard,
I would like to urge the Council to impress upon all
actors that any recourse to violence and intimidation
will not be accepted and that there can be no military
solution to the Libya crisis. Delaying tactics aimed at
postponing the elections indefinitely will only deepen
the crisis. I am concerned about the lack of progress
in the implementation of the Commission’s action plan
for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and
foreign forces. The Libyan parties need to renew their
focus on kick-starting the withdrawal process, in line
with the action plan. Pending the Libyan authorities’
approval required for the UNSMIL ceasefire monitors’
deployment to Sirte, the monitors continue to operate
from Tripoli. They did not report any ceasefire
violations during the reporting period.
On the economic front, the lack of accountability,
transparency and equity in the allocation of resources
remains a key cause of tensions. I therefore welcome
the Council’s emphasis, in resolution 2656 (2022), on
the importance of establishing a Libyan-led mechanism
that brings together stakeholders from across the
country to set spending priorities and ensure that oil and
gas revenues are managed transparently and equitably,
with effective Libyan oversight. On 9 November,
the co-Chairs of the Economic Working Group of
the International Follow-Up Committee on Libya

S/PV.9192

resumed consultations and agreed on the urgency of
supporting related initiatives by Libyan institutions and
assisting them in harmonizing proposals for temporary
mechanisms until an elected Government is in place or
a national budget is agreed on.
The human rights situation in Libya remains
alarming. UNSMIL continues to document enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions and ill-treatment
in detention facilities across the country. Since October,
dozens of detainees in Mitiga prison have reportedly
started a hunger strike to protest the conditions in
their detention. The authorities have refused to issue
detention certificates, which prevents families from
receiving the allowances and salaries of their detained
relatives. Human rights violations against migrants
and asylum-seekers continue with impunity. I want to
reiterate how urgent it is to find rights-based alternatives
to detention. Migrants and refugees crossing the
central Mediterranean from Libya continue to be
intercepted by Libyan authorities, made to disembark
in Libya and sent to detention centres where they suffer
serious human rights abuses. We reiterate our call to
the Libyan authorities and neighbouring countries to
uphold international standards related to safe searchand-rescue practices and ensure that people who are
intercepted are able to disembark in a place of safety.
On the humanitarian front, I am pleased to report
a continuing 57 per cent decrease since 2020 in the
number of internally displaced persons in Libya, which
now stands at 134,787. The Libyan authorities should
accelerate their efforts to find durable solutions for all
who are still internally displaced.
Women remain concerned about their ability
to actively engage in the awaited elections, both as
voters and candidates. Online violence against women
has been on the rise. UNSMIL has been supporting
women’s groups in leading a unified campaign against
that kind of violence. I call for continued and consistent
efforts to improve women’s rights and incorporate
related measures into the law of the land. I am glad to
note the active and positive participation of women and
young people in my interactions with Libyans at the
grass-roots level.
In the coming weeks and months, UNSMIL will
endeavour to facilitate a conversation between the
key institutional players in Libya as a step towards
overcoming their differences and moving forward
towards the organization of free and fair elections.
We will also strengthen our engagement with relevant

22-692553/12

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

segments of the general citizenry, as their legitimate
voices need to be heard and will be paramount in
ensuring that the country can find a way out of the
crisis. The accompanying support and pressure
from the Council, in particular, and the international
community, as a whole, speaking with a united voice
under the coordination of the United Nations, are likely
to reap positive results.
The President: I thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his briefing on the current situation in
the country. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our support for his mediation efforts.
The situation in Libya remains extremely tense.
Despite the relative calm on the ground, the current
status quo is extremely unstable. Realistically, we do
not yet see an end to the dual-power period, nor are there
any prospects for the holding of inclusive, nationwide
elections or for unifying the organs of Government.
Progress on the Constitution track is also very modest.
Meanwhile, under pressure from the diverging interests
of external players, the situation again threatens
to spiral out of control. We believe that the current
situation in Libya demands the Security Council’s
undiminished attention to the issue, which is why we
insisted on convening today’s meeting. At this juncture,
our priority is maintaining the ceasefire regime and
facilitating the quest for compromise among the main
political players in Libya. Given the recent troubling
reports from Tripoli, that is particularly urgent. We
underscore the unacceptability of creating obstacles
to the Government’s work and urge Libyan leaders to
show restraint and refrain from taking escalatory steps.
We reaffirm our approach to eliminating the foreign
military presence in Libya through a coordinated,
balanced, gradual and step-by-step withdrawal of
all non-Libyan armed groups and military units,
without exception, with the aim of maintaining the
balance of power and preventing the escalation that
might be triggered by a sudden security vacuum.
The international community should coordinate its
assistance to Libyans, and in that regard, UNSMIL is
4/12

15/11/2022

one of the main mediators. Key players in Libya and its
neighbours should not have a dual agenda.
One of the main reasons for the protracted Libyan
crisis has been the consistent policy of our Western
colleagues, who pay lip service to their commitment
to a political settlement but continue exploiting the
turbulence in Libya for their own interests. The energy
factor plays an important role in that connection. There
is no mistaking the fact that Western capitals are paying
increasingly greater attention to Libyan hydrocarbons
and their extraction and transit. Moreover, Libya
is known for its low-cost oil production, which is of
high quality and located close to European markets.
It is not a coincidence that in every statement by Western
officials on Libya the importance of unimpeded access
to Libyan natural resources is always mentioned in
one way or another, or that the force majeure declared
this summer on a number of Libyan oil fields resulted
in a disproportionately negative reaction from those
same officials.
That comes as no surprise, as the goal of turning
Libya into a gas station to meet the energy needs of
our Western colleagues was devised not yesterday
but in 2011, when Libyan statehood was destroyed
as a result of the aggression of NATO countries.
It is clear that the United States Administration continues
to view the political process in Libya solely through
the prism of its own economic interests, including by
preventing price hikes on the so-called black gold.
Accordingly, Washington’s main efforts are aimed not
at a genuine settlement of the Libyan crisis but rather at
preserving the situation so that it does not deteriorate
and undermine the supply of energy resources from
that North African country to the European market. In
the understanding of our American colleagues, that is
the main task of the Libyan authorities.
Furthermore, we cannot exclude the existence of a
number of agreements reached behind the scenes with
third countries on the export of Libyan oil. Essentially,
Washington does not care who extracts it or on what
legal grounds — its ultimate goal is to squeeze Russia
out of the world energy market. A similar policy is being
pursued in relation to other oil-producing countries in
North Africa and the Middle East.
The Libyan economy is more than 90 per cent
dependent on oil exports. According to the Libyan
National Oil Corporation, the country’s hydrocarbon
production has already reached 1.2 million barrels per
22-69255

15/11/2022

The situation in Libya

day, which is projected to increase to 2 million barrels
per day. The largest oil reserves in Africa could provide
Libya with enough funds to quickly restore the country.
Nevertheless, in the context of political instability
and the disunity among key financial institutions, those
oil revenues do not always make it into the country’s
budget but remain in foreign bank accounts. It is
important to ensure that those funds are used for the
benefit of ordinary Libyans, rather than ending up
in the pockets of a small number of businesspeople,
including foreigners.
However, such a scenario does not fit into the
priorities of our Western colleagues, which is why,
unfortunately, we continue to see the machinations
behind the scenes, the creation of various
non-transparent configurations, the fomenting of
divisions among political actors and the attempts to
impose external choices on the Libyan people.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank Special Representative Bathily
for taking time away from his important engagement
with Libyan stakeholders to brief the Security Council
today. I welcome his continued engagement with all
Libyan stakeholders, including women and young
people, across the country.
Let me once again express the United Kingdom’s
support for Special Representative Bathily and his
efforts to reinvigorate Libya’s stalled political process.
Stability in Libya can be achieved only through a United
Nations-facilitated, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
process that leads to parliamentary and presidential
elections as soon as feasible. All Libyan parties have
an obligation to work with Special Representative
Bathily to achieve that and deliver elections for the
Libyan people.
We are concerned by reports that armed groups
prevented a meeting of the High State Council in Tripoli
yesterday. Any attempt to obstruct civilian institutions
from carrying out their responsibilities is unacceptable.
The United Kingdom reaffirms our commitment
to working with Libya and our international partners
to secure peace, stability and prosperity for Libya.
The unanimous adoption of the 12-month renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya was a welcome demonstration of the Council’s
support, and I look forward to engaging with Special

S/PV.9192

Representative Bathily again during the mandated
Council meeting to be held next month.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I also wish to start by thanking
Special Representative Bathily for his briefing. Norway
is encouraged to see that he has been able to consult with
a broad range of actors all over Libya since he arrived
in the country. His message to the various parties
about the importance of agreeing on a constitutional
framework for holding free and fair elections is critical,
and we call on all parties to reach such an agreement
as soon as possible. Fulfilling the will of the Libyan
people is more important than securing personal
positions and privileges.
The full implementation of the ceasefire agreement
reached in 2020, including the withdrawal of foreign
fighters, mercenaries and foreign forces, is also of the
utmost importance for Libya’s stability and the security
of its people.
Let me also reiterate Norway’s deep concern at the
deteriorating human rights situation in Libya. Civil
society representatives and human rights defenders
must be protected. We also continue to be deeply
concerned by the reports of violations and abuses of
international law, including conflict-related sexual
violence, arbitrary arrests and detention, abductions
and the reported use of torture. Greater efforts are
urgently needed to end those violations and abuses.
Finally, let me again express Norway’s full support
for the United Nations presence in Libya, especially
that of Special Representative Bathily. We continue to
urge all actors to engage constructively with him in the
political process.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative Bathily for his update this morning. We
continue to support his efforts to reach a sustainable
and peaceful Libyan-led and Libyan-owned solution to
the current crisis.
We reiterate our calls for Libyan leaders to come
together and agree on a constitutional basis for the
holding of free, fair and inclusive elections as soon as
possible. The ultimate goal should be the establishment
of a unified Libyan Government that serves all Libyans
and brings to a close the protracted transition period.
We are encouraged by the Special Representative’s
commitment to an inclusive approach and process. We
continue to urge meaningful engagement with civil
society, including women and young people, which is

22-692555/12

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

all the more essential against the alarming backdrop of
the shrinking civil society space in Libya.
We welcome the meeting last month of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission in Sirte and the agreement
to establish a subcommittee on armed groups. We echo
calls for the full and expeditious implementation of the
October 2020 ceasefire agreement and the maintenance
of prevailing calm on the ground.
Finally, we welcome the unanimous adoption last
month of the one-year renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
which was a critical step that enables the Special
Representative to fulfil his mandate with predictability
and stability. Resolution 2656 (2022) contains key
elements, including on women’s participation,
accountability, human rights and the protection
of civilians.
Libyans deserve the collective support of both the
members of the Security Council around this table and
the broader international community. We encourage
all actors to use their influence and good offices to
avoid a deepening of tensions between Libyan parties
and to put Libyans first. The appointment of Special
Representative Bathily, coupled with the substantive
renewal of UNSMIL’s mandate, should provide us with
the opportunity and momentum to achieve that.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank Special
Representative Bathily for his update on the current
situation in Libya. We welcome his efforts to engage
all parties to reach an agreement on a constitutional
framework for presidential and parliamentary elections
and a timeline for a vote. We call on all Libyan leaders
to meaningfully participate in a process that leads
Libya to free and fair elections as soon as possible.
There is no other viable path to unified governance.
In the lead-up to elections, it is imperative that Libya
continue to make progress on the implementation of the
2020 ceasefire agreement, particularly the immediate
withdrawal of all foreign forces, foreign fighters and
mercenaries. All must commit to reducing tensions that
could lead to renewed widespread violence. It is also
imperative that Libya’s leaders embrace a transparency
mechanism that catalogues in detail the State’s oil
revenues and the allocation of those funds to ensure
that they are used for the benefit of the Libyan people.
Before I conclude, let me respond to the accusations
of the Russian representative this morning. The United
States rejects accusations that access to Libyan oil
6/12

15/11/2022

reserves is somehow the cause of the political impasse
in Libya today. We are dismayed that a member of
the Security Council that is an active participant
in the conflict today and is violating the Charter of
the United Nations by invading and occupying its
neighbour continues to shift the focus of the Council
with unfounded conspiracy theories. It is simply a
failed attempt to shield itself from legitimate criticism.
Libya’s leaders must shoulder the responsibility of
achieving sustainable peace, good governance and,
ultimately, prosperity for the people of Libya. And the
United States stands ready to support them.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for
his briefing and welcome the Libyan delegation to
this meeting.
Brazil considers it important for the Security
Council to continue to keep the situation in Libya under
close scrutiny. We are aware that the growing numbers
of Council meetings are not necessarily helpful to our
ability to discharge our collective responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations. But we should be
careful not to send a message of neglect with regard to
certain files, particularly the Libyan one, while we give
other items on the Council’s agenda comparatively more
space. The heightened tensions yesterday in Tripoli
around a meeting of the High State Council emphasize
the importance of closely monitoring the situation in
Libya. We will focus our remarks on one key aspect
of the situation in Libya, which is the international
community’s approach to the country.
First of all, Brazil has taken note of the willingness
of a number of actors, neighbouring countries and
regional organizations to collaborate with Libyan
stakeholders in the pursuit of peace and stability. We
would therefore like to remind the Council of the
important role that the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) can play in response to Libyans’ request for the
mobilization and coordination of international efforts
and goodwill for the country’s benefit. In that regard,
we also want to highlight the importance of a coherent,
integrated and strategic approach to peacebuilding
in Libya, in full respect for Libyan sovereignty and
peacebuilding priorities. Given the close relationship
between the situations in Libya and the Sahel, as
well as the current engagement of the region with the
Peacebuilding Commission, we further emphasize the
importance of regional coordination, including among
22-69255

15/11/2022

The situation in Libya

the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United
Nations missions operating in the Sahel and the PBC.
The international attitudes to Libya, however, have
not been uniformly positive. On the contrary, some
countries seem to have been fuelling the very protracted
threat of armed conflict that we in the Council have
been discussing for so long. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups, the
withdrawal of foreign troops and the unification of
military and security institutions are but a few areas
where foreign actions can actually be an obstacle to
peace and national reconciliation in Libya when they
are not undertaken under the auspices of relevant
United Nations bodies such as the PBC. The same is
true for the ongoing political standstill. We reiterate
that the political transition in Libya must be Libyanled and Libyan-owned, including with regard to an
agreement on a legal basis and timeline for elections. At
the same time, we acknowledge that the African Union
is well positioned to assist Libyan stakeholders in
pursuing intra-Libyan dialogue, including on national
reconciliation free from interference motivated by
foreign interests.
All countries must fully respect Libya’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity. They must also
abide by the measures authorized by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter. We therefore echo the
concerns about the effectiveness of the arms embargo,
whose failings appear to be a direct consequence of
pressure based on narrow political interests from outside
Libya. The same goes for the freezing of Libyan assets
abroad, whose active management in foreign countries
contravenes the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
working for the goal of a truly Libyan-led and -owned
peaceful political transition, which we consider a
necessary condition for peace and stability in Libya,
together with progress in the security and economic
sectors, all of which should be led from within Libya,
with the participation of Libyan stakeholders.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
France’s priorities concerning Libya remain
unchanged. Our goal continues to be a unified Libyan
Government capable of holding presidential and
legislative elections throughout the country. Libyans
have a right to security and sovereignty, and the ceasefire

S/PV.9192

agreement must therefore be fully implemented. In
coordination with the United Nations, France will
continue to support dialogue between the security
actors in the east and west, with a view to the formation
of a unified Libyan army capable of controlling its
borders. France will also continue to demand that the
arms embargo be respected and that all foreign forces,
foreign fighters and mercenaries be withdrawn from
Libyan territory. Libyans have the right to choose
their leaders. In the face of foreign interference, a
new and credible political road map for the concurrent
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections
throughout Libya is paramount. It should include strong
guarantees, both political and financial, so as to ensure
the effective holding of elections. All Libyans have a
right to prosperity. A fair and transparent redistribution
of income for the benefit of the entire population is
crucial. The human rights violations perpetrated in
Libya by human traffickers and militia members are
shocking. Impunity must end. Greater cooperation
between the Libyan authorities and the International
Criminal Court is essential. France welcomed the
recent visit to Libya by Prosecutor Karim Khan.
The Council’s adoption on 28 October of resolution
2656 (2022), with a robust one-year mandate for the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, should
contribute constructively to Mr. Bathily’s mediation
efforts. France will continue to support him in those
efforts with a view to achieving a stable, sovereign and
united Libya.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily for his update on the
situation on the ground and his active efforts. Albania
fully supports his crucial mediation role in Libya.
Albania is deeply concerned about the stark
polarization of the actors involved in Libya. Avoiding
an escalation of violence and any clashes must remain a
priority. All the parties should show calm and restraint
and truly commit to the United Nations-led mediations.
The long-standing Libyan crisis of legitimacy
affects all Libyan institutions and defines the course
of developments. It is high time to restore democratic
legitimacy through elections — the only way for the
country to move forward.
The time is long-overdue for Libyan leaders to
set aside their political divergences, engage in serious
dialogue and deliver on their citizens’ most important
request: to prepare and organize free, fair and credible

22-692557/12

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

elections. That is the obstacle in the current deadlock that
continues to stand in the way of our hope for tomorrow.
Libyan actors who obstruct the political process simply
to cling to power must be held to account.
Let us not forget that instability in Libya and
the role of foreign forces and mercenaries in the
country — which should be withdrawn — have
repercussions beyond the country. It is essential that
all international efforts in support of the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned stabilization process remain firmly
anchored to the strong leadership of the United Nations
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. However, the keys must remain in the hands
of the Libyan political leaders.
We agree with the assessment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the
deteriorating human rights situation, which affects
the freedom of expression and hampers civil
society. Harassment campaigns against civil-society
representatives must stop, and detainees must
be released.
Let me conclude by reiterating the need and urgency
to see all Libyan stakeholders come to an agreement
and finalize the constitutional and legal framework
for holding the elections. There is no time to buy for
anyone — only time to waste or lose. The Libyan
people deserve a future in a stable country with a
unified Government that is able to play a role in leading
the country to stability, security and prosperity, based
on an open and cohesive society in which everyone
benefits equally from the country’s national resources.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abdoulaye Bathily for his briefing today.
We have met on a monthly basis to hear updates from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
However, it is a matter of concern that the political
stalemate continues and there is still no agreement
between the parties on a constitutional framework for
holding elections in Libya. The continued political
stalemate could risk undermining the gains made in
Libya since the signing of the ceasefire agreement
in October 2020. The immediate priority is therefore
to resolve all outstanding issues on establishing a
constitutional framework for holding presidential
and parliamentary elections. Holding elections at
the earliest opportunity in a free, fair, inclusive and
credible manner is an urgent imperative.
8/12

15/11/2022

The frequent mobilizations of armed groups and
the clashes between them bring into focus the dangers
posed by the continued presence of foreign forces and
mercenaries in Libya, which is a violation of Libya’s
ceasefire agreement of 2020 and of Security Council
resolutions. Violations of Council resolutions, in
particular of their provisions concerning the arms
embargo, continue without regard for peace and
stability in Libya and the region. Accordingly, the
Panel of Experts on Libya of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) has noted that
“[t]he remainder of the training provided by
[Türkiye] to the Government of National Unity
Affiliated Forces is military or naval in nature and
thus a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1970
(2011)”. (S/2022/427, para. 77)
In view of that, we note that Türkiye signed yet
another military agreement on 25 October. We call on
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to examine whether that action by Türkiye violates
paragraph 9 of resolution 1970 (2011) and to inform the
Council accordingly.
We are also concerned about the resurgence of
terrorist activity in Libya, and we reiterate that terrorist
groups and affiliated entities must not be allowed to
operate unchallenged in Libya. Given the fact that
terrorism emanating from Libya is bound to have
cascading effects in the Sahel region, it is therefore
important for the international community to address
it at its current stage in order to prevent it from having
collateral consequences on the wider African continent.
In conclusion, the political process in Libya
should be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, without
any imposition or external interference. For its part,
India remains committed to supporting Libya and the
Libyan people in their endeavour to seek lasting peace
and stability.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to thank the
Special Representative, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for
his informative briefing, and we affirm the support
of the United Arab Emirates for his mandate and the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to find a lasting solution in the country.
We also welcome Ambassador Taher Elsonni to
this meeting.
22-69255

15/11/2022

The situation in Libya

In the context of our discussion today, we would
like to focus on the following three issues.
First, the international community must take a
unified approach that is consistent with the Libyan
people’s desire to find a Libyan-led solution, and it must
support them in that pursuit. It is therefore necessary
to build on the consensus and unity reflected in the
Security Council’s renewal of the UNSMIL mandate
in resolution 2656 (2022) and seriously consider
reactivating United Nations initiatives, particularly
the Berlin Conference, in a way that includes all the
parties concerned, above all the Libyans themselves.
Along with those efforts, we must keep in mind that
the Special Representative needs to be given sufficient
time and space to work with all parties and partners in
Libya in order to reach a comprehensive settlement of
the Libyan issue. That means that the Council should
discuss the Libyan dossier according to the schedule
outlined in resolution 2656 (2022) in order to give the
Special Representative the opportunity to exercise his
good offices.
Secondly, it is imperative to take the necessary steps
to conclude a definitive agreement on a constitutional
framework for holding the parliamentary and
presidential elections. It is also imperative to take those
steps as soon as possible in order to meet the aspirations
of the Libyan people, bring the transitional stages to a
conclusion and achieve sustainable political stability.
Thirdly, we welcome the Special Representative’s
efforts to bring together the members of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission, which recently met in
Sirte. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of maintaining the permanent ceasefire agreement,
committing to de-escalation and preventing a military
build-up. We also call for concrete steps to be taken
towards unifying military institutions, and we reiterate
our calls for the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries in order to ensure that clashes
do not reoccur.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its support for the United Nations and international
efforts to achieve peace, stability and reconciliation in
Libya in a way that meets the aspirations and hopes of
the brotherly Libyan people.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Mr. Bathily, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.

S/PV.9192

The political process in Libya has been stalled for
some time, and instability and uncertainty on various
levels have undermined the security situation. It is
imperative for all the parties to remain calm, advance
towards a political solution, refrain from taking any
action that could escalate tensions and maintain the
hard-won peace.
The 5+5 Joint Military Commission plays an
important role in maintaining the ceasefire, among
other things. China welcomes the recent meeting
held by the Commission in Sirte and encourages all
parties to continue to strengthen their communication
through the Commission in order to prevent any
misunderstandings. The general consensus among all
the parties is that the political transition should be
completed as soon as possible.
Currently, all the parties in Libya have reached
consensus on most elements of the constitutional
framework required for holding elections. The House of
Representatives and the High Council of State recently
indicated that they would resume their dialogue. China
hopes that the political will of all the parties in Libya
can be translated into practical actions and that, through
the good offices of the United Nations and on the basis
of the work accomplished to date, an agreement will
be reached as soon as possible on the outstanding
issues with respect to the constitutional framework for
the electoral process in order to create the conditions
necessary for holding elections as soon as possible.
Since he took office, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Abdoulaye Bathily has worked
actively to make extensive contacts with all the parties
in Libya. China hopes that progress in the political
process will be achieved as soon as possible through
the good offices of the Special Representative. China
supports the League of Arab States, the African
Union and other regional organizations in playing a
constructive role in Libya’s political process.
External interference is a major reason for the
protracted crisis in Libya. Adhering to the principle
of Libyan-led and Libyan-owned is the only way for
Libya to achieve peace and stability. The international
community should hand over the leadership of the
Libyan issue to the Libyan people and avoid imposing
external solutions. All foreign fighters and mercenaries
in Libya should withdraw from the country as soon
as possible in a balanced and orderly manner in
accordance with the will of the Libyan people. In that

22-692559/12

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

process, the relevant parties should take the concerns
of the neighbouring countries fully into account,
strengthen communication and consultation and carry
out coordinated regional actions to prevent increasing
security risks in the region.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Abdoulaye
Bathily for his briefing. We have taken note of the
outcomes of his recent meetings, and we reiterate our
full support for his efforts. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to this meeting.
Given the lack of progress on the main outstanding
issues regarding the stabilization of Libya, particularly
since the postponement of the elections last December,
the Security Council should consider the circumstances
required to effectively assist in bringing about
peace in the country. Since the beginning of the
conflict, the Council has put in place a vast array of
measures, including sanctions, an arms embargo and
authorizations to combat the trafficking of migrants
and illicit arms transfers, among other things. With the
establishment of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in 2011, it also sought to facilitate a
political process led by the Libyan parties themselves
to find a lasting solution to the conflict.
Despite all such steps, weapons and foreign fighters
continue to fuel the violence. Migrants are shipwrecked
in the Mediterranean every month and suffer abuses at
the hands of militias and Government agencies.
It is also striking that some of those responsible
for obstructing the political process have managed to
consolidate their positions to such an extent that they
have become interlocutors accepted by the international
community. In that way, we have reached a paradox: to
get out of the current political impasse, we depend, to a
large extent, on the will of actors who benefit the most
from the status quo.
We view with particular concern the unwarranted
interference in Libyan affairs by various countries,
which use opportunistic partnerships with some
national political actors to advance their geostrategic
interests. We believe that such machinations deepen the
fragmentation of the country and undermine the Special
Representative’s chances of success. We therefore call
on all States with influence in the Libyan conflict to
refrain from actions that run counter to Security Council
resolutions and to maintain an ongoing dialogue with
10/12

15/11/2022

UNSMIL. The strict observance of the arms embargo
is particularly important.
My country will continue to defend the right
of the Libyan people to determine their future. To
achieve that, it is essential to reach agreements that
make it possible to organize general elections as
soon as possible. The electoral process must include
all components of Libyan society in taking decisions
regarding the country’s future. The full and equal
participation of women and young people, whether as
voters and/or candidates, is crucial in moving towards
a more inclusive political system.
Finally, we are aware of the risk of regional
fragmentation, which has threatened Libya since 2011.
We therefore urge the actors, with the support of the
Special Representative and through dialogue, to find
a means of organization that addresses the legitimate
regional concerns without jeopardizing the unity of the
country. As we said before, a united and prosperous
Libya is key to the security and stability of the
entire region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council
(A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his
briefing. We welcome the participation of Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya.
When the Security Council met on 24 October for
a briefing on the situation in Libya (see S/PV.9162),
we welcomed the stability and space that a substantive
year-long renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya would provide the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to meaningfully
engage in the peace process. We also subsequently
welcomed the 60-day reporting requirement that the
Security Council requested of the Secretary-General in
resolution 2656 (2022). We still believe that it would
be more meaningful to allow sufficient space for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
engage in depth in the peace process. A briefing based
on such a process would thereafter help us to hold a
more impactful discussion on the situation in Libya.
That notwithstanding, we acknowledge the updates
provided by the Special Representative of the Secretary22-69255

15/11/2022

The situation in Libya

General today, and we encourage his continued efforts
in reaching out to all parties and stakeholders and
helping them to coalesce their commitment and action
towards peace in Libya.
We acknowledge the magnitude of work that lies
ahead in view of the continued political stalemate. We
urge that, as mediation continues, national dialogue and
comprehensive and inclusive national reconciliation
be mainstreamed throughout the peace process. The
African Union and our Governments remain on hand to
support Libya in that regard.

S/PV.9192

people. Such elections cannot be achieved other than on
a firm constitutional basis. We therefore urge the United
Nations and other international partners, working
through the Organization, to extend technical support
for the development of the constitutional framework.
We encourage similar efforts for the economic
development of Libya through the reunification of
economic institutions. In that regard, we call for more
attention to be paid to ensuring that the oil sector, as
the economic mainstay of Libya, is safeguarded against
undue political and foreign interference.

The members of the A3 are concerned about the
recurrent outbreaks of violence among rival armed
groups in and around Tripoli, which continue to claim
lives and injure many people. We call on all armed
groups to cease their violence, especially within areas
of civilian residence and activities. We also call on all
Libyan leaders, particularly those under whose control
the armed groups fall, to exercise maximum restraint in
their utterances, which influence the conduct of those
armed groups.

Our meeting in October was in the wake of the
horrifying washing-up of bodies of 15 migrants in
Sabratha. We continue to wake up to a steady increase
in the number of African migrants facing untold
atrocities while crossing the Mediterranean to Europe.
This month alone about 600 migrants were stranded on
the Mediterranean for two weeks in search and rescue
vessels. Among them were children travelling alone and
sick people, yet they were being denied disembarkation
by some European Governments.

Foreign forces and fighters, as well as mercenaries,
in Libya are a key contributor to the standoff between
armed militias. Their continued presence in Libya is
in direct contravention of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2656 (2022). They also continue to
constitute a grave security threat to the neighbouring
States and the Sahel region.

While vulnerable people are being turned away at
borders, there is a growing appetite to fund African
border and migration management programmes without
corresponding systems of accountability. Channels of
information-sharing in support of such cooperation
are also wanting in transparency. We call for closer
monitoring by the United Nations of the resources and
information channels used in that regard, and we will
be expecting more information necessary to better
address that issue.

We therefore demand their immediate withdrawal.
We also emphasize that such a withdrawal should
be done in close coordination with neighbouring
States and with the corresponding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to prevent the export
of conflict into the region. In that regard, we support
the full implementation of the ceasefire agreement of
October 2020 and the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
action plan of 8 October 2021.
We urge the political leaders and the people of
Libya to understand that there cannot be a military
solution to the conflict. It is critical that they commit to
the political process, which must ensure that all interest
groups in society, including women and young people,
are meaningfully involved.
We encourage continued dialogue to help address
all impediments to holding free, fair and transparent
elections, as desired by the Libyans, in order to have
a credible, unified Government, duly elected by the

We reiterate our demand that refugees, migrants
and asylum seekers be treated with dignity as a basic
requirement of international law and consistent with
our call in all other conflict situations worldwide.
Finally, we reaffirm our respect for Libya’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty and our support for
a truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to pay tribute to your
skilful stewardship of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily for his
briefing. We welcome the various visits that he has made

22-6925511/12

S/PV.9192

The situation in Libya

in Libya and his meetings with many stakeholders, to
whom he listened.
It has been less than three weeks since the previous
briefing on Libya (see S/PV.9162), and just a few days
since the briefing by the Prosecutor General of the
International Criminal Court (see S/PV.9187). There is
therefore not much to talk about or new developments
in the current political situation that we can report.
Accordingly, my statement today will be brief.
We would recall that the Libyan people are tired of
these many meetings and statements without achieving
concrete results. Some would even say that these
meetings and statements are like news releases with
some briefings and political analysis without a solution.
We hope that the situation will soon change.
We listened to Mr. Bathily’s briefing and the
statements by Council members, all of which confirm
the importance of acting quickly in order to emerge
from the current stalemate and the political impasse
in my country. In that context, we would like to
reiterate the importance of the Security Council and
the international community respecting the voice of
the Libyan people and their desire to emerge from the
conflict and bring about stability. As stated in most of
our previous statements, the solution in Libya needs us
to act simultaneously on the following four issues.
First, all forms of foreign interference in
Libyan affairs, direct or indirect, must cease. Those
interventions have only exacerbated the state of division
and dispersion in my country. We have seen that many
States are currently proposing solutions according to
their desires. To those we say, let the solution be Libyanowned and by the Libyan people and their leaders and
respect national initiatives to reach that solution.
Secondly, there is a need to put an end to all
foreign presence on Libyan territories regardless of its
name or form, and put an end to all armed groups and
outlawed militias while supporting the Joint Military

12/12

15/11/2022

Commission as a nucleus for building a united Libyan
army under civilian leadership and with a monopoly on
weapons by the State.
Thirdly, national efforts must be supported to
emerge from the cycle of conflict through genuine
and comprehensive national reconciliation. Such
reconciliation could bring about stability and prosperity
for the Libyan people and restore confidence among all
Libyans regardless of their affiliation.
Fourthly, mistakes of the past must not be repeated
while expecting different results. There is a need to
respond to the will of the Libyan people who want to put
an end to all transition phases and all political bodies that
currently exist. That starts with supporting consensus
efforts based on a Constitution and electoral laws that
guarantee non-exclusion and non-marginalization in
order to hold general elections as soon as possible and
use all capacities available to make that happen.
As we have reiterated a number of times, elections
are not a solution in and of themselves, and yet they
are one of the most important paths towards ending
the current crisis and putting an end to the crisis of
legitimacy, so that we can find radical solutions to the
remaining challenges accumulated over the years, most
important a separation of powers, the fair distribution
of wealth and achieving security and military stability
throughout Libya’s territory.
In conclusion, we reiterate that there is no military
solution to the Libyan crisis. We call on everyone to
support the deadlines that we have mentioned and take
prompt steps to support the voice of the Libyan people
and the national will to find a solution.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

22-69255
