A/RES/67/76

United Nations

Distr.: General
11 December 2012

General Assembly
Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 100

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2012
[on the report of the First Committee (A/67/415)]

67/76. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other
nuclear explosions constitutes an effective nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
measure, and convinced that this is a meaningful step in the realization of a
systematic process for achieving nuclear disarmament,
Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September
1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Treaty constitutes a
fundamental instrument in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
and that, after more than 15 years, its entry into force is more urgent than ever
before,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by 183 States, including 41 of the 44
whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, and welcoming the ratification
of the Treaty by 157 States, including 36 of the 44 whose ratification is needed for
its entry into force, among which there are 3 nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling its resolution 66/64 of 2 December 2011,
Welcoming the adoption by consensus of the conclusions and recommendations
for follow-on actions of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 1 which, inter alia, reaffirmed the vital
importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty as
a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
regime and included specific actions to be taken in support of the entry into force of
the Treaty,

_______________
1

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on
actions.

12-48316

*1248316*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/76

Recalling the Final Declaration adopted by the seventh Conference on
Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
held in New York on 23 September 2011, convened pursuant to article XIV of the
Treaty, and noting the improved prospects for ratification in several Annex 2
countries,
Welcoming the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, adopted at the ministerial meeting held in New York on
27 September 2012, 2
Stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification,
1.
without delay and without conditions, in order to achieve the earliest entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; 3
Welcomes the contributions by the signatory States to the work of the
2.
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization, in particular its efforts to ensure that the verification regime of the
Treaty will be capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon
its entry into force, in accordance with article IV of the Treaty;
Underlines the need to maintain momentum towards completion of all
3.
elements of the verification regime;
Urges all States not to carry out nuclear-weapon test explosions or any
4.
other nuclear explosions, to maintain their moratoriums in this regard and to refrain
from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the Treaty, while stressing that
these measures do not have the same permanent and legally binding effect as the
entry into force of the Treaty;
Recalls Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 and
5.
1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009, emphasizes the importance of their implementation,
and reaffirms its firm support for the Six-Party Talks;
Urges all States that have not yet signed the Treaty, in particular those
6.
whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible;
Urges all States that have signed but not yet ratified the Treaty, in
7.
particular those whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to accelerate
their ratification processes with a view to ensuring their earliest successful
conclusion;
Welcomes, since its previous resolution on the subject, the ratification of
8.
the Treaty by Indonesia, a State whose ratification was needed for the Treaty to
enter into force, and by Guatemala as significant steps towards the early entry into
force of the Treaty, and also welcomes the signature by Niue of the Treaty;
Also welcomes the recent expressions from among the remaining States
9.
whose ratification is needed for the Treaty to enter into force of their intention to
pursue and complete the ratification process;
10. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level
and, where in a position to do so, to promote adherence to the Treaty through
bilateral and joint outreach, seminars and other means;

_______________
2
3

2

A/67/515, annex.
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.

A/RES/67/76

11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to
prepare a report on the efforts of States that have ratified the Treaty towards its
universalization and possibilities for providing assistance on ratification procedures
to States that so request it, and to submit such a report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session
the item entitled “Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
48th plenary meeting
3 December 2012

3
