UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

NEW

22 MARCH 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2419)

,...+.....*I-.

1

,*,...*,..*....,..*...

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ,.,....,,...o,....,.o.*.*,

1

Adoption of the agenda .,..,....,,,,....,,,...,......,........,..*....

I

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15643) . . .

1

zVPV.2419

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of rhe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the suppIement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

-2

2419th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 22 March 1983, at 4.15 pm.
Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

President:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miskine (Chad)
and Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ) took places
at the Council table: Mr. Essy [Ivory Coast), Mr. Sarre’
(Senegal) and Mr. Abdalla (Sudan) took the places
reserved ,for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in a letter dated 16
March 1983 from the representative of Chad to the President of the Security Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2419)
1. Adoption

4. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following other documents: S/15644,
which contains a letter dated 17 March from the representative of Chad to the President of the Council, transmitting a message from the President of the Republic of
Chad; and S/15645, which contains a letter dated 17
March 1983 from the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the President of the Council.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15643)
The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.

5. Members of the Council also have before them photocopies of a letter dated 21 March from the representative of Chad to the President of the Council, which will
be circulated as a document of the Council under the
symbol S/15649.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1, The PRESIDENT:
Since this is the first meeting of
the Council for the month of March, I should like, on
behalf of the Council, to pay a tribute to my predecessor,
Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich Troyanovsky, representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of February. Mr.
Troyanovsky guided the work of the Council last month
with his usual accustomed great diplomatic skill. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
our deep appreciation for his work.

6. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Co-operation of Chad, Mr. Idriss Miskine. I welcome
him and invite him to make his statement.
7. Mr. MISKINE
(Chad) (interpretation from French):
Before addressing the subject now before the Council,
Sir, I should like to express to you, on behalf of my
delegation, sincere congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of March and, at the
same time, to tell you how grateful we are for the expeditious manner in which you have convened the Council.
My delegation is happy to see the representative of the
United Kingdom, a country with which Chad maintains
cordial and fruitful relations, presiding over the Council
for this important period of the year. We are certain that,
under your intelligent and dedicated guidance, and
thanks to your outstanding qualities as a statesman and
an experienced diplomat, the Council will be able to
shoulder the difficult responsibilities assigned to it by the
Charter of the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15643)
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Chad, the Ivory Coast, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Senegal and the Sudan, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

8. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a
well-deserved tribute to your predecessor, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the
competent and dynamic way in which he directed the
work of the Council last month.
1

’

9. I should aIso like most warmly to congratulate the
newly elected members of the Council-Malta,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe-and
to
wish them every success in their important work in the
Council.

17. On 23 December 1938, Mr. Franqois Poncet, the
French Ambassador to Italy, took note of that statement
in the following terms:
“If the instruments of ratification could not be
exchanged owing to a postponement of the Tunisian
Convention which was to precede that exchange,
France is not responsible for appraisal of the circumstances which have led Italy itself to desire that
postponement.”

10. Lastly, I should like to express the deepest gratitude
of all the people of Chad and of their Government to all
the members of the Council for having responded so
promptly to the appeal made to them by my country,
Chad, and for having allowed me to address the CounciI.

18. Moreover, in its resolution 392 (V) adopted on 15
December 1950, the United Nations General Assembly
recommended, in paragraph 1 (a), with respect to Libya,

11. If we have been compelled to request this urgent
meeting of the Council, the principal body for safeguarding international
peace and security, it is because we
believe that the tension now prevailing between Chad
and Libya is so serious and so explosive that if we are not
careful it will inevitably disturb that peace and security
which the international community so dearly needs.

“That the portion of its boundary with French territory not already delimited by international agreement
be delimited, upon Libya’s achievement of independence, by negotiation between the Libyan and French
Governments, assisted on the request of either party
by a third person to be selected by them or, failing
their agreement, to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral”.

12. The situation in Chad is serious and disturbing
because of the outright intervention of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in Chad. That militarily
over-equipped country has indeed taken it upon itself, in
defiance of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity and the relevant resolutions of those organisations,
as well as in defiance of the principles of international
law, to occupy by force the part of Chad territory commonIy known as the “Aouzou Strip”, which in fact represents. .the Tibesti sub-prefecture, that is, more than
150,000 square kilometres.

19. It was on the basis of that resolution that the
“Treaty of Friendship and Good Neighbourliness”
was
concluded on 10 August 1955, at Tripoli, between the
French Republic and the United Kingdom
of Libya
[ibid., annexxJ,

20. Under the terms of article 3 of that Treaty, concerning the boundary, the following is clearly stated:
“The two High Contracting Parties recognize that
the frontiers between the territories of Tunisia, Algeria, French West Africa and French Equatorial Africa,
on the one hand, and the territory of Libya, on the
other hand, are those resulting from the international
instruments in force on the date of the establishment
of the United Kingdom of Libya, as defined in the
exchange of letters appended hereto (annex I).

13. Indeed, Qaddafi’s Libya attempted to occupy this
part of Chad territory as far back as 1971. The occupation became effective in 1973.
14. In order to justify their actions the Libyan leaders
refer on the one hand to a mere road map published in
1970 by Studi Cartofici Milano and which includes part
of northern Chad as Libyan territory, with the explanatory note that the international borders thus outlined
should not be considered as definitive, as they are subject
to change and, on the other hand, to the stillborn LavalMussolini Treaty of 1935.

21. The aforementioned annex I, which constitutes the
exchange of letters between the United Kingdom
of
Libya and the French Legation at Tripoli, clearly stipulates the following international instruments from which
the western and southern borders of Libya result: first,
the France-British Convention of 14 June 1898 [ibid.,
annexlJ, which delimits the French possessions of the
Ivory Coast, the French Sudan and Dahomey, the British colonies of the Gold Coast, Lagos (Nigeria) and the
other British possessions to the west of the Niger River,
as well as the deIimitation of the French and the British
possessions and the spheres of influence of both countries to the east of the Niger River; secondly, the Additional Declaration of 21 March 1899 [ibid., onnex1l-J
delimiting
the boundary between Chad and Libya;
thirdly, the France-Italian Agreements of 1 November
1902 [ibid., annexIII] reaffirming the preceding agreements; fourthly, the Convention between the French
Republic and the Sublime Porte of 19 May 1910 [ibid.,
annexIV] delimiting the boundary between Tunisia and
Tripolitania;
fifthly, the France-British Convention
of

15. The stillborn Laval-Mussolini
Treaty of 7 January
1935, termed the “Treaty of Rome 0;1 the settlement of
the interests of Italy and France in Africa” [S/15649,
annex VlrJ, however it may upset the Libyan representative, is non-existent.
16. Although the French Parliament passed a law authorizing ratification of the Laval-Mussolini
Treaty in fact
there was no exchange of instruments of ratification.
Therefore that Treaty never came into force and has
never had any legal validity. Furthermore, on 17 December 1938, Count Ciano, the Italian Foreign Affairs Minister, declared: “As the Treaty of Rome was neither
ratified nor completed, it is historically invalid”.
2

8 September 1919 [ibid, annex q delimiting the boundary between Chad and Libya; and sixthly, the FrancoItalian
arrangement
of 12 September 1919 [ibid.,
annex VA delimiting the boundaries between Tripolitania, Algeria and Tunisia.

and by virtue of the agreements signed with Pierre
Laval, Italy might have put forward to the Tibesti
region”.
It is therefore surprising, to say the least, that Libya should
today invoke such a document to justify its occupation of
part of the territory of Chad.

22. The France-Libyan Treaty was approved on 22
November 1956 by the French National Assembly and on
29 November by the Council of the Republic. Act No.
56-1235 of 12 December then authorized the President of
the Republic to ratify it and the exchange of instruments of
ratification took place on 20 February 1957. The Treaty
was published and came into force through Decree No.
57-436 of 26 March, signed by the President of the French
Republic, Mr. Rent Coty, and countersigned by the President of the Council of Ministers, Mr, Guy Mollet, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Christian Pineau.

29. Furthermore, Libya unreservedly voted for resolution AHG/Res.16
(I) [ibid., annex XII] adopted at the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government ot’ the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964. By that resolution all member
States pledged to respect borders existing at the time they
attained independence.
30. Furthermore, in a treaty of friendship, co-operation
and mutual assistance signed at N’Djamena-which
was
then Fort Lamy-on
12 January 1972, Chad and Libya
undertook in their relations to respect the principles of
the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and
that of the United Nations. Therefore by occupying part
of Chad’s territory Libya is deliberately violating both
the letter and the spirit of those Charters.

23. To our knowledge none of the parties expressed any
reservations concerning the delimitation of the border
between Chad and Libya. It should be made clear that the
letters exchanged on the day of signature of the Treaty, on
IO August 1955, and which comprise annexes, are detailed
and unassailable declarations as to the border between
Chad and Libya. Thus the border between Chad and Libya
is today constituted by the following two straight lines: the
first originates at the Tummo well and ends at the intersection of the Tropic of Cancer 23O27’ north latitude with
Greenwich 15Oeast longitude, The second originates at the
Tropic of Cancer and goes to the point where Greenwich
24Oeast longitude meets parallel 19O30’ north latitude. It is
at that point that the three borders of Chad, Libya and
Sudan intersect.

3 1. According to Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations:
“All Members [of the Organization] shall refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.”

24. As regards the question of borders, the Treaty of 10
August 1955 calls for the following comments.

Article III of the Charter of the Organization
Unity stipulates that:

25. The Treaty established, beyond any doubt, the lack
of validity-indeed,
the total non-existence of the Treaty
of Rome of 7 January 1935. Article 3 and annex I in fact
provide an exhaustive list of the international instruments in force concerning the borders. Since the Treaty
of Rome is not on that list, it is clear that it never entered
into force, This is a legal principle that cannot be called
into question.

of African

“The member States, in pursuit of the purposes
stated in Article II, solemnly affirm and delcare their
adherence to the following principles: , . , respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each State
and for its inalienable right to independent existence”.i
32. If today we have been compelled once again to
address the Council it is because the aggression of which
my country is the victim as a result of that occupation is
becoming increasingly flagrant.

26. The Treaty recognizes the borders defined by the
France-British
Additional
Declaration of 21 March
1899, the Rarrbre-Prinetti
exchange of letters of 1
November 1902 and the France-British Convention of 8
September 1919.

33. The statement we have just made to the Council
amply demonstrates-if
that were needed-the seriousness of the situation now prevailing in my country, As
the Council knows, Chad is one of the countries least
favoured by nature and its poverty is very familiar to the
international community. We are now living through the
grimmest hours of our history because of the expansionist designs of our neighbour to the north, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

27. Those international instruments concern not only
Libya and Chad; they also concern other African States
that are now independent.
28. Moreover, during discussions concerning ratification by France of the Treaty of 10 August 1955, on 29
November 1956, Mr. Maurice Faure, then Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs declared before the Council of the
French Republic:

34. This situation not only endangers the very existence
of Chad as a sovereign State and as a member of the international community: it can also seriously endanger the
peace and security of that part of the African continent.

“This Treaty provides for the definitive renunciation by Libya of the claims which, in the Mussolini era
3

43. Because of these factors, from the very outset and
until the Libyan revolution, the .Ja.mahiriya did its best to
help the people of Chad achieve stability. Ever since the
outbreak of the FROLINAT
[National Liberation Front
of C/&j revolution, which began at Nyala in the Sudan
in 1966 under the leadership of the late Ibrahim Abatcha,
we have attempted to effect a national reconciliation in
Chad to protect that country’s interests.

35. That is why, inspired by our desire to resolve the
problem through peaceful channels, Chad is today
addressing the Council in order to obtain its assistance in
recovering its territorial integrity so that it may live in
peace within the borders it inherited from colonization,
It is requesting that Libya withdraw completely from the
territory of Chad.
36. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, upon whom I now
call.
37,

44. Beginning in 1974, we initiated serious attempts to
achieve that end. After the coup d&rat of General Malloum, I personally went to N’Djamena two weeks later at
the request of President Malloum to try to effect a
national reconciliation in Chad. Contacts were actually
made with Mr. Abba Siddik, who was secretary general
of FROLINAT
at the time, and with Hissein Habrti, the
leader of the Armed Forces of the North. At the time,
Goukouni Weddey was an assistant of Hissein HabrtS,
and we sent a delegation to meet with him in Tibesti,
together with the then President, Mr. El-Baghlani,

Mr. TREK1

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretaAt the outset, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your assuming the presidency for this month.
I am confident that your experience and wisdom will
help the Council in its deliberations.
tion from Arabic):

38, I cannot fail to seize this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor, Mr, Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union, and to convey to him the
gratitude of my delegation for his valuable efforts and
the wisdom with which he conducted the proceedings of
this Council last month.

45. It must be remembered that Habrt had been
employed as a civil servant in the town of Al-Bayda,
Libya, and that he had been asked to leave Libya because
of malfeasance, He then went to Tibesti and raised an
army against the N’Djamena Government.

39. In the letter dated 17 March, which I addressed to
you in the name of my country [s/156&j,
I stated that
we did not see any reason for the convening of this meeting of the Council because the letter submitted by the
delegation of the Northern Army, that of Hissein Habrt
[S/15644], has no formal character and is completely
devoid of meaning. That letter represents a personal
stance on the part of the leader of the Northern Army,
the so-tailed FAN, and it is inimical to the Jamahiriya.

46. Hissein Habrt rejected the notion of national reconciliation, but Goukouni Weddey arrived in Tripoli and a
meeting between the resistance groups in Chad was held
there, at which it was agreed to work towards national
reconciliation, Madame Francoise Claustre had been
imprisoned in Tibesti by Habre, who wished to hold her
hostage. Goukouni, however, prevented him from doing
so, and Madame Claustre was later released to the
French Government through Libya.

40. What is the situation in Chad; what does this
delegation-if
we can call it a delegation-represent?
Who can speak in the name of Chad at the present time?
Is it the legitimate Government of President Goukouni
Weddey, the Government recognized by the OAU, a
Government that represents all of the parties in Chad
who were signatories to the Lagos Accord [S/14378,
annex 4, or is one of the wings of that Government, the
wing led by the former Defence Minister, a clique that
represents only one of the eleven groups that were signatories to the Lagos Accord7

47. As the result of a Sudanese initiative, a quadripartite summit meeting was held by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Chad, Niger and the Sudan on 22 February 1978,
at which it was decided to move towards national reconciliation in Chad and to convene a meeting at Sebha in
Libya in order to effect national reconciliation. National
reconciliation was achieved, but Habre refused to participate in it as one of the groups parties to the Chad dispute. He went to the Sudan and there formed a
movement. Meetings were held at Benghazi and Sebha,
after which a communique was issued and agreement
was reached between FROLINAT
and the N’Djamena
Government, with the participation of representatives of
Niger and of the Sudan, whose delegation was led by the
then First Vice-President of the Democratic Republic of
the Sudan, Mr. Abu-Al-Qasem Mohammed
Ibrahirn.
However, that agreement was also rejected by Hissein
Habre. Later, Hissein HabrC was reconciled with General Malloum and became Prime Minister of Chad. However, only a few weeks later he rebelled against President
Malloum and the civil war in Chad assumed larger
dimensions. At the initiative of Nigeria, the first Kano
meeting was convened in Nigeria on 11 March 1979.
Most of the Chadian groups attended that meeting,
including Hissein HabrC. He inisted on deposing President Malloum of Chad. I was a participant on behalf of

41. Members of the Council must be made familiar
with the issues in Chad and examine the explosive situation that prevails there as a result of the ambitions of the
person who, as mentioned in the minutes of the Lagos
meeting, which are still available, was willing to walk
over the body of every person in Chad in order to accede
to power.
42. The Jamahiriya has historic relations with Chad.
Both countries fought together against Italian fascist
colonialism; many Chadians died on Libyan soil and
thousands of Libyans died while defending Chadian soil
against imperialism.
Both peoples are cohesive even at
the racial level; Hissein HabrC himself, the leader of the
northern group, has two sisters who are married to
Libyans.
4

my country at that meeting. HabrC formed a Government in defiance of the Kano Accord with Shawwa as
Prime Minister. However, the OAU refused to recognize
that Government.
48. The first Lagos meeting was then convened. However, Hissein Habrt also refused to participate in that
meeting. When he realized that the OAU was rejecting
his position and refusing to recognize his Government,
he agreed to participate in the second Lagos meeting, at
which the following leaders from Chad took part: Goukouni Weddey, Wadal Abdelkadar KamouguC, Hissein
Habrt?, Aboubakar Abdel Rahane, Acyl Ahmed, AbdouIaye Adam Dana, Abba Siddik, Hadjero Senoussi,
Mahamat Abba Said and Fatcho Balam. At that meeting, the Lagos Accord was signed; HabrC himself signed
it, and in accordance with its provisions he became Minister of Defence in the national Government of Chad.
Only a few months later, Minister of Defence Habr&
rebelled against the legitimate Government and civil war
broke out anew in Chad. Two weeks prior to the outbreak of war, HabrC had invited a Libyan delegation to
discuss the situation in N’Djamena. I attended that meeting as a member of the Libyan delegation, and Hissein
Habrt, Minister of the Interior Abba Siddik, Wadal
Abdelkadar KamouguC and Goukouni Weddey, head of
the Government, were there as well. Hissein Habrk asked
for Libya’s help. When I informed him that for Libya the
question of Chad had been resolved by the Lagos Accord
and the formation of the Government of National Unity,
he stated: “This is a negative neutrality”.
49. The minutes of that meeting are available, and all
those who took part in it are alive today.
50. Hissein Habr6 insisted that the Jamahiriya should
support Chad, With the intensification of the fighting
and in accordance with resolution AHG/Res.lOl
(XVII)
adopted at the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU at its seventeenth session, held at Freetown from 1 to 4 July 1980 [S/14378, annex II], which
called explicitly for assistance to the Government of
National Unity in Chad, following a legitimate request
from that Government and acting in accordance with
signed agreements, Libya sent armed forces to assist that
Government in putting an end to Habrk’s rebellion. The
rebel Habr6 was beaten and fled to the Sudan. At that
time, Chad enjoyed peace for the first time in 15 years.
The civil war in Chad ended.
51. Afterwards, at its eighteenth session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the OAU adopted resolution
AHG/Res. 102 (XVIII)/Rev.
1,2 by which it unanimously
decided to support the Government of National Unity
headed by Goukouni Weddey, and to form a force made
up of certain African States to help Chad end the war,
establish peace and implement the Lagos Accord, which
stipulated the holding of elections in Chad within six
months and the formation of a constitutional Government,

52. After the arrival of the African forces, President
Goukouni sent a request to the Jamahiriya to withdraw
its forces, and orders were actually issued to withdraw
the Libyan forces shortly thereafter. Then Hissein Habrt
resumed his rebellions activities and ravaged Chad anew
with the help of imperialist forces that we all know, and
which have incited him today, after their defeat in the
Security Council in the past, to lodge a complaint against
Libya.
53. Civil war broke out, but we were entirely neutral, as
Hissein HabrC is well aware. He sent us missions at that
time; however we have never interfered: we actually withdrew our forces from eastern Chad much faster than in
other areas so as not to give Hissein Habrt an excuse to
say that Libyan forces resisted him when he entered
Chad.
54. President Goukouni contacted us, arrived in Libya
and asked again that Libya forces be sent anew, but we
categorically refused that request.
55. Then Hissein HabrC entered N’Djamena to start a
new era of bloodshed and massacre of the people of
Chad. He personally took part in those massacres, and
Paris March has published accounts of them. We found
children, some Libyan or of Libyan descent, slaughtered
in the lake there at the hands of Habrt.
56. Thus we see two Governments in Chad, one legitimately recognized by the OAU, that of National Unity in
Chad.
57, The participants at the conference held at Tripoli
from 5 to 8 August 1982, attended by 34 Heads of African States, stated in particular the following in respect of
Chad:
“We expressed our deep concern for the deteriorating situation in Chad and for renewal of civil strife
since the voluntary departure of the Jamahiriya’s
forces-whose efforts and sacrifices had significantly
contributed to the restoration of peace and security
and to safeguarding the unity of that long-suffering
sister country.
“We confirm our support of the Lagos Accord concerning national reconciliation in Chad and condemn
any faction to that Accord which may seize power in a
way that would disturb the peace and security of the
country.“’
58. At the second meeting, also held at Tripoli, more
than 32 African countries refused to recognize the Habre
Government.
They stressed their recognition of the
Government of Goukouni Weddey until the OAU convenes in plenary and takes a decision on who should
represent Chad.
59. Mr. Habrt sent four representatives to Libya at that
time, including Mr. Miskine himself, conveying letters
that confirmed to Colonel Qaddafi that he is a great
socialist, seeks conciliation,
wants recognition from

Libya and is willing even to give up N’Djamena. But we
told him that we could not at all recognize something
that the OAU did not. We even rejected publicizing any
of the letters sent by Hissein Habrk.

the revolution,
periods.

a.nd not during the Italian

or Ottoman

65. Libya’s borders during the Ottoman era were at the
city of Faya, and the charts can testify to that A chart
annexed to the documents of Libya’s independence
which was incorporated in the report of Mr. Adrian Belt
is deposited with the United Nations, and is available at
the United Nations and its Library; it shows that Aouzou
is an integral part of Libya.

60. Why was this particular time chosen by Habrt, who
twice had met with Sharon in the presence of one of his
then assistants who participated later in the Government
of National Unity? Is HabrC the one who expresses the
desire of the people of Chad?

66. We do not accept consideration of this issue. It has
to do with sovereignty and it cannot be discussed by any
party whatsoever. But we are ready to consider any
dispute,

61. Representatives have all received a copy of the letter
from the legitimate
Government in Chad-that
of
National Unity-a
copy of which I too have received
through the Security Council. That letter categorically
rejects the claim of the delegation of Chad, that of N’Djamena or that of the Northern Army, to represent Chad.
It is the legitimate Government recognized by the OAU
which issued that letter.

67. In the past, during the 1977 OAU meeting at Libreville, Mr. Kamougue, the Foreign Minister of Chad, who
is Vice-President of the legitimate Government of Goukouni Weddey, submitted a complaint to the OAU, An
ad hoc mediation committee4 was formed for Chad and
Libya and is still in existence. It is entrusted with the task
of considering the dispute, if there is any, between Chad
and Libya.

62. My present statement is not in any way a reply to
what has been said by Idriss Miskine, the representative of
the Northern Army, because I do not recognize him as
the Foreign Minister of Chad in accordance with the
OAU resolution. This does not at all mean recognition of
that Government by Libya-unless
recognized by the
OAU. I speak to familiarize the Council with our point
of view on the issue of Chad.

68. And at the 1978 OAU meeting at Khartoum the
existence of the Committee was reconfirmed,5 It does
exist. In the OAU we have a conciliation and arbitration
commission, and did the delegation of Chad at the
time-not
the representative of Habrt who has no
competence-contact
it?

63. The representative of HabrC spoke of legal details. I
do not intend to dwell on legal issues in detail-there
are
so many of them on which I could dwell if I wantedbecause I do not believe that the Security Council, which
is concerned with international peace and security, is
interested in the conventions of 1936 and 1956. That of
1936 is null and void, because Hissein Habrd does not
want it; but that of 1956, which was rejected and was not
ratified by the Libyan Parliament, is in effect. I shah not
dwell on border disputes. I do not believe that it is the
purpose of the Council to do so because if it does there
are 18 African States which have border disputes, and I
can enumerate them all. It is not for the Council to deal
with that now.

69. The representative of Habrii is representing no one.
He is an agent. Even his tickets and hotel expenses in
New York were paid him in order to denigrate the Jamahiriya. But I can attest to the fact that ultimately he will
do nothing but sabotage Chad’s national interests. Chad
needs national reconciliation. It needs the Lagos Accord
anew for reconciliation. And when there is a legitimate
government in Chad recognized by the OAU, my country
affirms before you that it will be ready, as in the past,
to consider with that government any dispute,
70. But this is a farce, I call it that because there is no
current tension between Libya and Chad. The tension is
in Chad itself; there are actually two Governments in
Chad-a legitimate one that controls more than half of
Chad, and that of Habrt, propped up by foreign colonial
help, which slaughters the people of N’Djamena.
But
Chad needs every penny for its reconstruction. For two
full years we bore the brunt of Chad’s expenses; we were
its saviours, and the representative of Chad knows that
even his salary and the expenses of the Mission of Chad
here at that time were paid by Libya. We paid the arrears
of Chad here in the United Nations so that Chad could
participate in the voting; millions of dollars were spent
also on the reconstruction of Chad.

64. Furthermore, let us suppose that there is a dispute
between Chad and Libya over the delimitation
of
borders. The Jamahiriya is not against the idea of discussing this with any State, We had recourse to the International Court of Justice in the case of the dispute with
Malta concerning the continental shelf, and the same
thing applies to Tunis, and a ruling in this regard has
been issued. In the past, when there was a real Government of Chad, we conducted negotiations with an official
delegation from that country headed by Mr. Jimmy
Mimari, the then Vice-President of the Republic of Chad,
At that time I headed a delegation as the Foreign Minister of my country and presented charts, and the delegation of Chad presented some of its documents, and we
decided on more contacts. But to say that Aouzou is a
part of Chad is a falsification of the situation. There has
never been any sovereignty by Chad over Aouzou
throughout history-not
during the royal era, not after

71. The representative of Hissein Habrd cannot come
now and say that Libya occupied Chad in 1973-the
Year of Fenugreek, according to a popular Libyan saying. In 1973 Mr. Habrt was asleep in Al-Bayda, as I
mentioned, after being expelled from Libya for malfeasance. Now he comes back calling for Aouzou. He is
6

75. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Egypt in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

obviously dreaming. Actually he has been asleep since
1972--q&e a long time indeed-and
now he has awakened and he claims that the situation in Chad is explosive, and that Libya is occupying Chadian territory. But
Libya respects all international
instruments. Libya
signed the Cairo Agreement and has respected the colonial borders, We inherited borders from Italian coionialism, and Chad inherited borders from French colonialism. We respect the freedom and territorial integrity of
Chad, but we reject the notion that there should be interference in our affairs; we reject any claim to part of our
land.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Khalil (Egypt)
took the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council
chamber.

72. The people in Aouzou are Libyans and have representatives in the Libyan General People’s Congress. They
will not accept to be anything but Libyans. This issue can
never be the subject of discussion on the part of any party
whatsoever. With due respect to all, we categorically
reject any such discussion. However, we are willing to
consider all issues with Chad when there is a national
rCgime in Chad representing all the people of Chad, as I
said before.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
77. Mr, SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from Fret&):
Permit me first of all, Sir, on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf personally, to congratulate you most
warmly on your assumption of the presidency for March.
My delegation is convinced that, thanks to your qualities
as a seasoned diplomat, the work of the Council will be
successful.

73. I believe that the Council’s competence is clear in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which stipulates the following:

78. This complaint by Chad against Libya is timely,
and I believe that, were the United Kingdom not a
member of the Council, everything would have had to be
done for it to be here with us today-and
indeed for
several reasons. The first is that the case before the Council for consideration indirectly concerns the United Kingdom, and, because of the responsibilities of your country,
Sir, the United Kingdom, you would have had to take
cognizance of it. There is another reason. A few
moments ago I was reading your illustrious poet, Shakespeare, who, talking of your island, said this:

“The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security”
-if such a dispute exists; but even Habrt’s representative
did not say that peace and security are being endangered
at all: there is no dispute between Chad and Libya“shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice.”

“This fortress built by Nature for herself . . .
‘“This precious stone set in the silver sea . . .

Article 33 is crystal-clear: there is nothing endangering
peace and security at all. We are ready to begin immediate talks with the legitimate Government of President
Goukouni, recognized by the OAU. We do not want to
impose our will on anyone or on Chad. Libyan forces
were in the whole of Chad and we would have been able
to impose our will, but we had no desire to do that.
When we were asked to withdraw our forces, we did so in
10 days only. We know who is behind this gang. Tomorrow we will see the headlines in the New York
newspapers -these newspapers which ignored Libya’s
complaint against imperialism in the Security Council
because they wanted to exploit that issue for other purposes. Tomorrow we will see an editorial headlined
“Chad has a complaint against Libya”.

“Against

the envy of less happier lands . . .“.I

79. Hence the people of your country have always been
jealous of their independence and integrity. So for all
those reasons, Sir, I think you are in a better position
than anyone else, with your characteristic objectivity, to
be able to appreciate the problem we are considering
today.
80. Having said that, permit me also to pay a welldeserved tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Troyanovsky, representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, for the praiseworthy manner in which he
guided the proceedings of the Council during February.

74. There are those who incite those mercenaries-and
I say “mercenaries” because they do not represent Chad
at all. Miskine himself-and
I know him personallyknows that they belong, together with Hissein Habre, to
one clan in Chad, together with others of his ilk.

81. My delegation welcomes the new members to the
Council-Malta,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan
*Quoted

7

in English by the speaker.

and Zimbabwe-and
wishes them every success in the
delicate and important work they are called upon to do
in the Council.

United Nations, and to scrupulous respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
88. From the study of the case my delegation has had
the opportunity to make, it becomes clear, if one refers to
the historic facts and the juridical documents left by the
former colonial Powers, whether they be, among others,
France-British Conventions-and
that was why, Sir, I
referred a moment ago to the fact that it was most fortunate that you were President of the Council right nowthe 8 September 1919 Convention [S/15649, annex VJ,
the France-Italian
arrangement of 12 September 1919
[ibid., annex VT], the Laval-Mussolini Treaty of 7 January 1935 [ibid., annex Vlfl, upon which, incidentally, the
Libyan side is basing itself, and, closer to us, the Treaty
of Friendship and Good Neighbourliness signed on 10
August 1955 [ibid., unnex Xl between the French Republic and, at the time, the United Kingdom of Libya, it
becomes clear, as I said, that Chad has legitimate reasons
to claim sovereignty over the Aouzou Strip.

82, I should like also to thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Council for the honour you have done
me in having invited the Senegalese delegation to participate in the debate on the dispute between two fraternal
African countries-Chad
and Libya. You have given my
delegation an opportunity to make its own modest contribution to the discussion of this important item on the
agenda, a matter which, it must be said, is of great concern to all Africans. Whether we like it or not, if it is not
settled it will pose a threat to international peace and
security.
83. It is with the greatest interest and attention that my
delegation listened to the parties-the
Republic of
Chad, through its representative, Mr. Idriss Miskine,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in the person of its representative to the United Nations, Mr. Ali Treiki-with
regard
to a strip of territory on the frontier between the two
countries commonly known as the Aouzou Strip.

89. This part of Chad territory which today is the subject of competing claims was at the time of the signing at
Tripoli itself on 2 March 1966 of the Agreement of
Good-Neighbourliness
and Friendship between Chad
and Libya under Chad’s administration, as indeed it was
under French administration in the colonial era.

84. The argument of Chad, which was so brilliantly
presented to us by Mr. Miskine, as we heard him just
now, proceeded along strictly Cartesian lines, which,
based on a number of irrefutable historic and juridical
facts, followed implacable rigor and logic, We are particularly grateful to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chad for this new light he has shed on the dispute
between his country and Libya-iight
which gives us a
better appreciation of the problem of the occupation of
the Aouzou Strip in Tibesti. We believe that this presentation will have been illuminating to the Council and to
all those listening to this debate as to the true dimensions and the true nature of the problem.

90. Unfortunately, we must note that this Agreement of
Good-Neighbourliness
and Friendship, as well as the
Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance signed on 23 December 1972, was violated by the
Libyan side, as we have just been told by the delegation
of Chad.
91, Indeed, the fact alone of unilaterally sending troops
to Tibesti constitutes in itself a systematic violation of the
principles of international law, inasmuch as this act violates the principles of territorial integrity and sovereignty
of States as they appear in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations and the sacrosanct principle of the inviolability of the frontiers inherited from the
colonial era, as laid down in resolution AHG/Res,l6
(I)
of the OAU [ibid., annex Xl., adopted at Cairo on 21
July 1964 as a supplement to article III, paragraph 3, of
the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and
which provides “respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of every State and for its inalienable right to
an independent existence”,

85. The purpose of my delegation is not to dispense
justice and still less to enforce it. Our own purpose is to
be objective, so that our contribution to the debate can
shed further light on the matter for the Council to enable it to take informed decisions, as it deems appropriate, in possession, in so far as possible, of all the
elements of the case.
86. As is known, Senegal was a member of the AdHoc
Mediation Committee set up in July 1977 at the fourteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, held at Libreville,4 on the
initiative of Mr, Omar Bongo, President of the Gabonese Republic and at the time President of the OAU, in
order to seek ways and means to bring about a peaceful
solution-a
solution, I would say, essentially African in
its nature-to
the problem which today is the subject of
the proceedings in the Council.

92. This resolution provides “that all member States
pledge themselves to respect the borders existing on
their achievement of national independence”.
93. It seems to us therefore that the facts are now out in
the open with all the clarity conferred upon them by
historical truth and one could say that the case has been
presented. It is now up to the Council, in the light of the
debate, to take the necessary decisions.

87. Senegal has therefore followed this question very
closely because of its unequivocal devotion to the ideals
of peace and justice, as enshrined in the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity and in the Charter of the

94. For our part, we have listened to the case made by
the Libyan side. Its argumentation-I
regret to have to
8

say this-has hardly fully convinced us. We cannot, therefore, accept it in its entirety.

contribution to the establishment of a new era of civilization, peace, justice and fraternity.

95. Without indulging in demagoguery-and
without
taking any side whatsoever or attempting to influence in
any way the final decision of the Council-it
does seem
to us that the most appropriate solution would be to
prevail upon our Libyan brothers and friends to heed the
voice of reason.

103. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretationfrom
French):
I should first like to present to you, Sir, the warm congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency, Your competence and your great experience
in international relations assure us of good leadership in
the Council’s business for this month.
104. I take this opportunity to convey to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet
Union, the congratulations and thanks of my delegation
for the excellent work he accomplished last month when
President of the Council.

96. The international community, through the Council,
should act so as to get Libya to abide by the most elementary norms of international morality, the principles of
international law and the rules of good-neighbourliness
that underpin the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity and the Charter of the United Nations itself, of
which Libya is a member.

105. I shouId also like to welcome to our midst Mr.
Idriss Miskine, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Chad, who was kind enough to undertake
the journey to New York to participate in the Council’s
work. The fact that he is with us is in itself extremely
meaningful and conveys the full importance of the matter before the Council.

97. Libya must agree to respect the sovereignty of Chad
and, more generally speaking, the sovereignty of other
States. The use of force and illegal occupation have never
been a good solution to disputes between States.
98. At a time when Africa needs to mobilize all its
resources to face up to the numerous problems posed by
its economic development, it seems hardly appropriate to
US for it to allow itself to be dominated by dissension that
is more likely to hold up its positive development
towards the progress and well-being of its peoples.

106. The matter which the Council now has before it
concerns two countries: the Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Chad, members of the OAU and of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, two countries
that are friends of Togo and with which the Togolese
Government maintains excellent relations of friendship
and co-operation.

99. Chad, which has gone through the ordeal of an
unprecedented civil war and which has now regained its
national unity, is attempting to rebuild from the rubble a
sorely tried administration and economy. In this regard it
is only natural for it to aspire to regain its territorial
integrity and finally to live in peace within the frontiers it
inherited from the colonial era. This is the truth.

107. Togo has always acknowledged the right of all
peoples to adopt the government of their choice. This is a
sovereign right. Togo recognizes States, not individuals,
That is why our Government recognized the Government of National Unity of Chad, presided over by Goukouni Weddey, when it enjoyed the support of 11 factions and of the people of Chad.

100. In our view, the Government and the people of
Chad deserve assistance. The International Conference
on Assistance to Chad, organized under the auspices of
the OAU and the United Nations and held at Geneva in
November 1982, testifies to the clear will of the international community to come to the aid of the people of
Chad, resolutely committed to the battle for development.

108. In the same way, since 7 June 1982 Togo has recognized the Government of Hissein Habre, which enjoys
the support of the people of Chad and the international
community. The United Nations and the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries have both solemnly recognized
the Government of Hissein Habrt, as the sole legitimate
Government of Chad.
109. The Government of Togo is, furthermore, most
gratified at the very fortunate initiative recently taken by
the Libyan authorities, who dispatched to Mr. Hissein
HabrlS an official mission in order together to seek ways
and means of producing an amicable settlement to the
dispute between those two countries, which is the subject
of our present discussion in the Council.

101. It is in this spirit of solidarity and equity that we
should like to see the case of Chad considered, hoping, as
the President of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Abdou
Diouf, said in an interview which he granted two weeks
ago to the Third World Press Club of Radio France
International, “that Libya will respect the sovereignty of
Chad and of other States and will truly attempt to work
for the unity of the countries of Africa”.

110. Togo is therefore convinced that the territorial dispute existing between the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the Republic of Chad can still be settled
through bilateral negotiations, with or without the mediation of third parties.

102. It is this appeal that I should like to repeat here to
our Libyan brothers, that they may heed the voice of
reason and withdraw from Chadian territory so that the
people of Chad, who have been so sorely tried, can
recover their unity and independence, make their contribution to African unity, as well as their modest

111. Consequently Togo advocates that all means,
including arbitration and international
judgement, be
used to bring about a peaceful outcome of this dispute.
9

112. Togo is prepared to support any resolution that
may be adopted by the Security Council in order to
resolve the dispute.

118. We must warn against raising normal issuesamenable to solution in a charged atmosphere and in a context that is far from friendly. We emphasize the gravity of
using these disputes in the context of strategic and political conflicts between States. We do so because we are
careful to preserve the interests of all parties, who in this
instance are our brothers in national identity and creed
to whom we are bound by ties of common destiny in the
context of the League of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. We are also bound to
them by amicable and fraternal relations, and we should
like to see stability prevail in their countries and an
atmosphere of understanding and co-operation prevail in
their bilateral relations.

113. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency for this month.
Your well known experience, competence and capability
will enable you to conduct the work of the Council with
great success. Your diplomatic skill and expertise will
enable the Council to achieve the best possible results. It
gives me pleasure to commend the traditional friendship
binding our two countries and the closeness of our
relations.
114. I cannot fail to congratulate Mr. Troyanovsky, the
representative of the Soviet Union, on the way in which
he conducted the work of the Council last month. His
skill, expertise and objectivity won him admiration and
appreciation.
115, The delegation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan views the issue before the Council in the light of the
following considerations.

119. The declaration made by the representative of
Libya concerning its readiness to discuss the border dispute between it and its neighbour Chad on a biIatera1
level and in the Organization of African Unity is compatible with the principles of the Charter and exemplifies a
responsible political position. We hope that such discussion will take place, when circumstances permit, as a
result of Chad’s positive response to this Libyan
commitment.

116. First, the great continent of Africa has been suffering from many complicated problems. The peoples of
that fraternal continent are chafing under the problems
of development, problems for which colonialism was
responsible, and its peoples are trying to confront and
overcome them by various means. To that end all efforts
and potentialities must be harnessed to ensure an appropriate atmosphere of co-operation and stability among
the States of that continent and between that continent
and the world.

120. In this context we call upon our brothers in Libya
and Chad to pursue a policy of restraint, goodneighbourliness and peaceful settlement of disputes, We
would assure them that it is in the interests of the peace
and stability of both countries and of the whole region
not to link border disputes to issues of legitimacy in each
country because we believe that the nature of the rbgime
of any country falls squarely within the competence of
the people of that country and that selection of that
rCgime is its exclusive right.

117. Secondly, African border disputes are vestiges of
colonialism, and in that continent they assume a distinct
and special character. But it is encouraging to see that
many African States have overcome those disputes and
achieved amicable settlement of them in a manner acceptable to all parties. Those settlements were facilitated by
the adoption of a rational and realistic approach and the
exercise of quiet diplomacy through bilateral contacts
between States. Moreover, regional organizations, good
offices and arbitration proceedings by those organizations played a vital role in bridging the differences on
many issues that arose among African brothers, including border disputes. But the most common element in the
achievement of amicable settlements of border disputes
in Africa and elsewhere was that all parties were keen not
to intensify and escalate those disputes and not to use
them regionally or internationally as instruments in the
context of regional and international political disputes.
Making those disputes subject to the social and political
contradictions that plague African relations and politicizing and internationalizing
them causes complications,
bringing more transient issues to the forefront while
basic issues are drowned in a tumult of charges and
counter-charges. Issues that at the outset are amenable to
solution become intractable because they become symbols for issues that cannot be solved without resort to
force in relations among nations.

121. Finally, this reality prompts us to call upon OUT
brothers in Libya and Chad to return to bilateral contacts to settle this dispute among brothers and to give the
OAU a real opportunity to continue its activities in this
regard.
122. The OAU has given the Chad question special
attention and has adopted numerous unanimous decisions regarding it. It has also constituted a five-member
good-offices committee which is still concerned with the
achievement of an amicable settlement of the LibyaChad border dispute.
123. Hence we think it would be wise if the efforts
expended by the OAU enjoyed the support of Libya and
Chad, which participated in the constitution
of that
organization and have already accepted its good offices,
and the support of the Council, since these efforts accord
with Article 52 of the Charter of the United Nations. The
last thing Africa needs is conflicts or tension.
124. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Ivory Coast. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
125. Mr. ESSY (Ivory Coast) (interpretation
from
French): I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
10

there are tenets of our policy which we cannot allow to
be challenged. Foremost is respect for the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, which is consistent with
the Charter of the United Nations, one of the cardinal
principles of which is non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.
132. The OAU recognizes States and not individuals.
The Tobar and Wilson doctrines on the theory of legitimacy are alien to Africa. “The first to become king,”
history teaches us, “was a successful soldier”. Just as we
recognized Goukouni Weddey as Head of State of Chad
when he was in power in N’Djamena, so too we today
fully recognize Mr. Hissein Habre as Head of Government of Chad. The Ivory Coast, as President
Houphouet-Boigny
has stated on many occasions, “does
not pass judgement on coups B&at. The only judges are
the sovereign peoples who experience such changes of
regime or administration.”

for affording my delegation this opportunity to speak on
a problem that concerns it not only as an African State
but also as a peace-loving State that wishes to see international relations governed by ethical principles and by
certain norms which are indispensable for the attainment
of a coherent international society committed to a system
of law and in which those subject to international law,
both large and small, can enjoy the attributes of their
sovereignty without fear.
126, The United Kingdom, which had the formidable
responsibility of presiding at the attainment of international sovereignty by many large and small States, all
Members of the United Nations, is in a better position
than anyone to realize how fragile certain sovereignties
would be were there no body of law capable of protecting
them against the expansionist greed and designs of certain Powers. It is therefore a real pleasure for my delegation to see the representative of the United Kingdom, a
country with which the Ivory Coast has relations of sincere friendship and multilateral co-operation, occupying
the presidency of the Council.

133. It is all the more difficult for us to understand the
criticism and objections that have been raised, particularly when they emanate from persons who have
employed similar methods in acceding to high office.

127. Your extensive diplomatic experience and your
skills which we have admired both in the Council and in
the General Assembly, are a valuable contribution to our
search for a peaceful solution to the thorny question now
before the Council.

134. The welcome accorded the present delegation of
Chad, both in meetings within the United Nations system
and by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, is
highly significant in this connection as indicating the
desire of the international community to see a certain
stability prevail in international relations.

128. I should also like to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, for the usual effectiveness and skill with which he guided the work of the
Council last month.

135. There is another principle that is dear to us in the
OAU, and that was designed by our Heads of State precisely in order to avoid the border conflicts that could not
fail to arise in the decolonization of territories interrelated
by geography and history.

129. For the Ivory Coast peace is a true creed without
which there can be no development. Thus it cannot
remain indifferent to any threat to or breach of the peace
in any African State, particularly in those areas that
President Houphouet-Boigny defined in April I971 in an
effort to find ways and means to guarantee peace to our
continent; he identified three prerequisites that are
closely interrelated: namely, peace within each African
State, peace among African States and peace between the
African States and the rest of the world.

136. That principle of the inviolability of the borders that
emerged as an aftermath of decolonization is enshrined in
resolution AHG/Res.lG (I) [ibid] adopted on 21 July 1964
at the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU, held at Cairo, which stipulates in paragraph 2 “that
all member States pledge themselves to respect the borders
existing on their achievement of national independence”,
and made it possible for our States in the sub-region, within
the framework of joint commissions, to delimit our borders
with the help of the maps, agreements and treaties
bequeathed by the former colonizing Powers.

130. Accordingly, it is obvious that if any one of those
three prerequisites were lacking the entire system would
be threatened. In the case before the Council today, what
do we find? First, Chad, an African country, has not
experienced calm political life since 1965, that is, five
years after its accession to independence-that
calm poIitical life conducive to the development essential for a
country that is relatively disadvantaged by being landlocked. Secondly, there is a border dispute between Chad
and its neighbour to the north, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Those two situations, both of which run counter to
the three prerequisites I tnentioned earlier, cannot fail to
be of concern to any African State that seeks peace for
the African continent and, therefore, peace for itself.

137. All States that emerged from decolonization possess
geographical and population-related data that cannot be in
error since the taxation system enforced in the colonial
period enabled the colonial administration in place to draw
up a balanced budget for the management of the territory
under its administration, It was therefore not in the interests
of the colonial Powers to manipulate those geographical
and population-related data because of the impact of such
data on the budget of the colony and, therefore, on that of
the home country in case of deficit.
138. In the case before us today there have been nurnerous international
instruments concluded between the
former colonizing Powers of Chad and Libya, among

131. However, above and beyond this dispute between 1
two African States, with all the consequences it entails,
I
i
!I

11

which we might mention the France-British Convention
of 14 June 1898, the Additional Declaration on 21 March
1899, which is an addendum to that Convention, the
France-Italian Agreements of 1 November 1902 and the
Treaty of Friendship and Good Neighbourliness
concluded between the French Republic and the United
Kingdom of Libya on 10 August 1955 [S/J%@, anneXe$
.I, ZZ, III and Xi respectively].

139. From our reading of the letters addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of the Republic of Chad, as well as the letter from the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, we can
affirm that there does undeniably exist, under the terms
of Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations, a
dispute whose prolongation
is likely to threaten the
maintenance of peace in Africa and, therefore, international security.
140. One party bases itself upon a plethora of legal
texts in proving its good faith with regard to lega title
inherited in a “succession of States”, whereas the other
party calls these into question.
141, The Council therefore cannot stand idle in the face
of this dispute and adjourn without recommending the
use of one of the means for peaceful settlement provided
by the Charter: inter aliu, possible recourse to the International Court of Justice to obtain its legal opinion in
this succession of States which concerns two African
States members of the OAU and Members of the United
Nations and therefore governed by the’cardinal principles of those two organizations, which are based on
respect for territorial integrity, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, non-aggression and the nonacquisition of territories by force and respect for the independence and sovereignty of States.

his meritorious efforts and great activities that characterized his presidency of the Council last month.
146. The Council has been convened to consider an
important issue represented by the complaint submitted
by the Government of Chad against the Libyan occupation of a part of its territory.
147. A few weeks ago we had an opportunity to address
this Council on a matter in which Libya-most
unfortunately-was
the main common denominator, At
that time we confirmed that the quest of the Jamahiriya
for domination and expansion and its threat to the security of neighbouring and other countries were the main
reasons for the tension and state of instability prevailing
in that region.
148. A real source of concern is to see the Council for
the second time in less than a month open the file of
Libyan intervention in the affairs of neighbouring countries, subjecting their independence and sovereignty to
danger at a time when the ink has barely dried on the
statements made in the last series of meetings concerning
the importance of respecting the territorial integrity of
other States and the principles of non-interference in
their internal affairs and the inadmissibility of the use or
threat of use of force.
149. What is unfortunate, too, is that neighbouring
countries constitute an arena for these aggressive acts by
Libya at a time when Libya’s responsibility should be
keenly to develop good-neighbourly
relations, mutual
respect and co-operation with its neighbours, as well as
to strengthen the historical and cultural bonds that link it
with those States.
150. As it participates in the present debate of the
Council on the issue of the Libyan presence in Chad, my
country confirms Sudan’s interest in this matter. A continuation of this presence which has lasted for a decade
has negative effects on Sudan and the other African
States and threatens their security and stability. In addition, our interest stems from the fact that the essence of
the issue proceeds from the aforementioned principles:
respect for the sovereignty and independence of the
neighbouring States and their territorial integrity, the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force,
and the importance of the peaceful resolution of disputes. Above ail, the perpetuation of that presence
obstructs efforts aimed at establishing peace and security
in that country. Also, it endangers Chad, which is one of
the least developed countries, prevents it from achieving
economic and social development for its people and,
moreover, obstructs the efforts of the international
community to help Chad-efforts that were crystallized during the International
Conference on Assistance to Chad
held recently at Geneva.

142. The Ivory Coast will spare no effort to make its
modest contribution to any peaceful solution to this dispute that is based on justice and law.
143. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
144. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan) (interpretation from
Arabic): It gives me great pleasure and is an honour for
me to convey to you, Sir, at the outset of my statement
warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency for the current month. We are confident that
your wide experience and expertise in the diplomatic and
political fields will be great assets and enable the Council
to discharge its duties and responsibilities in the service
of international peace and security in a way that will
respond to the desires and expectations of the international communiry for security and stability. My country,
which enjoys close relations with your friendly country,
wishes to confirm its co-operation with you in the
achievement of our noble purposes,

151. I do not need-especially after the clear statement
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs arid Cooperation of Chad--to dwell on the political and legal
aspects of the Libyan-Chadian dispute which would reinforce Chad’s sovereignty over the Aouzou sector. My

145. My thanks go also to your predecessor, Mr, Oleg
Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union, for
12

I
~

delegation wishes to draw the Council’s attention to the
danger of the continuation of the Libyan presence in
Chad, a crystal-clear issue that should not be the subject
of prevarication or speculation. It is a matter that has to
do with the illegal occupation of a part of Chad’s territory and represents a violation of the principles of the
regional organization to which the two parties to this
dispute belong. I refer to the OAU, which has confirmed
the inviolability
of frontiers inherited at the time of
independence.

Commission
for Reconciliation
and Arbitration,
but
what is unfortunate is that Libya has twice in succession
obstructed the convening of OAU meetings at Tripoli,
thus undermining
the course of its different bodies,
including that on reconciliation,
157. Libya must respect the principles of the OAU if
it seriously wishes to resolve its disputes through the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity. One of the
most important principles is undoubtedly that of the inviolability of the frontiers inherited since independencethrough which it was possible to avoid much of the
plague of disputes at a time when the African States were
still suffering from the problems of national unification
and other problems, especially countries sharing common tribes and cultural and historicai ties.

152. This issue represents another dimension of Libya’s
relationship with its neighbours and other African countries resulting from a policy characterized by intervention
in the affairs of others, attempts at destabilizing those
countries, imposing a trusteeship and hegemony, using
mercenaries and threats of military invasion. This is clear
from Libya’s occupation of a country, its sowing seeds of
discord among its people, allying itself with those who
have done the same with it, and expelling by force of
arms those who did not ally themselves, thus undermining OAU principles and other international norms that
govern contemporary conduct among nations. It has also
obstructed the OAU plan aimed at achieving reconciliation in Chad.

158. The issue of the Libyan presence in Chad is not an
issue of today only. Certain Governments of Chad and
countries like Sudan have sought a solution of the issue
through the OAU throughout the years, but to no avail.
159. Chad’s request that the Council consider this issue
reflected the gravity of the matter as well as the dontinued inimical attitude of Libya towards the Government at N’Djamena. The Council, which is charged with
the responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security, must fulfil that obligation by taking the proper
necessary measures to safeguard the independence and
sovereignty of the Republic of Chad by calling upon
Libya to withdraw its forces from Chad.

153. This period is characterized by a deterioration in
Libya’s position, and about one third of the members of
the OAU have severed relations with Libya owing to its
acts.
154. Libya did not confine itself to this occupation, but
continued to be inimical to the present Government in
Chad, which represented the hopes of the people of Chad
for national unity and reconstruction. It was inimical to
it, threatening it and doubting its representation of the
people of Chad, starting with Tripoli, continuing to
Managua and ending in New Delhi during the meetings
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, oblivious to
the fact that the Libyan presence in Chad is a national
issue, that is, of interest to all the people of Chad, and is
not a matter for futile verbal clashes about the legitimacy
or illegitimacy of Governments.

160. My country attaches great importance to the
efforts of the present Government of Chad to restore its
sovereignty throughout the entirety of its territory and
commends that Government’s
efforts to submit this
problem to the Council after the failure of successive
Governments to solve it through other efforts, including
regional mediation. We feel that the Council’s position
will reinforce the efforts of the people of Chad to maintain their country’s independence and to reconstruct it
after the civil wars that obstructed the clarification of all
aspects of this issue. Chad has to direct all its resources
and capabilities towards reconstruction and development
in order to put an end to the vestiges of its past. This can
be done only after the immediate and complete withdrawal of Libyan forces from the territory of Chad: This
is what we hope for and we hope also that the deliberations of the Council will result in that coming about.

155. The Council is confident that the dispute over the
legitimacy of Governments can never be a justification or
a reason for occupying the lands of others by force. The
issue under consideration before the Council has to do
with respect for two principles that are enshrined among
the most important bases for international conduct. They
are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity and in
other agreements relevant to the Chad issue that had
been referred to by other speakers who preceded me this
evening. These two principles are: respect for the territorial integrity of States and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries. Respect for these two principles is not subject to certain Governments and there can
never be any justification for violating them or for seeking other solutions based on disagreement among
Governments.

161. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
162. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt): I should first of all like to
express my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency. We wish you success and
are equally sure that you will easily achieve it with
distinction.
163, I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity to express to your predecessaar, Mr. Troyanovsky of
the Soviet Union, our gratitude for the manner in which
he discharged his responsibilities.

156, Libya has declared that these issues should be
resolved through regional arrangements in the OAU’s
13

164. Respect for the territorial integrity of Chad is not
only a natural right of its people to sovereign independence, but is also necessary for peace, security and stability in the region, indeed in the African continent as a
whole.
165. Constructive African efforts within the OAU have
been diligently directed towards assisting the people of
Chad to achieve peace and national unity after the civil
strife that has, unhappily, engulfed them for over a
decade. Heads of State of the OAU have consistently
called upon all its members to support efforts aimed at
maintaining peace and security in Chad, to abstain from
interfering in its domestic affairs and to contribute
towards creating the proper atmosphere necessary for
consolidating stability and Chad’s newly found peace,
gained at such great cost, as we all know.
166. In spite of these clear, consistent and constructive
positions and all the principles upon which they are
based, a region which constitutes an integral part of
Chad is still under occupation by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Recurrent endeavours by the legitimate Government of Chad to induce Libya to withdraw from the
territory of Chad have met, at best, with procrastination.
167, We have, I am sure, all listened with great care to
the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Co-operation of Chad. Our attention was no less intense
when we followed the arguments of the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In the opinion of my delegation, the Government of Chad was fully
justified in bringing its complaint to the attention of the
Council.

172. Mr, BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
As members of the Council may have noticed when listening to the representative of Libya, he deliberately
departed from the subject before us, that is, the occupation by force of part of Chad’s territory by Libya. In so
doing, the representative of Libya has amply demonstrated, as if there were a need to do so, that his country
is flagra.ntly and shamelessly intervening in the internal
affairs of Chad in overt violation of all international
rules.
173. We therefore categorically refuse to be led down
this path ourselves, Hence, in exercise of the right of
reply, we would not like, as the representative of Libya
did, to get bogged down in political considerations and
thus miss the point about the precise problem we have
brought to the Council-the
question of the occupation
of part of Chad’s territory by Libya. Members of the
Council will recall that in our statement we confined
ourselves strictly to the legal aspect of this matter. Hence
we had felt that the Libyan representative would do the
same. Unfortunately, as Libya has always done, particularly in the Council on 7 February 1978 [206&h meeting],
its representative has indulged in discussions and wild
imaginings to evade the substance of the problem. Al1
that the representative of Libya said was a tissue of lies
and constituted unacceptable interference in the internal
affairs of Chad.
174. Libya affirms without any proof to back it up that
part of Chad’s territory it is occupying by force is “an
integral part of Libyan territory”-and
those are terms
used in the letter dated 17 March 1983 from the Libyan
representative to the President of the Council [S/15645$

168. We did not detect in the statement of the Libyan
representative any attempt seriously to resolve this issue,
in spite of the very forthcoming position of the Government of Chad, as expressed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chad.

175. For our part we have presented irrefutable proof
amply demonstrating that the territory at present occupied by Libya is unquestionably part of Chad. On 10
August 1955, in accordance with the recommendation of
the General Assembly, a treaty was concluded between
France and Libya [S/15649, annex XJ, putting an end to
any Libyan claims to part of Chad’s territory. And even
in 1965-five years after Chad acceded to independence
and 10 years after the signing of the French-Libyan
Treaty-Chad
and France were by common accord still
administering that part of our territory at present occupied by Libya.

169. Foreign Minister Miskine, having thoroughly and,
in my delegation’s view, very convincingly presented his
country’s point of view, has again-and
before the
Council-repeated
his Government’s readiness to resolve
this question by peaceful means. He has addressed himself to the Council in order for it to help the iegitimate
Government of Chad to restore its territorial integrity
and to live in peace within the frontiers inherited from
the past-a basic principle which the members of the
OAU have pledged themselves to respect in order to
avoid interminable difficulties and conflicts.

176. The representative of Libya has described us as
“rebels”. Can he say, therefore, why an official delegation of the Libyan Government went to N’Djamena on 2
March 1983 to discuss State matters with the Chad
Government? I think this is, to say the least, a rather
inconsistent attitude in the Libyan position, Can he tell
us why his Government invited and welcomed to Tripoli,
his capital, a governmental representative from Chad to
discuss matters of State with Libyan authorities?

170. In the opinion of the delegation of Egypt, the least
the Council could do is to call on Libya to respect the
territorial integrity of Chad and, consequently, put an
end to its occupation of Chadian territory, and to
respond to Chad’s attempt to put an end to, and resolve,
the tension persisting between the two countries.

177. May I be allowed to reveal the content of the discussions which took place at N’Djamena and Tripoli, the
essential subject of which, as my Government saw it, was
the occupation by Libya of part of Chad’s territory. Let
this be well understood: for the Libyans, three conditions

171. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Chad has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I now
call on him.
14

must be met by Chad for these discussions to be successful, Firstly, our Government must proclaim an Arab
Islamic Republic, whereas everyone knows that Chad is
a republic-one,
indivisible and non-religious-even
though Chad was one of the founding members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. Secondly, Libya
demands that our country form a strategic alliance with
Libya in order to destabilize the countries near ChadCameroon, the Niger and Nigeria-which
it describes as
reactionary regimes. Chad would then serve as a springboard to destabilize the regimes of these neighbouring
countries, Thirdly, Libya asks us to keep the historic
frontiers between the two countries, which, as they see it,
means that the present frontier between the two countries
would have to be obliterated.
178. Once these three conditions had been met, Libya
would then hand over to the Chad Government the
members of this puppet government.

184. I do not want to respond to Habre’s delegation. I
only want to respond to the delegation of one of the
parties to Camp David-the
delegation of Egypt-and
to the delegation of Sudan.
185. Sudan and Egypt have common frontiers with
Libya; yet they have not charged in their statements that
Libya occupied part of Sudan or part of Egypt. Nemeiri’s
representative stated that Libya creates problems and is
expanding. We have heard this from President Nemeiri
personally, in Nairobi, and he even mentioned that Libya
wanted to occupy Nigeria at that time, More pettiness!
186. I steered away from legal arguments; I stated
clearly that at Tripoli and at N’Djamena-I
was the head
of my country’s delegation-we
spoke clearly of the legal
question concerning the frontier problem that Chad
claims exists with Libya and we are prepared to discuss
this and any issue with the legitimate Government of
Chad.

179. As the Council can well imagine, our Government
rejected in to@ these three unacceptable conditions and
the shameless bargain proposed by Libya. In view of this
extremely negative position taken by Libya, like that
adopted at previous negotiations both bilaterally and in
the OAU, the Chad Government decided to bring the
matter before the Council so that the true problem of the
occupation of part of our territory should be settled by
the Council, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of
African Unity.

187, The representative of Sudan stated that Libya
wanted to commit sabotage and rejects any legitimate
Government-what
legitimate Government or representative? Sudan is a signatory of the Lagos Accord
[S/14378, annex 4 and here is its signature-that
of the
Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs at that time, That
Accord provides for the formation of a Government of
National Unity in Chad comprising 11 groups. One of
those groups is the delegation of Hissein Habre-the
Armed Forces of the North.
188. Sudan presided over the Sebha meeting in Libya
and was one of signatory States of the Sebha DeClaFation. The Sudanese delegation was led by Abu-Al-Qasem
Mohammed Ibrahim, but Sudan disregarded its signature and concluded another agreement with Hissein
Habrt: whereby Hissein Habre was later appointed Prime
Minister under President Malloum.

180. Hence we urge all the members of the Council to
invite the representative of Libya, who is present here, to
return to the question of concern to us which is now
before the Council, namely, the occupation of part of our
territory by Libya. All the delaying tactics of Libya prove
to what extent the representative of Libya is lacking in
arguments to justify the military presence of his country
an Chad soil.

189. Sudan also incited Habrt to rebel at that time, as it
incited him in the last rebellion against President GOUkouni. Who incited whom to rebellion in Chad?

18 1, In conclusion, we once again request the representative of Libya ta tell us under which claim and in the
name of what convention or treaty Libya occupies part
of Chad territory with impunity. It should withdraw its
troops from Chad without any preconditions, for, contrary to what was said by the representative of Libya,
there is indeed a threat to peace and security not only in
the region but also internationally.

190. We now hear that Libya sent a delegation. That is
not true; Libya did not send an official delegation. We
hear that Libya wants an Islamic republic in Chad! We
could have done that when we had our forces in Chad,
had we wanted to. What would have stopped us? I do not
think President Nemeiri would have stopped us; he could
not even defend his capital against internal opposition
elements. I do not think that one of the parties to Camp
David, who sold the land to colonialism to establish its
bases, would have stopped us. But Libya refuses to do
this. Libya has never imposed any conditions on Chad or
on any other country.

182. The CHAIRMAN:
The representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply, I call on him.
183. MF. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpreration from Arabic): The representative of Chad personally knows that what I said is true. He knows that before
Idriss Miskine came to the United Nations he came ta my
office and said that he had not received a letter from the
legitimate Government, that he was in an embarrassing
situation and he sought my assistance at the time to help
him to contact the legitimate Government,

191. I have said from the beginning that there is a canspiracy and that Habre has been prompted to undertake
this manoeuvre to pave the way-and here I am warning
against operations that may be undertaken by imperialism in collusion with the Nemeiri regime and with Egypt,
a party to the Camp David accords, against Libya.
15

192. I stated that Hissein Habre met Sharon. That
meeting took place in the Hilton Hotel at Cairo, when
Sharon was there. The inclusion of Egypt and Sudan in
the list of speakers today affirms the manoeuvre and the
conspiracy, as well as the fact that some of the statements
were written for some delegations by well-known parties.
What is the aim of this? Is it to pave the way for an act of
aggression against Libya? We shall see in the near future.

200. Libya respects the independence of Chad and its
territorial integrity. It never has intervened and never will
intervene in the internal affairs of Chad. But at the same
time it respects its own borders and can protect its territory, and it will not give up an inch of its territory under
any circumstances, We are willing to discuss any issue on
a bilateral level, on an African level, on any level, to
settle this problem, if there is a problem. But to the Egyptian rtgime and to the Sudanese rtgime I say that imperialism cannot protect them. What they have said does
not represent their peoples: it represents Menachem
Begin, Camp David and the friends of Camp David.

193, I have been accused of obfuscating the issue and of
going into a political discussion. What is the purpose of
the Council: to discuss legal questions? Is it the International Court of Justice? Is it the Committee of Good
Offices of the OAU? The Council is concerned with
peace and security and discusses political issues in the
first place and not legal issues.

201. Revolutionary Libya will continue to defend its
territories with all its might. We will not accept intervention in our affairs by any Power. Aouzou is part and
parcel of Libya; Aouzou is Libyan territory. We inherited it from Italian colonialism. The Italian representative, who is now present, can be asked this question:
when Libya was defeated, was Aouzou part of Libya or
was it not? The United Kingdom and France are aware
of the facts. We inherited Aouzou from Italian colonialism; its population is Libyan, and it is represented in the
People’s Conference. Whoever wants to fight Libya
should not use these immoral means and manoeuvres.
Libya is a signatory of the Cairo Agreement, and we
respect all agreements.

194. This is a map prepared by the United Nations and
on the basis of which Libya was granted its independence. The map was not prepared by Libya but by the
United Nations, Let us see whether Aouzou forms part
of Libya or not. As regards the agreements, the LavalMussolini Treaty is invalid and the Treaty of Ben Halim
with France is valid. I do not want to go into the legal
details, but the problem in Chad is a political one.
195. Thirty-two African States recognized the Goukouni Government. If I wanted to discuss the problem of
Chad I would discuss it with the legitimate Goukouni
Government and not with a group of mercenaries. I have
never attempted, and I shall not do so, to change the
course of the debate, but let us be clear: what is the
function of the Council? Is it to discuss legal questions?
Let the Council decide and then we shall discuss the
documents which I already have, Then let us change the
Security Council into an international court of justice
and let it assume the functions of a court, or let it be
turned into a good offices committee.

202. I reserve my right to speak again, and I shall have
a lot to say if the representatives of the Egyptian and
Sudanese puppets or imperialism dare to speak of the
Jamahiriya. As for what some other speakers said, I shall
not even dignify their remarks with an answer.
203. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Sudan
wishes to exercise his right of reply. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
204. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan): Judging from the last
words of the representative of Libya, Libya is a part of
Africa. Throughout the history of the United Nations,
Africa has observed a certain decorum and etiquette in
dealing with this august international body. Speaking of
African Presidents, whether the Chadian President, the
Sudanese President or other Presidents in the manner in
which the representative of Libya just addressed the
Council is, to put it as mildly as I can, in bad taste.

196. What I heard from the delegation of Sudan and
from Egypt’s Camp David delegation affirms the dimensions of the real conspiracy, and I feel that the Council
must not be deceived. There is an Arab proverb which
says: “If a rogue disparages me, that is eloquent proof of
my lofty ideals.”
197. Egypt, which sold Sinai to Israel and imperialism,
is giving lessons in morality, It sold the whole of Egypt to
Menachem Begin and now it is giving lectures on ethics.
And to whom? To the Libyan revolution,

205. The issue in question is the complaint by Chad,
and Chad has given the Council its arguments. The
Libyan representative has given very few arguments that
deserved to be discussed and indulged in a lot of irrelevant talk about matters unrelated to the matter in question. I should like the Council to take note of that.

198. Egypt was the vanguard of the Arab nation. It
was always the defender of Arab causes and Arab territories. Unfortunately it has changed and become a puppet
entity. And let us of Africa and the Arab nation acknowledge that imperialism succeeded in recruiting puppets in
the Sudan and Egypt.

206. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Egypt
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

199. Undei what pretext does the representative of the
Egyptian rdgime give lectures on ethics? The dimensions
of this conspiracy are clear.

207. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt): Like the representative of
Sudan I shall be very brief in view of the lateness of the
16

hour and what K consider to be the trivialities just pronounced by the representative of Libya, I think he always
tends to see a conspiracy in any move; he tends to see the
hand of what he thinks is imperialism; and I think that in
his wild imagination he always indulges in insults to
which we have unfortunately all become accustomed. I
think our margin of tolerance perhaps goes beyond what
the code of conduct of this august body should be.
208. As I have said, he seeks to cast doubt even on the
representivity of my delegation. I noted some of the
words and sentences he used, and I need not really
bother the Council by replying to them. He said that
Egypt is a party to Camp David. Yes, that is a fact. We
are a party to Camp David, Camp David has sought and
still seeks a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
We stand by it, We hope it will be implemented. In fact I
think it is much more practical than the empty rhetoric
that is not getting us anywhere.

210. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya wishes to speak in exercise of
the right of reply. I call upon him.
211. Mr. TREK1 (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interprel&ion from Arabic): I believe that the representatives of
Egypt and the Sudan were cut to the quick by the facts.
Nothing is more painful than reality. I am happy that the
representative of Egypt recognizes that his country is a
corner-stone of Camp David and that, proceeding from
that premise, it implements Camp David.
212.

The meeting rose al Z 15 p.m.

NOTES
‘United Nations, Treafy Series, vol. 479, No. 6947.
2 See A/36/534, annex II.
I See A/37/431, annex.
( See A/32/310, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.l08 (XIV).
s See A/33/235
and Corr. 1, annex II, resolution AHG/Res,94 (XV).

209. I do not intend to speak again whatever the representative of Libya might choose to say. Suffice it again to
reiterate that I feel it is time that a certain code of conduct
was enforced and respected in the Council.

Litho in United

Nations,

New

York

That is all I wanted to say.

00400

60205-Octaber 1990-2,050
