UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

tal

~
""""'"?~

SECU'RITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FIFTEENTH YEAR

859

th MEETING: 25 MAY 1960

we SEANCE: 25 MAl 1960
QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SiAgenda/859). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . " . . . .

1

Cable dated 18 May 1960 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council (Si 4314, si4315). . . . . . . . . . . .

1

\;~

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (SiAgenda/859)

.

1

Adoption de 1'ordre du jour

.

1

Cablogramme, en date du 18 mai 1960, adress~ au Pr~sident du
Conseil de s~curit~ par le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res de
l'Union des R~publiques socialistes sovi~tiques (S/4314, Si
4315) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

( 18 p. )

s/pv.859

~ ..

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIFTY -NINTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Wednesday, 25 May 1960, at 3 p.m.
HUIT CENT CINQUANTE-NEUVIEME SEANCE
Tenue d New York, le mercredi 25 mai 1960, d 15 heures.
President: Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon).

President: sir Claude COREA (Ceylan).

Present: The representatives ofthe following States:
Argentina, Ceylon" Chinu, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great BritainandNorthernIreland,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Unide
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Provisional agenda (SI Agenda/&59)

Ordre du jour provisoire (SI Agendal 859)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. Cable dated 18 May 1960 from the Minister for

Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics addressed to the President ofthe Security
Council (S/4314, S/4315).

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Cliblogramme, en date du 18 mal 1960, adresse au
President du Conseil de securite par le Ministre
des affaires etrang~res de 1'Union des Republique15
socialistes sovietiques (S/4314, si4315).

i
~

II,
i

\

~:

~

!
~

I

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopt6.

f-:

1
t

!

Cable dated 18 May 1960 from the Minister for Fareign
Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council (5/4314,

S/4315)

Coblogramme, en date du 18 mai 1960, adresse au President
du Conseil de securite par le Mini!l:tre des affaires
etranglHes de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques (S/43i4, S/4315)

1. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French): My
delegation followed with the closest attention the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union [857th meeting] regarding the complaint
which he submitted to the Security Council in documents
S/4314 and S/4315. We listened with equal attention at
the same meeting to the United States representative's
reply to the accusations set out, in that complaint,
against his Government.

1. M. SLIM (Tunisie): C'est avec la plus grande attention que nous avons suivi Pexpose fait par le
Ministre des affaires etrang~res de PUnion sovietique
[857~me seance] au sujetdelaplaintequ'ila introduite
devant le Conseil de securite dans les documents S/
4314 et S/4315. Avec nonmoinsdeserieux,nous avons
entendu ~ la m13me seance la replique du representant

2. An impartial study of these two main statements
has led us to the conclusion that the situation is
serious, not so much because of the actualincident or
incidents which gave rise to it, but mainly because of
the mistrust which it has shown to exist between the
two parties chiefly concerned, and of the regrettable
consequences which it has had or might still, in the
near future, produce.

2. L'etude impartiale de ces deuxprincipaux exposes
nous a amenes ~ la conclusion que la situation est
serieuse, non certes en raison de Pincident ou des
incidents qui Pont provoquee en eux-m~mes, mais
surtout du fait de la mefiance qu'elle revMe entre les
deux parties princlpalement en cause, ainsi que des
suites regrettables qu'elle a eues ou qu'elle pourrait
avoir encore dans le proche avenir.

3. The accusation that the United States Air Force has

carried out aggressive acts against the Soviet Unionthe matter now before the Council-rests essentially,
according to the complaint, on two violations of the
Soviet Union's air sp~~e by United States military aircraft.

~:s~;a::~~~nt~~~~~~~na:u~~~:~~~ portees

iiat~:~:i~~~~~i:~~~~~~U~~l:~~~:t~~:~t~:n::n~~:

1'Union sovietique, objet de la question soumise actuellement au Conseil, repose essentiellement, selon la

II
f

t
t

t;

!

I'

l.i.l

[1
f:
t

t
ff
'

t

I

Ij

"1

FJ

~~'(l

~!)i

i'(1

i~;a;~~~~:~=1::~.t~':fu,.';::

I

1
il.a.ti.o.n.a.l.la.w.,.it.iS_d.if.fllliC.U.l.t• ll!r. .u.s.t.o.c.o.n.d.on.e.th.e.Vl.".Ol.a.-. ..in.t.e.r.na.ti.o.n.a.l'. .
il.n.o.u.s.ellls.t.di."fflllllllic.illile. .dll,a.dmll.e.tt.r.e.l.a.vi.o-

il~

jii

: =~c~~:,t~£rci:!~~1;~:~~~E: i=:~:~:i?:E:Ei~::@=111iZ~ I

1

f0

f~·"

tion of the air space ofasovereignState, whatever the
reason for it may have been.

lation de I'espace aerien d'un Etat souverain, queUe
que soit la raison qui l'a determinee.

5. On the other hand, we are pleased to note that the
Government of the United States announced on 16 May
1960 that it had decided to suspend such flights. President Eisenhower himself made a statement to that
effect in Paris, adding that these flights would be discontinued. In his speech of 23 May during the present
debate, Mr. Lodge made a statement in the same sense.
My delegation welcomes these unequivocal statements
as a reliable testimony of goodwill on the part of the
United States Government.

5. Il nous est par contre agI'eable de constater que le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a annonce le 16 mai
1960 la decision qu'll avait prise de suspendrede tels
vols. Le president Eisenhower l'a declare lui-meme
A Paris, en ajoutant que ces vols ne seront pas repris.
Dans son intervention du 23 mai, au cours du present
debat, M. Lodge a renouvele la m~me affirmation. Ma
deHigation accueille ces declarations non equivoques
comme une marque certaine de bonne volonte de la
part du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.

6. It seems to us that the question could have been
closed on lE? May 1960, after President Eisenhower's
statement. Unfortunately, events developed otherwise.
The hopes placed in the Summit Conference were
dashed, and the Security Council is now called upon to
deal with this question and take a clear decision in
regard to it.
7. In its request, set forth in the draft resolution
[S/4321] which it has placed before the Council, the
Soviet delegation asks us to describe the flight of the
United States U-2 aircraft over Soviet air space as an
aggressive act. Fully aware of our responsibilities
within the Council, we shall state our attitude on this
subject quite unambiguously.

6. Il nous semble que la questionauraitpntrouver sa
conclusion le 16 mai 1960, apr~s cette declaration du
president Eisenhower. Mais tel ne fut malheureusement pas le cas. Les espoirs fondes sur la Conference au sommet ont ete deQus, et le Conseil de
securite est appele aUjourd'hui A connaftre de cette
question et A se prononcer clairement l son sujet.
7. Dans sa requ~te, precisee par le projetderesolution qu'eUe a depose devant le Conseil [S/4321], la
delegation sovietique nous demande de qualifier d'acte
agressif le survol par 1'avion americain U-2 de 1'espace aerien sovietique. Pleinement conscients de nos
responsabilites au sein du Conseil, nous nous permettons de preciseI' sans ambiguil;e notre position A ce
sujet.

8. The members of the Council will doubtless recall
that Tunisia has been, and continues to be, the victim
of many violations of its air space by military aircraft. I have already had to draw the Council's attention
to them. What makes these violations, which are contrary to the principles of international law, unquestionably aggressive acts is the fact that they are
carried out by aircraft belonging to an army which is
engaged in a war in our immediate vicinity and that they
are preceded, accompanied or followed by the bombing
of our national soil. It is these circumstances, taken
together, that mark these flights clearly as aggressive
acts, to which Tunisia has been obliged to draw the
Council's attention.

8. Les membres du Conseil se rappeUent sans doute
que la Tunisie a ete et continue d'@tre 1'objet de nombreuses violations de son espace aerien par des avions
militaires. J'ai eu A attirer l'attention du Conseil A
leur propos. Ce qui fait que ces violations, contraires
aux principes du droit international, constituent indiscutablement des actes agressifs, c'estqu'eUes sont
le fait d'avions qui font partie d'une armee engagee
1ans une guerre dans notre voisinage immediat, et
qu'elles sont precedees, accompagnees ou suivies de
bombardement de notre sol national. C'est cet ensemble d'elements qui fait de ces violations des actes
agressifs caracterises, sur lesquels la Tunisie a ete
obligee d'attirer 1'attention du Consell.

9. If I have mentioned these violations of my country's
air space, it is because they constitute a current
problem which cannot but be called to mind in connexion with the question brought before the Council by
the Soviet Union. Unlike the violations of Tunisian air
space, however, the incident of the United States U-2
aircraft cannot in our view be described as involving an
aggressive act, since it lacks the essential features
characteristic of aggression.

9. Si j'ai evoque les violations de l'espace aeriendont
mon pays fait l'objet, c'est qu'il y a lA un probl~me
actuel auquel on ne peut s 'emp~cher de penser Apropos
de la question dont le Conseil a ete saisi par 1'Union
sovietique. Mais, contrairement aux violations de
l'espace aerien de la Tunisie, l'incident de l'avion
am.ericain U-2 ne saurait ~tre qualifie, Anotre avis,
d'acte agressif, les elements essentiels qui caracterisent l'agression lui faisant defaut.

10. It is in fact clear, from the explanatory memorandum submitted by the Soviet delegation [Sf4315] in support of its complaint as well as from the detailed statement made here by Mr. Gromyko that the flight concerned was a reconnaissance flight over military and
industrial establishments of the Soviet Union. At no
time have we been told that the aircraft was armed, or
was followed or accompanied by other armed aircraft.

10. En effet, il ressort du memoire explicatif depose
par la delegation sovietique A l'appui de sa plainte
[S/4315], de m~me que de l'expose detaille quenous a
fait M. Gromyko, que le vol dont 11 s'agit etait un vol
de reconnaissance des installations militaires et industrielles de son pays. A aucun m.oment, 11 ne nous
a ete dit que cet avion etait arme, ou qu'll precedait
d'autres avions armes, ou quIll etait accompagne
d'autres avions armes.

11. During this debate, all States , and particularly the
smaller nations, have been urged to take stand against
aggression and not to remain indifferent to this problem. On that point my delegation concurs completely.

11. Au cours de ce debat, i1 a ete fait appel A tous lee
Etats - et particuli~rementaux petites nations - pour
les inviter a s'opposer :ll'agression, Ane pas rester
indifferents :l l'egard de ce probl~me. Sur ce point,
ma delegation se permet de doiUler son accord total.

12. I represent here a country free of all commitments
towards either of the two blocs which, unfortunately,

12. Representant ici un pays libre de tous engagements A l'egard des deux blocs qui, malheureu2

16
se
ag
15
pr
co
w

is

stand face to face in the cold war. My country has
never shirked its responsibilities. Since becoming
independent, we have not hesitated to oppose such acts
of aggression as have taken place in the international
arena, and in so doingwe have been guided by the noble
principles of law, freedom and justice. It is with the
same awareness of the responsibilities incumbent upon
us and with the same attachment to the principles
which we, the smaller nations, so greatly value, that I
clearly state, on behalf of Tunisia, my inability to
discover, in the admittedly regrettable flights mentioned in the complaint now under discussion by the
Council, any of the elements that must be present in
armed aggression.

sement, s'affrontent dans la guerre froide, mon pays
n'a jamais fui ses responsabilites. Depuis notreind6pendance, n.ous n'avons pas hesite h nous opposer aux
agressions qui se sont manifestE:ies dans 1'ar~e
internationale, guides en cela par les nobles principes
du droit, de la liberte et de la justice. Crest avec la
m~me conscience des responsabilites que nous assumons, avec le m~me attachement aux principes qui
nous sont si chers, A nous, les petites nations, que je
me permets d'affirmer clairement, au nom de la
Tunisie, que je ne trouve aucUll des elements essentiels constitutifs de l'agression armee dans les vols,
certes regrettables, signales dans la plainte qui fait
actuellement 1'objet des deliberations du Conseil.

13. In all objectivity, the Tunisian delegation is unable to agree that these flights over Soviet air space by
United States aircraft constii:ute aggressive acts, and it
cannot, therefore, give its approval to the Soviet draft
resolution [S/4321].

13. Tr~s objectivement, la delegation tunisienne ne
saurait admettre comme constituant des actes agreesifs les survols de l'espace aerien sovietique par les
avions americains et ne saurait, de cefait, donner son
approbation au projet de resolution sovietique [si
4321].
14. Cet incident aurait pu, Anotre avis, ~tre regIe par
les voies qu'offre norm:\lement la diplomatie bUat6rale. Ma delegation ne peut que regretter sinc~rement
qu'll ait ete la cause de 1'interruption si dramatique de
la Conference au sommet sur laquelle tant d'espoirs
legitimes ont ete fondes. J'ai dit, au debut de mon
expose, que la situation nous paraft serieuse, non pas
du fait de l'incident en lui-m~me dont nous avons ~
connartre, mals bien du fait de l'ampleur de la mefiance que cet incident devoile et qui existe entre les
deux parties directement interessees.

14. In our view, this incident could have been settled
through the normal channels of bilateral diplomacy.
My delegation can only express its sincereregretthat
the incident has brought about so dramatic an interruption of the Summit Conference onwhich so many legitimate hopes had been pinned. At the beginning of my
statement I said that the situation seemed to us to be
serious, not because of the incident in itself, but
because of the extent of the mistrust which it has
shown to exist between the two parties directly involved.
15. For if responsible United States officials were on
1 May, a mere fortnight before the Summit Conference,
preparl3d to risk flights over Soviet territory in circumstances which are now a matter of public knowledge, that must argue a continued lack of trust on their
part. Such mistrust may be regretted; it may be thought
justified or unjustified; unfortunately, however, it
exists, and its continuance is a serious matter for
mankind as a whole.

15. En effet, pour que les responsables americains
aient risque, le 1e1' mai, Aune quinzaine de jours de la
Conference au sommet, de faire survoler le territoire
sovietique dans les conditions que l'on sait, il faut
oroire que la mefiance persiste chez eQ'C. On peut
regretter ca sentiment, le juger legitime ou l'estimer
infonde, mais, malheureusement, il existe et sa persistance est grave pour 1'humanite entiere.

16. On the other side, the position is even more
serious. The violence of the Soviet Union's reaction
against the incident, bringing about the interruption on
15 May of discussions which had been so laboriously
prepared for, is the clear indication of a fear which
could conceivably turn to dread. And that is something
which must be regarded as even more serious, since it
is in no way calculated to allay mistrust.

16. La reciproque est encore plus serieuse. La violence de la reaction de 1'Union sovietique contre
1'incident en question, provoquant 1'interruption, le 15
mai dernier, des discussions si laborieusement preparees., denote indiscutablement une crainte qui n'interdit pas des apprehensions. Et cela, on ne peut
s' emp~cher de le considerer encore comme plus grave
parce que ce n'est pas denature Acalmer la mefiance.

17. An objective analysis of the situation leads us,
therefore, to the conclusion that the real problem confronting us is the confidence which has to be established
between the two parties concerned-a genuine confidence, truly and unreservedly felt.

17. L'analyse objective de la situation nous am~ne
donc~ la conclusion que le vrai problllme qui se pose
A nous est celui de la necessaire confiance A etablir
entre les deux parties interessees, une confiance 1'6elle, qu'il ne serait pas impossible de qualifier de
sinc~re et sans arrillre-pensee.

18. As the Tunisian delegation has from time totime
said in the United Nations, such confidence cannot be
based on statements of intention, however generous in
their phrasing they may be. Only satisfactory agreements, in line withthe principles of the Charter and the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, particularly
as regards the prevention of surprise attack, the cessation of nuclear tests, and disarmament, both nuclear
and conventional, in all its aspects-only agreements
of that kind, I repeat, will make it possible for such
confidence to be re-established, not only between the
parties directly concerned, but also, and above all, in
the hearts of men as a whole. Even agreements such

1.8. Comme la delegation tunisienne a eu 1'occasion de
l'exprimer A differentes reprises aux Nations Unies,
cette confiance ne saurait s'etablir sur la base de declarations d'intention, si genereuses soient-elles.
Seuls, des accords satisfaisants, conformes auxprincipes de la Charte et aux resolutions pertinentes de
l'Asserp.blee generale, notamment en ce qui concerne
la prevention d'une attaque par surprise" l'arr~ des
essais dJarmes nucleaires, et le desarmement sous
tousses aspects, aussi bien nucleaires que classiques,
seuls de tels accords, dis-je, permettront A cette
confiance de reparaftre, non seulement entre les
parties directement interessees, mais aussi et surtout,
3

as these would, to speak frankly , be ineffec tualif they
did not provid e for a proper system of contro l whereb y
all appreh ension could be elimin ated. That, to our mind,
is the crux of the proble m.

1
I

19. The entire world placed great hopes in the Summi t
Confer ence of 15 May which was so unfortu nately
interru pted. It regard ed that Confer ence as a means of
ensurin g the relaxat ion of interna tional tension , of
removi ng the danger of a terribl e world war, and of
seekin g a formul a for truly peacef ul coexis tence between the differe nt nations on the basis of freedo m,
law and justice . We had hoped that unders tanding
which might have been reache d at the Summ itConf erence would help to facilita te the peacef ul solutio n of
certain proble ms, vital-fo r us and for the whole world,
which the persist ence of the cold war hadma de it impossib le to solve in the spirit of the lofty princip les of
the Charte r. That indicat es how deeply we were disappointed by the failure of the Confer ence.
20. It is now, therefo re, the Securi ty Counc il's duty to
assum e its respon sibiliti es under the Charte r, particular ly since one of the parties concer ned has had
recour se to it in the norma l way.
21. Repres enting a countr y of Mrica which seeks
to mainta in and restor e peace on the basis of law,
freedo m and justice , the Tunisia n delega tion does not
yet ventur e to despai r. Consci ous of ourres ponsib ilities, we appeal for a resump tion of the interru pted
discus sions for negotia tion, and for the use of all other
amicab le proces ses recomm ended in the Charte r.
22. Despit e everyth ing, candle s of hope are still
burnin g which we must try to keep alight. The Soviet
Govern ment and the other Power s on the Ten-N ation
Disarm ament Comm ittee are, happily , continu ing their
discus sions at Geneva . This is a fact which my delegation finds encour aging. Simila rly, we were please d to
hear the United States represe ntative reaffir m here
again, on 23 May, that his Govern ment was prepar ed to
enter into any useful negotia tions whereb y appreh ension and distrus t could be banish edfore ver. That is an
expres sion of goodwill on which substan tial hopes can
be based.
23. The duty of the Securi ty Counci l is, therefo re, to
promo te an amicab le settlem ent, to encour age true and
honest negotia tion, and to work toward s that end by
every possib le means . This, in our view, is the only
really useful course whereb y peace can be mainta ined
and the future of all mankin d assure d.
24. The PRESIDENT: The next speake r on my list is
the repres entativ e of France , who wishes to exerci se
his right of reply.
25. Mr. BERARD (Franc e) (transl ated from French ):
I wish to say only a few words. The represe ntative of
Tunisi a has seen fit to allude to violatio ns of his
countr y's air space, of which, he mainta ins, militar y
aircraf t have been guilty. If he had French aircraf t in
mind, it may interes t the Counci l to know the following:
carefu l inqUiri es by our author ities have shown that, in
accord ance with the catego rical instruc tions receive d
by our pilots, none of our aircraf t have crosse d the
Tunisi an frontie r. As the Council already knows from
the letter which I addres sed to it recentl y [S/430 9],
the French delega tion could itself say a good deal about
4

dans les cceurs de l'huma nite tout enti~re. A parler
franch ement, de tels a.·Jcords aussi seraien t inoper ants
s'ils ne compo rtaient pas un contra le adequa t, permettan t de bannir toutes les appreh ension s. Tel est,
selon nous, le veritab le probl~me.
19. Le monde entler fondait de-gran ds espoir s sur la
Confer ence au somme t du 15 mai, si malheu reusem ent
interro mpue•. Il y voyait le moyen d'assu rer la detente
interna tionale , d'eloig ner le danger d'une terribl e
guerre mondia le et de recher cher une formul e de coexisten ce pacifiq ue reelle entre les differe ntes nations ,
sur la base de la liberte , du droit et de la justice .
Nous avions espere que l'enten te qui s'ysera itetabl ie
contrib uerait a. facilite r la solutio n pacifiq ue de
certain s probl~mes vitaux pour nous et essent iels
poer le monde entier, que la continu ation de la guerre
froide a emp~che de resoud re daus l'espri t des hauts
princip es de la Charte . C'est dire combie nnous avons
ete deQus par la ruptur e de la Confer ence.
20. 11 apparti ent done mainte nant au Consei l de securite de prendr e ses respon sabilit es, confor memen t
a. la Charte , d'auhn t plus qu'il est reguli~rement
saisi par l'une des deux partie'3 .
21. Repres entant un pays de l'Afriq ue qui cherch e A
mainte nir la paix et a. la restau rer sur la base du
droit, de la liberte et de la justice , la delega tion
tunisie nne n'ose pas encore desesp erer. Consci ents de
nos respon sabilit es, nous nous permet tons de lancer un
appel pour la reprise des discuss ions interro mpues ,
pour la negooi ation, ainsi que pour l'utilis ation de tous
autres moyen s amiabl es recomm andes par la Charte .
22. 11 demeu re, malgre tout, des lueurs d'espo ir
qu'il y a lieud'e ntreten ir. Le Gouve rnemen tsoviet ique
ainsi que les puissa nces qui font partie duCom ite des
10 puissan ces sur le desarm ement continu entheu reusemen t les discuss ions a. Gen~ve. C'est a un fait que
ma delega tion se perme t de consid erer comme encourag eant. De m€!me, nous avons ete heureu x d'entendre ici m~me le repres entant des Etats-U nis
reaffir mer a. nOilveau, le 23 mai, que son gouver nemen t etait dispos e a. toutes negoci ations utiles
perme ttant de bannir a. jamais les appreh ension s et la
mefian ce. 11 y a la. une bonne volonte qui autoris e de
larges espoir s.
23. Le devoir du Consei l de securit e est done d'encourag er l'arran gemen t amiabl e, la negoci ation
franch e, loyale, et d'ceuv rer par tous les moyen s dans
ce sens. C'est, a. notre avis, la seule voie vraime nt
utile en vue du mainti en de la paix et au benefic e de
l'aveni r de l'huma nite enti~re.
24. Le PRESIDENT (tradui t de l'angla is): Le prochain orateu t inscrit est le repres entant de la France ,
qui desire user de son droit de repons e.
25. M. BERARD (Franc e): Je ne veux dire que deux
mots. Le repres entant de la Tunisi e a cru bon de faire
allusio n a. des violatio ns de l'espac e aerien de son pays
dont, dit-il, se seraien t rendus coupab les des avions
milita ires. S'il a voulu faire allusio n a. des appare ils
franQa is, il peut interes ser le Consei l de savoir que
les enqu@tes attenti ves auxque lles ont pris soin de se
livrer nos autorit es ont dllmon tre que, confor memen t
aux instruc tions formel les qu'ont reQues nos pilotes ,
nos avions n'ont en aucun cas franch i la fronti~re
tunisie nne. Comm e le Consei l le ~ait deja. par les
termes de la lettre que je lui ai recemm ent adres~e.

er
Its

r-

st,

la

llt

the respect owed by an independent country to the rules
of international law. But I anll sure that I anll interpreting the feeling of my colleagues in keeping within
the bounds of our agenda.

[S/4309], la diHegation franQaise aurait elle-m~me
beaucoup A dire sur le respect qu'un pays independant
doit aux r~gles du droit international. Mais je suis stlr
de repondre au sentiment de mes coll~gues en restant
dans les limites de notre ordre du jour.

26. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Tunisia
has requested to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

26. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'allglais): Le representant de la Tunisie a demand~ Aprendre la parole,
en vertu de son droit de reponse.

27. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French): I
shall be very brief. I do not consider that the French
representative was entitled, in the present case, to a
right of reply.

27. M. SLIM: (Tunisie): Je ne dirai qu'un mot, pour
denier au representant de la France le droit de reponse qu'il a pris.

28. I did not mention France. Nor did I mention the
representative of France; but, as he ref(:lrred to
Tunisia,' saying that according to the conclusive investigations carried out by his Government no French
aircraft had crossed the Tunisian frontier, I should
merely like to recall the incident of 8 February 1958.
This incident led to a debate in the Security Council
during which the representative of France admitted
that a B-26 bomber had bombed Tunisian territoryj an
end was put to the situation through the good offices of
friendly countries.

28. Je n'ai pas mentionne la France. Je n'ai pas
mentionne le representant de la France, mais, puisqu'il a mentionne la Tunisie en disant que, d' apr~s les
observations certaines que son gouvernement a faites,
aucun des avions franQais n'a franchi la froDti~re
tunisienne, je voudrais simplement me borner 1l. rappeler l'incident du 8 fevrier 1958, qui a donne lieu A
un debat au Conseil de securite au cours duquel le
representant de la France a admis que le bombardier
B-26 avait bombarde le territoire tunisien et il a ete
mis fin il. cette situation par les bons offices de pays
amis.
29. Je ne veux pas envenimer l'atmosph~re. Je veux
mIen tenir seulement il. un probl~me beaucoup plus
large, beaucoup plus vaste, beaucoup plus important
pour 1'humanitli, qui depasse et la Tunisie et la France
elles-memes, et qUi est 1'humanite tout enti~re.

te

lIe

0-

.s,

e.
ie
le
Is

~e

ts

lS

I1t
I1t

A
lu

In
le
n

I,

s

l.

r

29. I do not want to embitter the atmosphere. My
present concern is with a problem which is much
greater in scope and is much more important for
humanity-a problem ranging far beyond the confines
of Tunisia and. France, and affecting mankind as a
whole.
30. The PRESIDENT: The representative of France
has again asked for the floor. He has already exercised
his right of reply, but I would give him the floor.

30. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le representant de la France a de nouveau demande la parole.
Il a dejA use de son droit de reponse, mais je voudrais
lui donner la parole.

31. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
I think that what I have to say will close the matter. I
merely wished to take note of what the Tunisian representative has said and of the fact that his words
were not addressed to France. I anll very glad that that
was so.
32. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanish):
The Security Council has before it an affair the repercussions of which cannot be minimized, since they are
closely connected with relations between the two
greatest Powers. Thp military power and technical
resources of the United States and the Soviet Union are
so great that any worsening of relations between them
must cause deep anxiety about the danger of a chain of
events threatening peace, not by the design of those
responsible but because of the mistakes which they
might make. We have all witnessed the deplorable
happenings leading, in this month of May, to the present
situation, which no one could describe as free from
peril.

31. M. BERARD (France): Je crois quecequeje vais
dire va clore l'incident. J e voulais simplement prendre
acte de ce quIa dit le representant de la Tunisie et de
ce que ses paroles ne s'adressaient pas Ala France.
Je mIen rejouis.

e

s
e

33. It is in full awareness of the gravity of the moment
that the delegation of Ecuador is taking part in the
debate after a careful study of the memorandum presented by the Soviet Union, the statement ofthe Soviet
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the draft resolution
which he has seen fit to submit.

32. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de l'espagnol]:
Le Conseil de securite est saisid'une question qui a de
trop profondes repercussions sur les rapports entre
les deux plus grandes puissances du monde pour qu 'on
puisse en sous-estimer l'importance. La puissance
militaire, les ressources techniques des Etats-Unis et
de l'Union sovietique sont d'une anllpleur telle que la
deterioration de leurs relations ne peut que profondement nous preoccuperj un enchafuement de circonstances peut compromettre la paix du monde, non de
par l'intention des responsables, mais de par les
erreurs qu'ils peuvent commettre. Nous avons tous ete
temoins des deplorables evenements qui se sont deroules depuis le debut du mois de mai pour nous mener
finalement il. la situation dont nul ne peut dire qu' elle
ne soit grosse de perils.
33. C'est en pleine conscience de la gravite de l'heure
que la delegation de 1'Equateur prend part il. ce debat,
apr~s avoir etudie avec le plus grand soin le memoire
presente par l'Union sovietique, l'expose du Ministre
des affaires etrang~res de l'Union sovietique et le
projet de resolution qu'il a estime devoir presenter.

34. The complaint of the Soviet Union is confined to
the case of a flight by an aircraft of the United States
Air Force over Soviet territory on 1 May 1960-a
flight which the Soviet Union considers to be one of a

34. La plainte de l'Union sovietiqueporteuniquement
sur l'affaire du vol qu'un avion militaire des EtatsUnis a effectue le ler mai 1960 au-dessus du territoire sovietique. Pour l'Union sovietique, ce survol
5

recent series, reflecting an aggressive policy on the
part of the United States of America.

fait partie d'une serie de survols recents dans lesquels
l'URSS voit l'expression de la politique agressive des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

35. In reply to the Soviet complaint. the representative of the United States has formally repeated to the
Security Council his GOTernment's statement that such
flights haTe been suspended and will not be resumed.
He has reaffirmed the peaceful policy of the United
States. Government and the defensive nature of the
measures in question. The reply of the United States,
gi'Yen before the Council, also refers to acts of espionage committed by the Soviet Union in the United
States of America during the past few years.

35. R6pondant ll. la plainte de PUnion sovietique, le
representant des Etats-Unis diAmerique a confirme
deyant le Conseil de securite la declaration de son
gouvernement selon laquelle ces vols ont ete suspendus
et ne seront pas repris. n a repete que le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis pratique une politique de paix
et que les mesures dont il s'agit ont un caract~re
exclusivement defensif. Dans sa reponse, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis fait egalement allusion ll. des
actes d'espionnage auxquels l'Union sovietique se
livrerait depuis quelques annees sur le territoire des
Etats-Unis.

36. How should this problem be viewedby the Council,
the United Nations organ whichbearsprimaryresponsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security? In our opinion, the present international
situation requires that we look to the future and, if
that future is to be one of peace , refrain from any step
which might aggravate eXisting tensions; we must seek
a means of reconciling the two greatest Powers.

36. Comment le Conseil de securite, organe des
Nations Unies qui a la responsabilite principale du
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales,
doit-il aborder le probl~me?A notre sens, sil'on songe
ll. l'aven"!.!', ll. un avenir de paix, s 'entend, la conjoncture
internationale exige que nous nous gardions de tout ce
qui pourrait aggraver la tension actuelle et que nous
recherchions la voie de la conciliation entre les deux
plus grandes puissances du monde.

37. I venture to indicate. in this respect, one positive
element in this debate, an element which should not be
obscured QY the vehemence inevitably, at times,
characterizing the discussion. I refer. on the one hand,
to Mr. Gromyko's appeal for relations between States
to be effectively governed and controlled by international law. This appeal, which shows a positive
intention in that respect on the part of a very powerful
State, cannot but help to reduce tension and diminish
apprehensions. On the other hand, I refer to Mr.
Lodge's restatement of the traditionally peaceful
policy of the United States, and to his reaffirmation
that his Government will take positive steps towards
the creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust.

37. Qu'il me soit permis ll. ce propos de relever un
aspect positif de notre debat, que ne doitpas masquer
le caract~re inevitablement violent, par moments, de
nos discussions. Je veux parler, d'une part, de Pappel
que nous a adresse M. Gromyko demandant que le droit
international regisse et domine les rapports entre
EtatSj cet appel, qui temoigne des intentions positives
de Pune des plus grandes puissances, ne peut manquer
de contribuer ll. apaiser les tensions et ll. attenuer les
craintes. Je veux parler, d'autre part, de laconfirmation de la traditionnelle politique de paix des EtatsUnis d'Amerique, que nous a donnee M. Lodge, et du.
fait qu'il nous a repete que son gouvernement prendra
des mesures concr~tes pour etablir un climat de confiance mutuelle.

38. Having analysed the Bubstance of these two statements. I feel it is not too muchto say that the Council
is in a position to end this debate on a note of confidence.

38. Je me risquerai ll. dire, apr~s avoir analyse le
contenu profond de ces deux declarations, que le
Conseil est en mesure de terminer son debat sur une
note de confianee.

39. We understand the anger which flights of foreign
aircraft over its territory inspire in the Soviet Union.
Such flights would cause equal anger in any country, no
matter where they came from. But although the anger
is comprehensible, it should not be dramatized to the
point of blinding one to the most obvious facts of the
international situation: war. since it would destroy
everybody and leave no victors, must be prevented, and
the harder the problems, the greater the need for
negotiation.

39. Nous comprenons certes que 1'Union sovHitique
s'irrite de voir son territoire survoIe par des avions
etrangers. Semblable entreprise, quels qu'en soientles
auteurs, susciterait partout la m~me irritation. Mais,
s'il est vrai que cette irritation est comprehensible,
on n'est pas fonde ilPexagerer au point de perdre de
vue les verites les plus evidentes de la situation internationale: une guerre detruirait le monde entier,
ne laissant ni vainqueurs ni vaincus - aussi importet-il de la prevenir; en outre, la negociation est d'autant
plus necessaire que les probl~mes sont plus aigus.

40. It would be desirable-and this is what we fervently hope-that the debate in the Security Council
should have served to air the question of the flights
sufficiently to make it clear to the Soviet Union that the
United States does not intend to continue them, so that
we can all concentrate onthe constructive task of laying
the foundations of international security, which is essential to peaceful coexistence. In view of the technical
revolution which, as Mr. Gromyko has said. has
abolished traditional ideas of time and space and
fundamentally altered military strategy, public opinion.
would rightly reg~d it as unjustifiable for one of the
two greatest Powers to use an incident between them

40. n faut esperer - et c'est ll. quoi nous nous efforQOns de parvenir - que le debatduConseildesecurite
aura sern ll. eclaircir suffisamment la question des
vols et ll. persuader l'Union sovietique que les EtatsUnis n'ont pas l'intention de les poursuivre; nous pour..'
rons ainsi consacrer tous nos efforts ll. une reuvre
constructive consistant ll. jeter les bases de la securite
internationale, condition indispensable de la coexistence pacifique. Devant la revolution· technique,
qui, comme nous l'a ditM. Gromyko, a fait disparaftre
leJ!! notions traditionnelles de temps et d'espace et a
bouleverse la strategie. militaire, l'opinion publique
ne saurait admettre que l'une des deux plus grandes
6

,els
des

as a pretext for halting urgent action on behalf of the
security and progress of mankind.

puissances exploite un incident pour entraver les efforts qui doivent ~re faits immOOlatement en vue
d'assurer la securite et le progr~s de l'humanite.

, le

41. Here I would point out, as the Heads of the Governments of India and the United Arab Republic have
already stressed in their very timely statement, that
although the great Powers have a special responsibility
in questions of peace and war, because of their industrial and technical development and their possession of terrible means of destruction, this responsibility does not belong to them alone. Since the fate of all
peoples depends on the solution of these grave questions of peace and war, every other State has the right
to share that responsibility.

41. Permettez-moi de souligner ici que, comme l'ont
declare fort justement les chefs des Gouvernements
de l'Inde et de la Republique arabe unie, s'il est vrai
que leur developpement industri,el et technique et les
terr-ifiants moyens de destruction dont elles disposent
conf~rent aux grandes puissances une responsabilite
speciale pour ce qui est de la paix et de la guerre, ce
n'est pas ll. elles seules cependant que cette responsabilite incombe. Le sort de tous les peuples du monde
depend de la solution qui sera apportee aux graves
probl~mes que posent la guerre et la paix, et c'est
pourquoi tous les autres Etats ont le droilt de partager
cette responsabilite.

42. When, after many years of grievous cold war,
relations between the great Powers underwent an
improvement, a f!;le,ling of releaf entered into international life, and' e~eryone welcomed the direct contacts between Heads of Government.

42. Lorsque, apr~s de nombreuses annees d'une
penible guerre froide, les relations entre les grandes
puissances ont semble devoi:.. :;'ameliorer, une sensation de soulagement a domina le climat international et
les contacts directs entre les chefs d 'Etat ont ete
universellement applaudis.

43. However, those of us who have been observing
events from the standpoint of the international community in general have noted two great dangers. One
is that the handling of problems by the great Powers
alone might result in the interests of other countries
being forgotten. The other is that direct contacts
between Heads of Government, operating as they do
somewhat. out,side the established international structure, might be too greatly affected by chance happenings
in the relationships between the great Powers, and
might therefore be exposed to the effects of the vacillations and brittleness of those relationships.

43. Neanmoins, pour nous qui observions les evenements du point de vue de la communaute internationale dans son ensemble, deux graves dangers se
sont clairement dessines: tout d'abord, si les grandes
puissances r~glent les probl~mes entre elles, les
inter~ts des autres seront oubliesj deuxi~mement,ces
contacts personnels, qui s'organisent quelque peu en
marge des institutions internationales etablies, sont
trop sensibles aux incidents qui peuvent survenir dans
les relations entre les deux grandes puissances pour
ne pas subir les consequences des fluctuations et de la
fragilite de ces relations.

44. Perhaps another positive aspect of recent evems
is the undeniable lesson that the interests of the great
Powers, as well as those of the others, would in the
long run be better protected if relations and negotiations between them were clearly inserted within the
framework of some international law-and the highest
international law is the Charter of the United Nations;
and if negotiations between them on questions of universal interest took place under a system which would
give them stability at critical moments (which will
always occur), and in the presence of representatives
of the other members of the international community,
whose interests are at stake and whose positive contribution should not be underestimated.

44. Un autre aspect positif des evenements recents
est de nous avoir appris que les interets des grandes
puissances, comme d'ailleurs les interets des autres
nations, seront mi6UX proteges a la longue si leurs
rapports sont incontestablement regis par une 10i
internationale - et la loi internationale supr~me est la
Charte des Nations Unies -, si leurs negociations sur
les probl~mes d'inter~t universel s'effectuent dans le
cadre d'une structure qui leur assure la stabilite
m~me dans les moments critiques - car il y aura
toujours des moments critiques ~ , et si leurs contacts ont toujours lieu en presence de representants
d'autres membres de la communaute internationale,
dont les inter~ts sont egalement en jeu et dont la
contribution positive ne saurait ~tre sous-estimee.

45. I may be told that my remarks and hopes are
politically unrealistic. I admit that they are, if we take
a short-term view. But I am sure that, in the long run,
the force of what we might call international democracy, of which the only existing expression is the
United Nations, will expand and make itself felt in the
political thinking of every Power.

45. On dira peut-etre que mes raisonnements etmes
espoirs manquent de realisme politique. A br~ve
echeance, c'est exact, je le reconnais. Mais je suis
certain que ce que j 'appellerais volontiers la democratie intel'nationale, dont l'Organisation des Nations
Unies est laseuleexpressionvivante,finirall.la longue
par se frayer un chemin et s'imposer dans les conceptions politiques de toutes les puissances.

46. After this digression, I will now turn to the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union. We think that
this draft should be rejected, for two basic reasons.
In the first place, it proposes the condemnation solely
of a particular series of a,cts,failuretorecognize that
the accused party has likewise referred to certain acts
on the part of the Soviet Union, and that for the investigation of these the Council would have to examine
the world situation, possibly as it has developed since
as long ago as the Second World War. It would be un-

46. Je passerai maintenant, apr~s cettebr~vedigres­
sion, au projet de resolution presente par l'Union
sovietique. Pour deux raisons fondamentales, on peut ll.
notre avis trouver ~ y redire: 11 propose tout d'abord
de condamner une eerie de faits pris isolement,
ignorant que la partie accusee a impute a l'Union
sovietique certains actes qui obligeraient le Conseil,
s'il fallait les tirer au clair, a examiner la situation
internationale en remontant peut-~tre aussi loin que la
deuxi~me guerre mondiale. n serait injuste de pro-.

'me

son
dus
er-

laix

i'lre
erdes
se
des

des
du
,es,
nge
ure
tee
ous
eux

'un

uer
, de
Ipel

~oit

Itre
ves
uer
les

tla-

Its;00
dra
on~ le

le
une

que
ons
les
iis,
lIe,
i de
in:er,
ie:ant
orrite
des
Its-

urvre
rite
eo[Ue,

lre
3t a
que
des

7

• .. .",u:;;, <

-

.. ~~

•

~

,

~

; ; : , • ., I .... ' , .

"''''

•

~

•

_

.

"~1"

<~

•

,

'"

~

.)

"-

'

'

_

•

~

•

,

~

..

~',

'"
,

---(
"0<

"

.,'

fair to take a decision with regard to condemnation
now. without examining the whole picture; and we do
not think that such an examination would create an
atmosphere conducive to peace.

noncer aUjourd'hui une condamnation sans examiner le
tableau d'ensemble. Mais cet examen risquerait ~
notre avis de creer une atmosph~re peu favorable ft.
la paix.

47. Our second objection is that the draft is based on
the premise that the United States of Americahas agogressive intentions. On this point we disagree completely with the Soviet Union. The Government of
Ecuador views with the highest respect and admiration
the peaceful intentions of the United States of America
and the way in which the United States has shown its
respect for the integrity of other countries. We cannot
therefore accept any statement, explicit or implicit. to
the opposite effect.

47. Notre deuxi~me objection est que ce projet de
resolution part du principe que les Etats-Unis d'Amerique sont animes d'intentions agressives. Nous ne
pouvons ft. cet egard qu'exprimernotredesaccordtotal
avec l'Union sovietique. Le Gouvernement de l'Equateur respecte et admire les intentions pacifiques des
Etats-Unis ainsi que la faQon dont ils respectent euxm~mes l'independance des autres pays. Nous considerons donc comme inacceptable toute affirmation du
contraire. qu'elle soit directe ou indirecte.

48,. For all these reasons we hope that the representative of the Soviet Union will not press his draft
resolution to a vote but will, instead, associate himself
with the rest of the Councilinaconciliatory statement
which will open new roads towards collective security.

48. Pour toutes les raisons que je viens d'exposer,
nous esperons que le representant de 1'Union sovietique
n'insistera pas pour Clue son projet soit mis aux voix
et s 'emploiera au contraire ~ cooperer avec les autres
membres du Conseil de securite pour adopteruntexte
conciliant qui ouvre des voies nouveHes ~ la securite
collective.
49. ~e PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Ace stade
de nos debats, et le Conseil ayantentendules opinions
de tous les autres membres, je voudrais enqualite de
representant de CEYLAN exprimer aussi bri~vement
que je le puis son point de vue sur la question dont
nous sommes saisis.
50. La question, telle que Pa definie le representant
de PUnion sovietique, est importante; elle est cependant simple et je voudrais la presenter en citant les
termes employes par le representant de 1'Union sovietique: il s'agit de "la question des actes agressifs
commis par les forces aeriennes des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique contre l'Union sovietique et de la menace
que ces actes constituent pour la paix universelle n. Le
fait essentiel que nous trouvons ~ son origine est le
survol du territoire de 1'Union sovietique, le ler mai
de l'annee en cours, par un avion U-2 des Etats-Unis.
Ce fait n'est pas conteste. On necontestepas non plus
que ce survol etait un acte commis de propos delibere,
~ des fins de reconnaissance - end'autrestermes, en
vue de recueillir des renseignements importants concernant l'Union sovietique. On a egalement affirme et cela n'a pas non plus ete nie - que ce vol a ete precede d'autres vols analogues. Ces actes sont en dehors
de toute controverse. Hs constituent ~ notre avis un
probl~me important qui comporte tout d'abord un
aspect juridique et, ensuite, un aspect d'importance
beaucoup plus grande, ~ savoir les relations internationales, et notamment les rapports entre deux des
plus puissants pays du monde, les Etats-Unis et
l'Union sovietique.
51. En sa qualite de Membre de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies acceptant les principes de la Charte,
Ceylan estime que l'integrite territoriale deto~ltEtat,
grand ou petit, et le caract~re sacre de ses droits
souverains sont -inviolables et sont garantis non pas
seulement par la Charte, mais aussi par Pacceptation
universelle de ces principes. Le respect de ces droits
essentiels et fondamentaux est absolument necessaire '
au maintien de la paix parmi toutes les nations.
l'existence d'une societe pacifique et ordonnee n'est
possible que dans le respect du droit et que si chacun
s'acquitte de facgon scrupuleuse des obligations decoulant des traites internationaux. Nous estimons par
consequent que c'est ~ l'heure actuelle un principe du
droit international que 1'espace aerien situe au-dessus
du territoire d'un pays, quel qu'il soit, lui appartient,

49. The PRESIDENT: At this stage of our debate, the
Council having heard the views of all the other members, I should like, in my capacity as the representative of CEYLON, to express its views on the issue
before us as brie!1y as I can.
50. The issue, as stated by the representative of the
Soviet Union. is important; and yet it is simple, and I
would bring it up by quoting the words of the representative of the Soviet Union: "the question of aggressive acts by the Air Force of the United States of
America against the Soviet Union, creating a threat to
universal peace". The principalfact on which this issue
is based is the flight of a United States U-2 aircraft
over the territory of the Soviet Union on 1 May of this
year. This fact is not disputed. Neither is it now disputed that the flight of the aircraft was a deliberate
act for reconnaissance purposes-in other words, for
obtaining important information concerning the Soviet
Union. It has also been alleged-and neither has this
been denied-that such flights have taken place on
previous occasions. These happenings are not in dispute. They constitute, in our opinion, an important
issue which involves, first, a juridical question and,
second, a question which is of far greater importance,
namely, international relations, particularly the relationship between two of the most powerful countries
of the world, the United States and the Soviet Union.

51. As a Member of the United Nations which accepts
the principles of its Charter, Ceylon considers that the
territorial integrity of each State, large or small, and
the sanctity of its sovereign rights are inviolable and
are guaranteed not only by the Charter, but also by the
universal acceptance of these principles. The observance of these basic and fundamental rights is
absolutely necessary for the preservation of peace
among all nations. A peaceful and orderly society is
possible only under the rule of law and the fullest
compliance with international treaty obligations.
Therefore, we hold that, at the present time, it is a
rule of international law that the air space over the
territory of any country belongs to that country and
cannot be violated without a breach of international law•
I think that this important fact must be fully recognized.
8

....

"~~

Only
on the
tryin
sea·
law, 1
time
territ
alia,
imply
and t
navig,
unive
o:re1'
that
State
right
and,
oblig
andp
very
devel
and 0
speci
of th
Civil

52.
agree
signa
accep
erei b
ter1'it,
this I
Sovie
but I l
and SI
to the
princl
53. I
tions
larly
such'
But a
laws,
repre
point
long
suspe
nate
ind
of its
sary
itself
eradi
hum
and c
howe
earth
suspe
no ju
sover
space

.

·

"

.

...

'

(
~

~ ,,~~

'o,

•

~-

~

•

,,~

~".

•

<

_"

~

,

~ •• t .

-..

~

.

, . '''l

•

• •..., ~

.
'"

'.;.

Only recently, at the second United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea, when nearly eighty States were
trying to draft a law fixing the breadth of the territorial
sea in an attempt to develop and codify international
law, many States, particularly many important maritime Powers, argued against extending the width ofthe
territorial sea beyond six miles, on the ground, inter
alia, that sovereignty over the territorial sea would
imply corresponding sovereignty over the air space
and that this would obstruct existing facilities for aerial
navigation. This confirms the contention that there is
universal recognition of the principle that the air space
o ITer the territory of any State is a sovereign right of
that State, and that it cannot be invaded by any other
State without its authority and permission. This is a
right which is particularly important to small States
and, as a small State which pays special attention to its
obligations under the Charter ~d to international law
and practice, Ceylon would like to stress this right
very emphatically. Ever since aviation began and then
developed so rapidly, this right has been recognized
and observed and, to strengthen such observance, a
special organization has been set upunder the auspices
of the United Nations. It is called the International
Civil Aviation Organization.

et ne peut ~tre viole sans enfreindre les r~gles du droit
international. Je pense que ce fait essentiel doit @tre
pleinement reconnu. Tout recemment encore, A la
demP.~me Conference des Nations Unies sur le droit de
la mer, alors que pres de 80 Etats s'attachaient A
rediger un texte fixant la largeur des eaux territoriales
en s'efforQant d'~tendre et de codifier le droit international, de nombreux Etats, et en particulier de
nombreuses puissances maritimes, ont plaide contre
l'extension de la largeur de la mer territoriale audell!. de 6 milles en faisant notamment valoir que la
souverainete sur la mer territoriale entralb.erait une
souverainete correspondante sur l'espace aerien, ce
qui aurait pour effet de reduire les facilites dont jouit
actuellement la navigation aerienne. Ceci confirme la
th~se selon laquelle est universellement reconnu le
principe affirmant que la souverainete d'un Etat
s'~tend A l'espace aerien situe au-dessus de son territoire et qu'un autre Etat ne peutypenetrer sans son
agrement et son autorisation. Crest la un droit qui
rev~t une importance particuli~repour les petits Etats,
et Ceylan, petit Etat qui donne une attention toute
speciale aux obligations qui lui incombent en vertu de
la Charte ainsi qu'au droit international et ala pratique
internationale, voudrait soulignertr~snettement 1'importance qu'il revet. Depuis les debuts del'aviationet
etant donne la rapidite avec laquelle elle s'est developpee, ce droit a ete reconnu et respecte et, afin
d'en faciliter l'observation, une organisation speciale
a ete creae sous les auspices des Nations Unies. Elle
porte le nom d'Organisation de l'aviation civile internationale.

52. This organization negotiated an international
agreement which was signed in Chicago in 1944. The
signatories whichwere sovereign States,big and small,
accepted in that agreement the principle of the sovereign right of each State to the air space over its
territory. Among the big States which subscribed to
this principle was the United States. I believe the
Soviet Union did not sign that international agreement,
but I am sure that the Soviet Government fully accepts
and subscribes to that principle, because its complaint
to the Security Council today is made under the same
principle.

52. Cette organisation a negocie un accord international qui a ete signe a Chicago en 1944. Les Etats
souverains signataires, wands et petits, ont accepte
par cet accord le principe de la souverainete de chaque
Etat sur l'espace aerien au-dessus de son territoire.
Au nombre des grands Etats qui ont accepte ce principe se trouvaient les Etats-Unis. J e crois que 1'Union
sovietique ne figure pas au nombre des signataires de
cet accord international, mais je suis certain que le
Gouvernement sovietique reconnait ce principe et
l'accepte sans reserve, car crest precisement sur lui
que se fonde la plainte dont elle saisit aUjourd'hui le
Conseil de securite.
53. Cependant, c'est un fait qu'il yaeudes violations
de ce principe a des fins diverses, et notamment aux
fins d'espionnage. De temps a autre, de tels actes
d'espionnage ont ete decouverts etdemasques. Mats la
non-observation des obligations et r~gles internationales decoulant ~es traites, meme si elle reste secr~te~
doit ~tre consideree comme reprehensible. L 'espionnage, on l'a deja fait remarquer, existe depuis des
si~cles et continuera d'exister aussi longtemps que les
faiblesses humaines; il durera tant que les Etats se
suspecteront, se craindront et chercheront l!. se
dominer les uns les autres. Mais l'espionnage se
pratique en secret, dans l'ombre, en evitant la publicite comme s'il avait honte desaproprelaideur. Nous
supposons qu'on le consid~re comme necessaire dans
la societe civilisee d'aujourd'hui, bien que le procede
lui-meme soit demoTalisant et degradant. n n'est pas
facile de l' extirper de la societe et il sera peut-etre
impossible dry parvenir tant que la nature humaine
n'aura pas subi un changement profond, creant un
climat de confiance et d'amitie, de bonnevolonteet de
comprehension. Cependant, le fait que l'espionnage
existe sous des formes diverses sur la terre et dans
les airs et, maintenant aussi, pense-t-on, dans l'at-

53. It is, however, a fact that there have been violations of this principle for various purpo/3es, particularly for the purpose of espionage. From time to time,
such acts of espionage have been detected and exposed.
But avoidance of international treaty obligations and
laws, even if it is done secretly, must be regarded as
reprehensible. Espionage has, as has already been
pointed out, existed for centuries and will continue as
long as human frailties continue and as long as States
suspect each other, fear each other and seekto dominate each other. But espionage is carried out in secret,
in darkness, shunning publicity as if it were ashamed
of its own ugliness. We suppose it is considered necessary in the civilized society of today, although the act
itself is demoraliZing and degrading. We cannot
eradicate it easily from society, not perhaps until
human nature changes radically and brings about trust
and confidence, goodwill and understanding. The fact,
however, that espionage exists in diverse forms onthe
earth below and in the air above and now, also, it is
suspected, in the rarer atmosphere of outer space, is
no justification for the repudiation of the principle of
sovereign right of a State to the integrity of the air
space above its territory.
9

~

'-,

_,..

;.

I

mosph~re rarefiee de l'espace extra-atmospherique.
ne justifie pas la repudiation du principe du droit
souverain quIa chaque Etat A l'integ-rite de l'espace
aerien au-dessus de son territoire.

54. It has been said that espionage is necessary for the
purpose of obtaining intelligence, wllich is essential
especially in the nuclear age for the defence of States
from surprise attacks. That is a hard reality of the
world as it is today. torn asunder bymutual suspicion
and fear. The moral fibre of nations has been weakened
by resort to acts of this kind. but. Whatever we may
say, it will continue until some international accord
can be negotiated which will obviate the need for it. We
cannot overlook the fact that, however much it may be
necessary for purposes of defence. espionage involves
a violation of international law and practice and
amounts to an attack against the sovereign rights of
States, when it violates. say, for instance. the air
space of any State. From this point of view, we deprecate strongly any attempt to evade the obligations
of international law and of international treaties for any
reason whatsoever.

54. On a dit que l'espionnage est necessaire afin
d'obtenir des renseignements, qu'll estindispensable.
tout specialement i\ 1'Age nuc!eaire. pour defendre les
Etats des attaqu8s par surprise. C'est Ill. une dure
realite du monde tel qu'il est aUjourd'hui, dechirepar
les m6fiances et les craintes mutuelles. La fibre
morale des nations a ete affaiblie par le recours a
des pratiques de cette esp~ce. mals quoique nous
pUissions dire. l'espionnage continuera jusqu'h ce
qu'll soit possible de negocier un accord international
qui en ferait disparartre la necessite. Nous ne pouvons
negliger le fait que. si necessai;re qu'll soit pour les
besoins de la defense, l'espionnage implique des violations du droit et de la pratique internationaux et
6quivaut ll. une atteinte au droit sou-v:erain des Etats
lorsqu'il viole par exemple l'espace aerien d'un Etat
quel qu'il soit. Nous plal;ant il. ce point de vue, nous
desapprouvons lmergiquement toute tentative faite eL
vue de se soustraire aux obligations du droit international et des traites internationaux quel qu'en soit le
motif.

55. Now, I would like to deal with the second aspect of
the question under discussion. This refers to the
relationship of the two Powers concerned. The legal
implication' of the United States plane over Soviet
territory has been dealt with already. Without minimiZing its importance. I would now like to examine the
far more important aspect of its impact on the relationship between the United States and the Soviet
Union. This, we consider. is of vital importance, not
only to these two countries, but also to the whole world.

55. Je voudrais maintenant traiter du second aspect
de la question en discussion. n s'agit des rapports
entre les deux puissances interessees. J'ai dejhparle
des aspects juridiques du survol du territoire sovietique par 1'avion des Etats-Unis. Sans vouloir en
reduire 1'importance, je voudrais maintenant examiner
la question de beaucoup plus importante de ses repercussions sur les rapports existant entre les EtatsUnis et l'Union sovietique. Elle est, estimons-nous,
essentielle, non pas seulement pour ces deux pays,
mais aussi pour le monde entier.

56. In the nuclear age, when both these countries are
armed to the teeth with nuclear weapons, which in a
moment can bring about death and destruction to both
sides. to the whole human race, to small countries as
well as big countries, it is vital that goodwill and
understanding and a capacity to live and let live
should be established between them.

56. A l'!lge nucleaire, alors que ces deux pays sont
armes jusqu'aux dents et pourvus d'engins nucleaires
qui pe'.lvent en un moment semer des deux cates la
mort et la destruction pour la race humaine tout enti~re, pour les petits pays comme pour les grands, il
est essentiel que r~gnent entre eux la bonne volonte,
la comprehension et la tolerance en vue de laisser tout
le monde vivre.

57. I have referred on many other occasions to the
improvement in the relationship between these two
great countries, which began recently and appeared to
have considerably improved in the fall of last year.
With all the ideological and other differences between
these two countries, with all the suspicion that exists
and with fear of the domination of the one over the
other, it is foolish to expect completely harmonious
relations all at once. But the whole world hailed with
delight and relief a sign of better relations between
them. What has been referred to as the Camp David
spirit signified this improvement. We are sorry that
the efforts made to follow up this improvement by
holding a Summit Conference towards the end of last
year did not materialize. I hope that the theory that
such an attempt was prevented is not true. It is, however. a pity it did not take place at that time. for we
feel that if it had the course of history might have been
changed for the better and that the people of the world
might perhaps have seen the dawn of anew era of goodwill which might at last have fulfilled the universal
yearning of all peoples for peace. But alas, this did not
happen, and we were disappointed during the early
part of this year that the new spirit which was born of

57. J'ai parle en beaucoup d'autres occasions de
l'amelioration des rapports entre ces deux grands
pays, amelioration qui avait commence h semanifester
recemment, qui semblait avoir fait des progrlls considerables pendant l'automne de l'annee ecoulee. Etant
donne toutes les divergences ideologiques et autres qui
se manifestent entre ces deux pays, etant donne leur
mMiance et la crainte qu'ils ont chacun d'~tredomine
par l'autre, il cst vain d'esperer voirs'instaurerd'un
seul coup des relations parfaitement harmonieuses.
Mais le monde entier a salue avec joie et soulagement
le moment 011 il a discerne entre eux les signes de
relations meilleures. Cette amelioration correspondait i\ ce que 1'on a appele 1'esprit de Camp DaYid.
Nous regrettons que les efforts deployes en vue de
consolider cette amelioration en tenant une come-'
rence au sommet vers la fin de l'annee ecoulee n'aient
pas abouti. J'espllre que la tMse selon laquelle on
s'est oppose h cette tentative est inexacte. 11 est
cependant deplorable que la conference n'ait pas eu
lieu h ce moment-Ill., car nous pensons qu'en ce cas,
le cours de 1'histoire aurait pu ~tre change dans un
sens favorable, et que les peuples du monde auraient
peut-~tre vu l'aube d'une llre nouvelle de bonne volonte

10

Cronp
down
Soviet
have i
the c(
relati
that t
in re
count

58. I

viola
it wa
not 0
that
reco
in a
that
flight
Sumn
this
must
count
andc
fore
ap
byth
ago.
Sum
sidu
peac

59.
to en
thee
seve
the
pene
Conf
opini
kind!
reco
can
har
parti
are
voic
univ
Pow
peop
of us
hand
peac
60.

or b
whic
lead
way
for
Iwo
the
to t
worl
and
The

Calnp David was not doing so well. Then the shootingdown of the United States reconnaissance plane over the
Soviet Union occurred and this, of course, could not
have improved relations between the two countries. On
the contrary, this incident put a heavy strain on the
relationship between them. This iswhylstatedearlier
that the incident of 1 May was important, especially
in regard to the l'elationship between the two great
countries.

qui aurait enfin repondu au desir universel de paix
qui les anime tous.Maish6las,celan'apas ete et nous
avons 6te vivement dec;us au debut de oette almae, h
constater que le nouvel esprit, ne hCamp David, ne se
fortifiait pas. C'est alors que l'avion de reoonnaissanoe des Etats-Unis a ete abattu sur le territoire de
l'Union sovietique. Cela ne pouvait, bien entendu,
ameliorer les relations entre les deux pays. Elles ont
au contraire subi du fait de cet incident une tension des
plus serieuses. C'est pourquol j'al declare precedemment que l'incident du 1er mal etait important,
notamment en ce qui concerne les rapports entre les
deux grands pays.
58. 11 etait dejhgraved'~tresurpris entrain de violer
1'integrite territoriale d'un autre Etat, mais chercher
maladroitement h justifier cette violation et ml:)me
laisser entendre qu'elle pourrait se rep6ter n'a fait
qu'aggraver la situation. En toute humilite - reconnaissant que nous sommes l'une des plus petites puissances dans un monde de gllants - mals aussi en toute
sincerite, nous devor.s dire que nous desapprouvons
fermement la decision qui a conduit au vol de l'avion
U-2, surtout h la veille de la Conference au sommet:
nous desapprouvons sans equivoque ce vol et tous les
autres du m~me genre. Maintenant que la chose a ete
decouverte, il est fatal que les relations entre les deux
pays en cause s'alt~rent et que la tension internationale augmente au point de constituer un grave danger
pour la paix universelle. C'est pourquoi nous regrettons profondement ce qui s'est passe. Cet incident,
outre qu'il a detruit temporairement l'espoir ne du
nouvel esprit de bonne volonte qui regnait depuis quelques mois, a dlljh contribull hi 'lichee de la Confllrenee
au sommet preparee avec tant de soin par ceux qui
veulent la paix, et dont l'enjeu etait si important.
59. n ne serait d'aucune utilite, alapresente seance,
de se livrer a 1'interessant exercice de decouvrir les
causes de l'echec de la Conference: eUes peuvent@tre
diverses, mais il est certain que l'une d'elles est
l'incident de l'avion U-2. Ce regrettable incident appartient maintenant au passe, de m~me que la Conference au sommet et, chose plus grave encore a nos
yeux, la bonne volonte qui avait existe un moment.
Notre devoir le plus important est de la faire renartre,
car nous reconnaissons qu'on ne peut eviter la destruction definitive du monde que s 'il r~gne entre les
grandes pUissances, mais surtout entre les deux plus
grandes, la comprehension, l'harmonie et la bonne
volonte. Nous ne sommes pas seuls hpenserainsi. Ce
sentiment a ete exprime partout dans le monde et peut
@tre considere comme un appel universel que doivent
ecouter les grandes puissances, parce qu'il'importe a
tous les peuples, grands et petits, que la paix soit
assuree. Le plus petit d'entre ,nous y a droit et il a
aussi le droit de demander h ceux qui peuvent decider
la paix ou la guerre de se prononcer pour la paix.
60. Mais la paix ne peut @tre gagnee par de simples
mots, non plus que par les menaces ou I'lltalage de la
force: elle ne peut l'~tre que par des actas qui mettent
fin aux souPQons et h la peur. La consequence de tela
actes sera le desarmement total qui ouvrira la voie h la
paix parmi les hommes. A l'appui de cette faQon de
proceder pour ameliorer la comprehension mutueUe,
je voudrais citer bri~'Yement une declaration faite par
les dirigeants de deux pays sous-developpes.Jepense
h l'important communique qu'ont publie deux grands
chefs d'Etat, M. Nehru, premier ministre del'lnde, et
le Pr6sident de la R~publique arabe unie, M. Nasser.
Voici ce qu'ils ont dit le 20 mai:

58. It was bad in itself to be detected in the act of
violating the territorial integrity of another State, but
it was made worse by the unhappy blunder of seeking
not only to justify such violation but also to indicate
that such violations would continue. With all humility ,
recogniZing that we are one of the very small Powers
in a world of giants, we have to say in all sincerity
that we strongly deprecate the action which led to the
flight of the U-2 aircr!aft, especially on the eve of the
Summit Conferenc\}. Vie unequivocally disapprove of
this and other such flights. The detection of the flight
must necessarily impair relations between these two
countries, must lead to increased international tension
and constitute a great danger toworldpeace. We therefore greatly regret that it happened. This incident,
apart from destroying temporarily the hope engendered
by the new-born spirit of goodwill of only a few montho
ago, has already contributed to the break-up of the
Summit Conference which had been promoted so assiduouE"y by persons interested in the establishment of
peace, and on which so much depended.
59. It will do no good at this time and at this meeting
to engage in the interesting enterprise of discovering
the cause of the failure of the Conference. There may be
several causes, but it is certain that one of these was
the flight incident. The unfortunate incident has happened, and with it have been swept aside the Summit
Conference alld-more important even than that, in our
opinion-the goodwill that had been generated. To rekindle that goodwill is our most important task, fOl' we
recognize that the ultimate destruction of the world
can be avoided only on the basis of understanding,
harmony and goodwill among the big Powers, and
particularly the two most powerful among them. We
are not alone in this view; it has been universally
voiced in every part of thG world. It can be taken as a
universal appeal which should be heeded by the great
Powers. It is made because it is important to all
people, great and small, to secure peace. The smallest
of us has a right to it, and a right to ask those in whose
hands lies the issue of peace or war to decide for
peace.
60. But peace Call1lot be won by mere words or threats
or by the show of force. Peace can be won only by acts
which will remove suspicion and fear. These acts will
lead to total disarmament, and then we shall lead the
way to peace among men. In support of this approach
for seeking once again to create better understanding,
I would like to quote briefly from a statement made by
the leaders of two under-developed countries. I refer
to the important communique issued by two great
world leaders-Mr. Nehru, Prime Minister of India,
and President Nasser of the United Arab Republic.
They said, on 20 May:
11

" ••• Therefore, we feel profound regret over the
failure of the Summit Conference.
"We realize that special responsibilities regarding
peace and war fall on the shoulders ofthe pig Powers,
which are advanced in the fields of industry and
technical knowledge and which can produce the destructive weapons required by modernwar. However,
such responsibility is not confined to these States.
for all countries and peoples equally share this
responsibility. The fate of every country is connected with finding a sound solutionfortheproblems
of peace and war.
"It is of great importance that the setback resulting
from the failure of the Summit Conference should not
cause a deterioration in the present international
situation. otherwise, this might lead to increasing
the acuteness of the cold war and it might also raise
the possibility of a destructive war-a situation which
would end all hopes for progress and which would
undoubtedly lead to a world catastrophe, the terrible
consequences of which it is difficult to assess."
61. It will be noticed that in the joint communique the
two leaders lay the emphasis on the responsibility of
the great Powers in regard to peace and war. There is
no reference to the U-2 incident. What they urge as the
primary consideration is thepreventionofthedeterioration of the international situation. This is the need
of the hour-this is what we ourselves should like to
emphasize-and this can be achieved by doing everything possible to improve international relations.

• ••• Nous regrettons profond6ment 1'6chec de la
Conference au sommet.
"Nous comprenons que des responsabilites particu1i~res, concernant la paix et la guerre.incombent
aux grandes puissances qui se sont d6veloppees sur
le plan industriel et technique et qui produisent les
armes terribles de la guerre modeme. Mais cette
responsabilite n'est pas la leur seulement: elle appartient A tous les pays et A tous les peuples au
m~me titre car le sort de chacun d'eux depend de
l'heureuse solution de la question vitale et terrible
de la paix et de la guerre.
"n est de la plus haute importance d'emp~cherque
les consequences de l'echec de la Conference au
sommet n'aggravent la situation intemationale
actuelle. Sinon, on aboutirait fatalement A une intensification de la guerre froide et A. la possibilite
d 'un conflit atroce qui mettrait fin A. tout espoir de
progr~s et, en fait, m~nerait A un desastre mondial
dont il est difficile de mesurer les terribles consequences."
61. On aura remarque que dans ce communique conjoint, les deux hommes d'Etat soulignent la responsabilite des grandes puissances concarnant la paix et
la guerre. n n'y est pas question de l'incident de
l'avion U-2. Leur recommandation capitale. c'est
d'empecher que ne s'aggrave la situation internationale. C'est ce A. quoi nous devons nous employer
maintenant - je tiens moi aussi A insister sur ce
point - et nous pouvons y parvenir en mettant tout en
reuvre pour ameliorer les relations internationales.
62. C'est une solution que nous devonstrouvermaintenant, sans nous laisser decourager par un echec. On
a dit que les echecs sont les piliers de la reussite et
cela peut fort bien ~tre vrai dans le cas present. Si
nous vouloDs ressusciter l'esprit de bonne volonte,
nous ne devons rienfaire quipuisse exacerber les sentiments ni ebranler les bonnes intentions. C'est sous
ce jour que mon gouvexnement consid~re le projet de
resolution sovietique. Si, depuis l'incident de l'avion
U-2, il ne s'etait produitaucunfaitnouveauen mati~re
de conciliation et si 1'interpretation de cette affaire
etait restee celle qu'en adonnee dans sa declaration le
Secretaire d'Etat, M. Herter, nous aurions peut-~tre
juga de notre devoir de condamner ce survol comme
une violation injustifiee de 1'integrite territoriale de
l'Union sovietique. Mais, A. notre avis, ilfautaccepter
comme satisfaisant 1'engagement qu'a pris le president
Eisenhower, apr~s l'incident du survol et quelques
jours avant la date fixee pour la Conference au sommet,
de mettre fin A tous vols de ce genre au-dessus de
1'Union sovietique et de n.e pas autoriser qu'ils soient
repris. Assurement, cette declaration equivaut A
reconnartre qu'une erreur a ete commise etqu'ellene
sera pas repetee. A notre sens, elle est plus que cela;
elle constitue une expression de regret dont un grand
homme, loin d'avoir honte, doit ~tre fier. Apr~s une
telle declaration, emanant du chefd'undesplusgrands
Etats du monde, il aurait certainement fallu essayer
de poursuivre la Conference au sommet. A notre avis,
cette declaration rend tout ~ fait inutile une condamnation formelle parce qu'elleimplique l'acceptationdu
droit international et des obligations decoulant des
traites. Nous sommes convaincus qu'elle reconnart le
principe de droit auquel nous attachons tant d'impOrtance et nous sommes egalement convaincus de la
bonne foi des Etats-Unis - comme de celle de tout
autre Etat souverain -- lorsqu'ils promettent de ne pas
reprendre ces vols.
.

62. It is a solution we must now find. We must not be
discouraged by failure. It has been said that failures
are the pillars of success, and in the present case that
saying is quite applicable. If we are to build anew the
spirit of goodwill, we must do nothing to exacerbate
feelings and impair goodwill. It is in this light that my
Government views the Soviet draft resolution. If there
had been no new development of a conciliatory nature
following the U-2 flight incident, and ifthe case rested
with the interpretation drawn from the statement made
by Secretary of State Herter. we might have felt compelled to condemn the flight as an unwarranted invasion
of the territorial integrity of the Soviet Union. But, in
our view, the statement made by President Eisenhower
that, after the flight incident and a few days before the
Summit Conference was to take place, he had stopped
all such flights over the Soviet Union, and that such
flights would not be resumed, should be accepted as
satisfactory. Surely the ordinary implication ofthis is
a recognition that a mistake hadbeen made and it would
not be repeated. It is, in our interpretation, more than
that; it is an expression of regret of which a great man
should not be ashamed, but should be proud. Surely,
after such a statement from the head of one of the great
States of the world, some attempt should have been
made to continue the Summit Conference. In our
opinion, the statement made any formal condemnation
quite unnecessary, because it indicates the acceptance
of international law and of treaty obligations. We are
satisfied that the principle of law, to which we attach
very great importance, has by this statement been
vindicated, and we are satisfied that the United States
will implement it in good faith-just as we would believe
in the good faith of any other sovereign State-its
promise not to resume such flights.

12

64.
to c
lutio
us b
Unit
WOUll

and t
assu
Gove

65. •

whic
cond
the
hum
oped
pros
the w
shoul
Powe
not
anyo
will
worl

66.
Unio
of
aspe
given
gathe
very
aske

63. Reference has been made to a subsequent statement attributed to President Eisenhower which is
interpreted as limiting such a promise to his period of
office as President. He need not have made this additional statement, in our opinion, as it was obvious that
from a constitutional point of view he could not have
spoken for anyone but himself and the government he
represents. Fie spoke as President of the United States ,
and it is diffi.cult to believe that his successor-or any
succeeding government-would lightly deviate from
such a solemn assurance made in the name of the
United States without some strong and adequate reason
and after consultation with the Government to which that
assurance had been given. if there was still some
lingering doubt about this point, the clear and unequivoqal statement of the United States representative
in this Council should have removed such doubt. He
spoke here for the United States as its representative
in this important organ of the United Nations-the
Security COlmcil. He must have realized the importance
of his statement, which was clear and categorical. He
assured us that the United States Government had
stopped the flights and that they would not be resumed.
This must be recognized as the policy of the United
States Government.

63. On a fait etat d'une declaration ulterieure
president Eisenhower qui aurait limite cette promesse
it la duree de son mandat presidentiel. A notre avis,
point n'etait besoin de cette declaration complementaire puisqu 'n etait evident que, du point de vue constitutionnel, le president Eisenhower ne pouvait parler
que pour lui-m~me et pour le gouvernement qu'il
represente. n a parle en tant que President des EtatsUnis et il est difficile d'imaginer que son successeur - ou tout autre gouvernement qui succedera au
sien - s'ecarte d'un coour leger d'un engagement
aussi 1301ennellement pris au nom des Etats-Unis, sans
motif puissant et valable et sans avoir consulte le
gouvernement auquel cette assurance a ete donnee.
S'il demeurait quelque doute sur ce point, la declaration claire et denuee d'equivoque du representant
des Etats-Unis il. ce conseil aurait suffi A ]e dissiper.
M. Lodge a parle en qualite de representant de son
pays it cet important organe des Nations Unies qu'est
le Conseil de securite. n doit avoir eu conscience de
1'importance de ses paroles, qui etaient claires et
categoriques. Il nous a assure que son gouvernement
avait fait suspendre ces vols et ne les ferait pas reprendre: il nous faut admettre que cette politique est
celle du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis.

64. If this is so, no good or valid reason now remains
to condemn the United States. If the Soviet draft resolution to condemn the United States had come before
us before the United States gave its assurance or if the
United States had not given such an assurance, then we
would have felt compelled to safeguard the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of any State. But now that this
assurance has been given by the United States, my
Government accepts it.

64. Dans ce cas, il ne subsiste aucune raison valable
de condamner les Etats-Unis. Si nous avions ete
saisis du projet de resolution sovietique it cet effet
avant que les Etats-Unis n'aient pris d'engagement
quant itl'avenir, ou encore s'ils n'avaientpaspris cet
engagement, nous nous serions trouves dans 1'obligation de garantir la souverainete et l'integriteterritoriale de tout Etat quel qu'il soit. Mais maintenant
que nous avons reQu des Etats-Unis une garantie, mon
gouvernement 1'accepte.

65. There is also a strong psychological reason,
which is very important, why we should not now seek to
condemn the United States. I have earlier referred to
the fact that for the preservation of peace, to l:lave
humanity from annihilation and toenableunder-developed cO'lmtries to remove poverty and want and bring
prosperity and plenty to the under-privileged people of
the world, it is absolutely essential that good relations
should be created and fostered between the two great
Powers. It is essential also that we must begin now,
not months later. We must not allow an opportunity for
anyone accidentally or by design to light the spark that
will become a conflagration which will destroy the
world. We cannot permit of any delay. It must be done
now. How can we do that if we start by an act of
condemnation in the face of the assurance I have
referred to? Even if it can be done it is bound to leave
a bitter taste in the mouth; it is bound to exacerbate
feelings; it will not provide the atmosphere for reconciliation and the restoration of good relations. That is
why this is important from the psychological point of
view.

65. n existe aussi une serieuse raison psychologique - et cet argument est tr~s important - pour nous
dissuader de condamner maintenant les Etats-Unis.
J'ai dejA dit qu'il est absolument essentield'lltabliret
de renforcer de bonnes relations entre les deux grandes
puissances si nous voulons preserver la paix, sauver
1'humanite de la destruction, permettre aux pays sOllsdeveloppes de faire dispara1'tre la pauvrete et le besoin,
enfin assurer la prosperite et l'abondance it tous les
peuples du monde qui ne sont pas parmi les privilegies.
II est egalement essentiel que nOllS entreprenions cette
oouvre immediatement et non pas apr~s des mois
d'attente. Nons ne devons donner Apersonnel'occasion
de faire jaillir, accidentellement ou volontairement,
l'etincelle qui causera une conflagration mondiale.
Nous ne pouvons accepter aucun delai. Nous devons
agir d~s maintenant. Comment y parvenir si nous
commenQons par prononcer une condamnation en depit
des assurances que nous avons rel]ues et que j'ai
rappelees? M~me si, en principe, nous pouvons agir
ainsi, notre decision aura fatalement pour resultat de
creer des rancoours et d'exacerber les sentiments:
elle e creera pas l'atmosph~re proprice A la reconciliation et au retablissement des bonnes relations.
C'est pOllrquoi le facteur psycho10giqueestimportant.

66. We would urge the representative of the Soviet
Union, in the interests of the early re-establishment
of harmony and mutual good relations to consider this
aspect of the question and to consider the assurance
given by the United States, which, as far as can be
gathered, has been recognized as satisfactory by a
very large section of this Council. The assurance
asked for in operative paragraph 2 of the Soviet draft

66. Afin de retablir dans unprocheavenir1'harmonie
et 1es bonnes relations mutuelles, nous voudrions
prier instamment le representant de 1'Union sovietique
de tenir compte de cet aspect de la question, ainsi que
de 1'engagement pris par les Etats-Unis, engagement
qui, pour autant que nOlls puissions le savoir, a ete
reconnu comme satisfaisant par de tr~s nombreux
membres de ce conseil. L'assurance reclamee dans le
13

resolution has already been given. and that paragraph
has therefore already been complied with. In the circumstances. if the assurance can be accepted in the
belief that it will be implemented. I am sure that such
action will be greatly appreciated in all parts of the
world. because it would mean that a big concession
has been made for the sake of promoting world peace
by a country which might legitimately consider that it
has the right to condemn a flight over its territory.
We feel strongly that the need ofthe hour is to promote
good feeling, and. for that reason, we ourselves find it
difficult to vote for the Soviet draft resolution.

paragraphe 2 du dispositif du projet de resolution
sovietique a dejll ete donnee, donc les mesures mentionnees ~ ce paragraphe ont dejll ete prises. Dans ces
conditions, s'il est possibled'accepter cet engagement
avec la certitude qu 'u sera respecte, je suis certain
que le monde entier s'en rejouira car cette attitude
signifiera qu'une concession marquante a .ete faite,
dans l'inter~t de la paix mondiaIe, par un pays qui
pourrait legitimement estimer avoir le droit de condamner le survol de son territoire. Nous croyons
fermement qu'il est indispensable lll'heure actuelle de
favoriser la bonne volonte et, pour cette raison, nous
estimons qu'il nous serait difficile de voter pour le
projet de resolution sovietique.

67. Speaking as PRESIDENT. I would point out that
there are no other speakers on my list. Does any
member wish to take the floor now?

67. Parlant en ma qualitede !?RESIDENT,jevoudrais
signaler au Consell qu'll n'y a pas d'autres orateurs inscrits sur ma liste. Quelqu'un desire-t-il
prendre la parole?
68. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Je serais heureux que nouspuissionspoursuivre le debat et passer auvote. nn'est que 5 heures.
69. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais informer le representant des Etats-Unis que
j'ai ete prie de remettre a demain matin la suite du
debat car le representant de 1'Union sovietique voudrait
repondre aux declarations qui ont ete faites ici, mais
prefererait ne le faire que demain. Aprl:ls avoir ecoute
tous les orateurs, 11 voudrait pouvoir etudier leurs
declarations pour donner sa reponse demain.

68. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): I would
hope we could go ahead with the business and proceed
to a vote. It is only 5 p.m.
69. The PRESIDENT: I might inform therepresentative of the United States that I have had a request that
this discussion be continued tomorrow morning, as the
representative of the Soviet Union would like to speak
in reply to the statements made in the debate and he
would prefer to do that tomorrow. Having heard all
the speakers. up to now, he would wish to consider the
statements that have been made here and give his reply
tomorrow.
70. Mr. LODGE (United States ofAmerica): We began
consideration of this matter on Monday afternoon. then
we had a meeting on Tuesday afternoon. and now one
on Wednesday afternoon. It has been the custom since
I have been here to have meetings in the morning and
in the afternoon. While I understood, and as a'matter of
fact joined with those who did not want to meet this
morning and yesterday morning, because I like to
accommodate members. I would still point out that time
is going by and that all opinions of every conceivable
variety have been expressed on this question. Consequently, I welcome your announcement, Mr. President,
that we are to meet tomorrow morning and tomorrow
afternoon. I am always in favour of a complete consideration, but I think we have had ~hat; and. if the
Security Council does not start dealing withthis matter
and coming to grips with it, I thinkit is going to make
a very unfortunate impression on world opinion. After
all. it is the proceedings here now that are standing in
the way of a resumption of negotiations and activity in
the field of disarmament and in the field of nuclear
test suspension and negotiations on outer space. As I
have said, I would be glad to stay here now and in fact
have a meeting tonight to dispose of some of these
things. but I realize that that is not your desire, Mr.
President. Of course, I naturally defer to you, but I do
welcome your statement that we will meet tomorrow
morning and tomorrow afternoon.

70. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Nous avons commence l'examen de cette
question lundi aprl:ls-midi, nous nous sommes reunis
mardi apr~s-midi et maintenant, c'est-ll-dire mercredi aprl:ls-midi. Depuis que je suis ici,l'usage a ete
d'avoir des seances le matin et l'apr~s-midi. Bien
que, par souci de courtoisie, j'aie compris et m~me
appuye la proposition de ceux qui ne voulaient pas que
nous nous reunissions ce matin ni hier matin, je voudrais faire remarquer que le temps passe et que
toutes les opinions possibles ont maintenant ete exprimees sur la question qui nous occupe. E:u consequence, je me felicite de vous avoir entendu aunoncer,
Monsieur le President, que nous nous reunirions demain matin et demain aprl:ls-midi. Je suis toujours
partisan d'un examen complet des questions, mais je
pense que cet examen aetefaitetque, si le ConseU de
securite ne s'attaque pas serieusement au probl~me,
11 en resultera une impression penible sur l'opinion
mondiale. Apr~s tout, ce sontnos discussions actuelles
qui retardent maintenant la reprise des negociations
ou des activites en mati~re de desarmement et de
cessation des essais nucIeaires ainsi que des negociations relatives a l'espace extra-atmospherique. Je
rep~te que je serais heureux que nous continuions
cette seance, voire que nous ayons une seance de nuit
pour avancer notre debat, mais je comprends que ce
n'est pas votre souhait, Monsieur le President, et je
m 'incline, tout en me felicitant de savoir que nous
nous reunirons demain matin et demain apr~s-midi.
71. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Pour ma
part, je voudrais que cette discussion se termine le
plus rapidement possible mais, comme le sait le representant des Etats-Unis, il y avait de bonnes raisons
pour que nous ne nous reumssions pas ce matin ni hier
matin. En l'occurrence, U me paraft: normal que le
representant de 1'Union sovietique demande un peu de
temps pour etudier les declarations faites ici cet

71. The PRESIDENT: I myself would like to finish
this discussion as soon as possible. There were good
reasons ,. as the representative of the United States
knows, why we did not meet this morning and yesterday
morning. On this occasion it is not unreasonable, it
appears to me, for the representative of the Soviet
Union to ask for a little time to consider the statements
made here this afternoon before he gives his reply. In

14

I-

I
i

j"
SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARG!NTINA·ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamerlcana, S.A., Alllna 500,
Buenos Airel.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
Melbcurne University Preu,369/71 Lan..
dale Street, Melbourne C.l.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. WUllerstorff, Markus Sittikusstras.. 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM.BELGIQUE
Agence et Meuallerles de la Presse,
S.A., 1,(.22, rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA.BOLlVIE
Ubrerla Selecciones, Casilla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL.BRESIL
Livraria Agir, Rua Mexico 9B·B, Calxa
Postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro.
BURMA.BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Book Depot, Rangoon.
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de librairie, Phnom·
Penh.
CANADA
Th-e QlIeen's Printer, Ottawa, Ontario.
. CEYLON·CEYLAN
. Lake House 800kshop, Assoc. New.papers
of Ceylon, p.a. Box 2,(4, Colombo.
CHILE·CHILI
Editorial del Pacifica, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
Llbrerla Ivens, Casllla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The World Book Co., Lld., 99 Chung
King Road, ht Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press, Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA.COLOMBIE
Ubreria Buchholz, Bogota.
Ubrerio America, Medellln.
Ubreria Nacional, Ltda., Barranqullla.
COSTA RICA
Imprenta y Libreria Treios, Apnrtado
1313, San Jose.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'Reilly 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
Ceskoslovensky Spisovatel, Narodnl Trida
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK·DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., N;rregade 6,
K;benhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC·
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Ubre,ia Domlnicana, Mercede. ,(9, Ciu·
dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR·EQUATEUR
Ubreria Cientlfir.a, Guayaquil & Quito.
EL SALVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Navas y Cia., 1a. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPIE
International Press Agency, p.a. Box
120, Addi. Ababa.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateemi~en Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu,
Helsinki.
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY·ALLEMAGNE
R. Eisenschmidt, Schwanthaler Strasse
59, Frankfurt/Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Hauptstrasse 101,
Berlin.Schoneberg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wies·
baden.
W. E. Saarbach, Gertrudenstrasse 3D,
Koln (1).

GHANA
University Bookshop, University College
of Ghana, p.a. Box Legon.
GREECE.GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 2B Stadion Streel,
Alhene•.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Economico-Financiera, 60 Av.
14.33, Guatemala City.
HAITI
Libralrie "A la Caravelle", Boite postale
111.B, Port·au·Prince.
HONDURAS
libreria Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG·HONG·KONG
The Swindon Book Ca., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND·ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti lB, Reykjavik.
INDIA·INDE
Orient Langman., Calcutta, Bombay, Ma·
dra., New Delhi & Hyderabad.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Delhi & Calcutta•
P. Varadachary & Ca., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
"Guity", ,(82 Ferdow.i Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ~IRAK

Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.
IRELAND·IRLANDE
Stationery Office, Dublin.
ISRAEL
Blumstein'. Bookstore., 35 Allenby Rd.
and 4B Nachlat Benjamin SI., Tel Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
Ubreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Via
Gino Capponi 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
Azuni 15/ A, Roma.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori.Nichome,
Nihonbashi, Tokyo.
JORDAN·JORDANIE
Joseph I. Bahous & Co., Dar·ul.Kutub,
Box 66, Amman.
KOREA·COREE
Eul.Yoo Publishing Co., Ltd., 5, 2·KA,
Chongno, Seoul.
LEBANON·L1BAN
Khayat'. College Soak Ccoperative
92.94, rue Bliss, Beirul.
LIBERIA
J. Mom;iu Kamara, Monrov;a.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
MEXICO.MEXIQUE
Editorial Hermes, S.A., 'gnaclo Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
MOROCCO·MAROC
Bureau d'etudes el de participations
industrielles, 8, rue MichauxaBellaire,
Rabat.
NETHERLANDS.PAYS.BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout
9, 's·Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND.NOUVELLE.ZELANDE
United Nation. Association of New Zea·
land, C.P.O. 1011, Wellington.
NORWAY.NORVEGE
Johan Grundl Tanum Forlag, Kr. Au·
gustsgt. 7 A. Oslo.

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales ogents have
not yet been appointecl may be sent to: Sales ancl Circulation
Section, Unitecl Nation., New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,
Unitecl Notion. Office, Palai. cles Nation., Geneva, Switzerland.

Litho in U.N.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co-operative Book Society,
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Publishers United, Ltd., Lahore.
Thomas & Thomas, Karachi, 3.
PANAMA
Jose Menendez, Apartado 2052, Av. itA,
sur 21·5B, Panama.
PARAGUAY
Agencia de Librerlas de Salvador Nizza,
Calie Pte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncl6n.
PERU·PEROU
Libreria Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
Lima.
PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Book Store, 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrigue., lB6 Rua Aurea, Li..
boa.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR
The City Book Store, Lld., Collyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
Libreria Bosch, 11 Ronda Universidad,
Barcelona.
Librerla Mundi.Prensa, Castello 37, Ma.
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze'. Kungl. Hovbokhandel A·B,
Fred,goton 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND·SUISSE
Librairie Payot, S.A., Lausanne, Geneve.
Hon. Raunhardt, Klrchgasse 17, ZUrich 1.
THAILAND·THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit, Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Road,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY·TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette, 469 I.tiklal Caddesi,
Beyoglu, Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Van Schoik's Bookstore (Pty.), Lld., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLlCS·UNION DES REPUBLlQUES
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunarodnaya Knyiga, Smolenskaya
Ploshchad, Mo.kva.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE
Librairie IILa Renaissance d'Egypfe", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
UNITED KINGDOM·ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stationery Office, p.a. Box 569,
London, S.E.l.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service, Columbia University Pre.s, 2960 Broadway,
New York 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoriale., Prof. H.
D'EUa, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1 0 plso,
Montevideo.
VENEZUELA
Libreria del Este, Av. Miranda, No. 52,
Edf. GaUpan, Caracas.
VIET·NAM
Librairie·Papeterie Xuan Thu, 185, rue
Tu.Do, B.P. 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA·YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalo'fba, Ljubljana, SIovenla.
Drzavno
Preduzete,
Jugoslovenska
Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Beograd.
Prosviefa, 5, Trg Bratstva i Jedinstvo,
Zagreb.
[60Bl]

Les commandes et c:lemandes cle rense;gnemenfs 'manonl de
pays ou it n'existe po. encore cle clepo.itaire. peuvent alre
aclressees Cl la Section cle. venle. et cle la clistribution,
Organi.ation cle. Nation. Unie., New·York (flats·Uni. cl'Am"
rique); ou a la Section des venles, Organisation cles Nations
Unies, Palois des Nations, Geneve (Suisse).

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

22880-November 1960-1,675
