S/2020/1143

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 25 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ambassador Tarek Ladeb on behalf of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 and 1989 and 2253, 1373 and 1540; Ambassador Dian Triansyah
Djani, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities; Ambassador Tarek Ladeb, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany,
Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference
on “Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council” convened on
Monday, 23 November 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-16063 (E) 301120 301220

*2016063*

S/2020/1143

Annex I
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism, Tarek Ladeb
On behalf of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism (CTC); and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I have
the honour to deliver a joint statement on cooperation among the three Committees
and their respective expert groups.
Earlier this year, societies around the world were suddenly and dramatically
transformed by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Against that
backdrop, the CTC, the 1267 Committee and their respective expert groups expressed
concern that terrorists and violent extremist groups would seek to exploit the global
disruption caused by the pandemic.
Those concerns were reiterated in the eleventh report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering
the threat, which was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
in collaboration with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and other
United Nations entities and international organizations.
The report noted a surge in the activity of ISIL and some of its regional
affiliates in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as in other regions,
particularly Asia and Africa. It noted that ISIL had not been able to re-establish its
operational capability, but that the pandemic’s impact on its propaganda, recruitment
and fundraising activities remained unclear.
The CTC, the 1267 Committee and their respective expert groups consider
that the pandemic’s socioeconomic, political, health and humanitarian impacts may
exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism and increase global terrorist threats,
not only in areas where non-State armed groups and terrorist groups are particularly
active but also outside conflict zones.
Over recent months, the CTC and the 1267 Committee have adopted a number
of response measures to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and the opportunities
that it may create for terrorists and non-State armed groups by reminding Member
States of their obligation to effectively implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in full compliance with international law, including international human
rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law.
Despite the travel restrictions imposed as a result of the pandemic, the three
Committees have ensured business continuity by adapting their working methods
to the temporary virtual environment and ensuring regular communication with
international, regional and subregional organizations, as well as United Nations
entities, particularly within the framework of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, to which the three expert groups belong.
During the 2019-2020 period, the Committees and their respective expert
groups stepped up their regular joint consultations. The quarterly updates that used
to be delivered by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to CTED
now also include the experts of the 1540 Committee. This regular exchange among
2/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

the expert groups helps strengthen the flow of information and communication on
issues of common concern. Their discussions focus on the level of the global threat,
the analysis of particular issues and coordination, particularly with to postponed
visits to, or engagement with, Member States.
Assistant Secretary-General and CTED Executive Director Michèle Coninsx
and the Coordinators of the two expert groups have also continued to meet regularly
to discuss cooperation and coordination matters. Experts of the Monitoring
Team have attended briefings organized by CTED with United Nations entities,
United Nations country teams and academic experts. The three expert groups intend
to continue organizing similar events on a virtual basis for the remainder of this year
and next, for as long as the restrictions on in-person meetings and travel persist.
In February, the CTED Executive Director and the Coordinator of the
Monitoring Team held a joint high-level political consultation in Indonesia — the
first of its kind — together with Under-Secretary-General Voronkov to follow-up on
the CTC’s 2007 and 2019 visit recommendations.
The three Committees consider such coordinated activities to be an extremely
useful way to strengthen their respective dialogues with Member States and help
ensure their full and effective implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The three Committees and their respective expert groups have also
continued to coordinate in assisting Member States to counter the financing of
terrorism and proliferation.
The three expert groups continued to interact with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), including its regional bodies, as appropriate and within the
framework of the coordinated United Nations delegation led by CTED. The experts
of CTED and the Monitoring Team attended the most recent FATF plenary and
working group meetings in order to ensure synergies between the work of their
respective Committees and the work of FATF, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions.
COVID-19 restrictions imposed by Member States have significantly
constrained the movement of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, which was required to postpone a number of important field trips and
regional events.
In June, CTED and the Monitoring Team issued a joint report on actions taken
by Member States to disrupt terrorism financing, in relation to the implementation
of resolution 2462 (2019). The report was based on a survey submitted to the wider
membership and to which answers from 112 Member States were received. The
questionnaire’s findings demonstrate Member States’ commitment to denying
terrorist groups access to funds and financial services and highlight the vital role
played by United Nations sanctions — especially asset-freezing measures — in
that regard. The report also provides a unique overview of the measures and good
practices implemented by Member States in this area, as well as the remaining
obstacles and challenges.
Member States indicated that they continued to face challenges with respect
to, inter alia, the institutionalization of public/private partnerships, the integration
of human rights obligations into measures to combat the financing of terrorism and
cooperation with civil society actors in developing policies to ensure risk-based
supervision of the non-profit sector.
Despite the significant progress achieved through increased joint informal
consultations and coordination, pandemic-related restrictions have resulted in the
postponement of many of the three Committees’ core activities. This included the
20-160633/37

S/2020/1143

postponement of a number of country visits to be conducted by CTED on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to assess Member States’ counter-terrorism
strengths, weaknesses and technical assistance needs in implementing resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
It also included the postponement of the joint special meeting of the CounterTerrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee on terrorism-financing threats and
trends and the implementation of resolution 2462 (2019). That meeting was mandated
by resolution 2462 (2019) and was to feature a presentation to the wider membership
of the aforementioned joint CTED and Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team report on actions taken by Member States to disrupt terrorism financing.
It was also necessary to postpone the comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which was to be held prior to the renewal
of the Committee’s mandate in April next year. A number of other planned events
of the 1540 Committee have been postponed to 2021, with the exception of the
updating of the Committee’s matrices and other activities that can be undertaken in
an online format.
Terrorism and proliferation continue to pose a grave threat to international
peace and security. Terrorists, terrorist organizations and their affiliates and cells
continue to adapt their tactics and methods, as do non-State armed groups.
As the world and the United Nations continue to adapt to the ongoing impact
of the pandemic, it is essential that the three Committees and their respective
expert groups pursue their close cooperation and continue to ensure a coordinated
response to the challenges imposed by the pandemic to business continuity, with the
aim of addressing a global security landscape that has become yet more complex
and unpredictable.
We shall continue to collaborate to identify and address the significant new
and emerging challenges faced by Member States, including the abuse of new
technologies for terrorist and proliferation purposes. It is possible that the global
increase in online presence during the pandemic will spark a new wave of innovation,
which, in the hands of non-State actors, and terrorists in particular, could potentially
have devastating consequences.
At the same time, however, innovation can help counter-terrorism and
proliferation activity. The use of unmanned aerial systems, for example, is being
explored for that purpose, as the three expert groups have learned from the briefings
of the Global Coordination Compact. The three Committees may further explore the
implications of this and other emerging issues.
They will continue to provide guidance and direction to their expert groups in
enhancing their collaboration and cooperation in accordance with the requirements
of the relevant Council resolutions. The impact of the pandemic and the resulting
security challenges underline more than ever the importance of ensuring close
collaboration and coordination among the three Committees and their respective
Groups of Experts.

4/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex II
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups
undertakings and entities, Dian Triansyah Djani
Over the past two years, I had the honour of chairing the Security Council
Committee pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
Today I would like to provide a brief update on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates, and report on the work
and activities of the Committee since the joint Council briefing on 20 May 2019
(see S/PV.8528). This briefing will also satisfy the requirement of resolution 2368
(2017) to report to the Security Council at least once a year on the overall work of
the Committee.
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team notes that the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on terrorism has varied between conflict
zones and non-conflict zones, and between short- and longer-term threats. Terrorist
groups are using the outbreak to advance propaganda and fundraising.
While for the moment ISIL represents an entrenched rural insurgency without
the reach to threaten urban areas on a sustained basis, the group has increased its
operations in the core conflict zones of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Al-Qaida
is further consolidating its presence in regions beyond its historical stronghold in
Afghanistan. The relationship between ISIL and Al-Qaida remains fraught and
idiosyncratic, depending on regional dynamics.
Regional and country visits are a key element of the mandate of the Monitoring
Team. The COVID-19 pandemic has imposed stringent travel limitations, and
various trips previously approved by the Committee could not take place. Notably,
the Monitoring Team was forced to postpone its visits to the Syrian Arab Republic
and Iraq. The Vienna regional meeting also could not take place.
On exceptional basis due to COVID-19 in order to reduce exposure to health
risks, since mid-March we have managed to hold informal virtual meetings, as a
creative solution, where Committee members had nonetheless an opportunity to
discuss a number of issues, including the reports of the Monitoring Team on the
global threat posed by ISIL and Al-Qaida.
In total in 2020, the Committee held three in-person informal consultations; two
joint in-person consultations with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011); four virtual informal informals; one joint 1267-1988 Committee virtual
briefing for interested Member States; and one joint informal informal with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team’s joint report on actions taken by Member
States to disrupt terrorist financing, pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019).
I extend my appreciation to all Council members for their constructive
engagement and cooperation to make sure that the Committee can continue to fulfil
its mandate despite the challenging situation. The Committee, in partnership with
the Secretariat, continues to dedicate significant efforts to making sure that its
sanctions list is accurate and as up-to-date as possible.

20-160635/37

S/2020/1143

Since the beginning of the year, the Committee has agreed to add to its
sanctions list four individuals and five entities. The Committee also removed
three individuals from the list. Moreover, since the last joint briefing to the
Security Council in May 2019, the Committee has considered seven comprehensive
reports of the Office of the Ombudsperson. Three of the reports were presented to
the Committee in 2020. Currently, four requests for delisting are pending with the
Office of the Ombudsperson. In total, there are currently 262 individuals and 89
entities on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list.
I should also like to mention that, building on the 2018 annual review, the
Committee mandated the Secretariat to implement technical amendments to 85 list
entries on its sanctions list in 2019, as well as amendments to 11 list entries and
narrative summaries on its sanctions list in 2020.
The Committee also recently concluded the 2019 annual review of its sanctions
list, and we received a record number of more than 40 responses from Member
States. A written briefing by the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team on the status
of the 2019 annual review was shared with Committee members on 15 October 2020.
In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring Team updates list entries
based on information provided by Member States. I would like to thank Member
States that have engaged with the Committee, and I hope that the wider membership
will continue to engage with the Committee and the Monitoring Team.
The contribution and cooperation of Members States are crucial both to
maintaining the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list up-to-date and ensuring
the effective implementation of sanctions measures.
Lastly, I would like to urge those Member States that have not done so to
submit the implementation reports mandated under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Council and international community can target their response
effectively only if they have reliable and up-to-date information.

6/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex III
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning
counter-terrorism, Tarek Ladeb
Allow me to address the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Even as we continue to adapt to the global challenges and uncertainties
presented by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the threat posed by
terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates, continues to pose grave threats to peace and security around the
world, in particular in Africa and South and South-East Asia.
A further major concern for us all is the increase in terrorist acts committed
by lone actors, individuals and groups embracing what is referred to by a number
of Member States as “extreme right-wing” or “racially and ethnically motivated”
terrorism. These various groups and individuals have demonstrated their ability to
adapt to the current unprecedented situation resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic
by, inter alia, continuing to exploit new technologies for radicalization, recruitment
and fundraising purposes.
The Committee has worked to ensure business continuity, with the support of
its Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), including by convening regular
informal-informal meetings through closed and open video-teleconferences (VTCs).
The assessment of Member States’ implementation efforts, of course, remains
central to the work of the Committee and CTED. During the second half of 2019,
prior to the onset of the pandemic, CTED conducted 12 assessment visits on the
Committee’s behalf. Due to the travel restrictions imposed by the pandemic, the
Committee was able to conduct only two assessment visits earlier this year — to
Equatorial Guinea and Qatar.
In order to continue dialogue and engagement with Member States, the
Committee is currently considering a proposed modality for conducting hybrid
assessment visits to Member States on a temporary basis, through a virtual
component and, subsequently, as soon as circumstances permit, through a physical
on-site component.
Conducting hybrid visits would allow the Committee to carry on its core
mandate of monitoring, facilitating and promoting Member States’ efforts to
implement the relevant Council resolutions, without altering its established
procedures. In the meantime, the updated framework document for CounterTerrorism Committee visits to Member States, aimed at monitoring, promoting and
facilitating the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014),
2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions, has
been issued as a Security Council document and is now available on the CTC website
(S/2020/731, annex).
The Committee has also accelerated its review and adoption of the overview
of implementation assessment and detailed implementation survey of Member
States, prepared by CTED. Thus far, the Committee has reviewed the documents of
177 Member States.
Pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 2395 (2017), CTED has also been working
to strengthen its desk-review assessment tools, including by developing the electronic
Detailed Implementation Survey and revising the overview of implementation

20-160637/37

S/2020/1143

assessment, to enhance their utility to Member States, donors and partner agencies
in the context of designing targeted technical assistance programming.
An increasing number of visited States have given their consent for the
Committee to share their respective visit reports, either partially or in full, with key
United Nations partners and technical assistance donors. That facilitates the sharing
of technical assistance needs and good practices in a transparent and proactive
manner, and it should be encouraged.
The Committee also regularly invites Member States to deliver briefings on
their ongoing implementation of the recommendations set forth in their respective
visit reports. The Committee welcomes CTED’s enhanced dialogue with relevant
United Nations entities as well as with Resident Coordinators and country teams
of States recently visited or about to be visited. The ongoing dialogue helps
integrate the technical assistance needs identified by CTED into their work.
The Committee also welcomes CTED’s ongoing monitoring and analysis of the
implications of the pandemic for Member States’ counter-terrorism and counteringviolent-extremism measures.
In the context of its work to identify emerging terrorism-related issues,
trends and developments, while working together with its partners, including the
member entities of its global research network, CTED has also issued a number
of analytical publications, including the recent trends tracker on the integration
of gender considerations into counter-terrorism responses in accordance with
resolution 2242 (2015).
Furthermore, CTED has continued conducting in-depth deep-dive missions,
including virtually, in the context of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) global programmes, such as the United Nations Countering Terrorist
Travel Programme and the Fusion Cells programme. The Committee and CTED
thereby continue to follow-up with UNOCT in designing, programming and funding
capacity-building projects and activities, based on their recommendations.
The Committee and CTED have a clear mandate, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, to monitor, promote and facilitate Member States’
implementation of Council resolutions on counter-terrorism. In order to ensure the
continuity of that work in the current exceptional circumstances, the Committee has
continued to hold open briefings through informal-informal VTCs. This practice
also keep States informed about the policy implications of newly adopted Council
resolutions. One such example was the open briefing held in August to present the
Committee’s updated technical guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and other relevant resolutions.
In October, the Committee organized an open VTC on emerging trends
in violent extremism conducive to terrorism and addressing violent extremism
through a human rights-based approach, which was an opportunity to explore
possible responses to emerging threats in full compliance with international human
rights obligations.
In October, the Committee also held a closed VTC on maritime security, during
which the participants stressed the vulnerability of porous maritime borders that
could be exploited by terrorists for travel and cross-border criminal activities, such
as trafficking in arms, persons, drugs and cultural property. The maritime domain
offers a set of possible opportunities for terrorist attacks against vulnerable and soft
targets, such as cruise ships and critical infrastructure, including port facilities and
offshore fixed platforms.

8/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Countering terrorism financing also remains a major focus of our attention.
The pandemic has increased the risk that terrorists and terrorist organizations will
exploit new financial instruments, including virtual assets, to raise and move funds.
Because of the pandemic, it was necessary to postpone the planned joint special
meeting of the Committee and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities, on terrorism-financing threats and trends. However, a closed joint VTC
was held in June, during which CTED and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team presented the findings of their joint report on countering terrorism
financing issued pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019).
Earlier this month, the Committee also held a virtual open briefing on the
role of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in bringing terrorists to justice,
including the effective use of battlefield- or military-collected evidence. The
Committee continues to stress the importance of promoting gender-sensitive and a
whole-of-society approaches to countering terrorism and violent extremism that is
conducive to terrorism, including by encouraging the participation of civil society
organizations, women’s groups, youth, religious leaders and other actors concerned.
In that regard, the Committee welcomes CTED’s ongoing virtual consultations with
civil society organizations on counter-financing-of-terrorism measures and their
implications for human rights.
The lockdowns imposed by Governments in response to the pandemic have
led to a global increase in the use of social media. That has provided terrorist
groups with an opportunity to further broaden and target their online messaging.
The Committee has therefore strengthened its focus on the need to assist States to
identify ways to counter terrorist online narratives. In January, the Committee and
CTED organized an open briefing on countering terrorist narratives and preventing
the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, in accordance with the guidelines set
forth in resolution 2354 (2017).
The requirement for us to meet virtually is of course unfortunate, but it is
a clear sign of the unprecedented time in which we are all currently living. I look
forward to an opportunity to brief the Council in person as soon as circumstances
permit. During this time of unprecedented challenges, we may wish to focus our
attention on the following areas.
First, we should continue to pay particular attention to the possible short-,
medium- and long-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global terrorism
landscape, including the exacerbation of the underlying drivers of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
Secondly, we need to ensure that counter-terrorism and countering violent
extremism remain high on the international peace and security agenda in the context
of the COVID-19 pandemic, in the light of Member States’ numerous competing
priorities, and that the Committee maintains its essential role in monitoring, facilitating
and promoting the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, it is essential to further strengthen international collaboration and
cooperation between Member States and United Nations entities and between
Governments and civil society organizations to achieve the objectives set forth in the
relevant Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism.
Lastly, let me assure the Council that the Committee and CTED will continue
to assess the impact of the pandemic on the global terrorism landscape and proactively
support the efforts of the Council and Member States to address the ever-evolving
global terrorist threat.
20-160639/37

S/2020/1143

Annex IV
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Dian Triansyah Djani
On behalf of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on the progress made since our last
joint briefing in May 2019 (see S/PV.8528).
I am grateful to the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
His Excellency Mr. Tarek Ladeb, Ambassador of Tunisia, for leading the joint
briefing process this year on behalf of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
The 1540 Committee mandate is the prevention of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their means of delivery and related
materials to and by non-State actors, particularly for terrorist purposes. While this
mandate differs from those of the other committees, there are important areas of
complementarity. Furthermore, from the perspective of our Committee, in resolution
2325 (2016) the Security Council reiterates the need to enhance cooperation among
the three Committees.
The devastating and potentially catastrophic consequences that the use
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons could have remain a matter of serious
concern. Furthermore, the fact that non-State groups and individuals with extreme
views are ready to use violence in various parts of the world also remains a serious
concern. Resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted by the Security Council precisely to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery to and by non-State actors, including
terrorists. All States must make every effort to prevent such proliferation.
The resolution obliges States to adopt and enforce measures to prohibit
non-State actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, transporting,
transferring or using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery. Measures are also required, among others, to account for and secure such
items and to ensure physical protection measures, border controls, law enforcement
efforts, export and transhipment controls and controls on providing related funds
and services.
Under resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council decided that the Committee
would conduct a comprehensive review on the status of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) prior to the renewal of its mandate, which is due to expire
on 25 April 2021. I reported to the Council in my letter of 27 August that, owing to
delays caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the Committee had decided that activities
scheduled this year related to the comprehensive review would be postponed until
2021, with the exception of the process of revising the Committee matrices and
activities that can be undertaken in an online format.
Despite the pandemic, the Committee continues to undertake activities this
year to promote the full and effective implementation of the resolution and to assist
States, upon request, in strengthening national capacity. They include engagement
with Member States as well as international and regional organizations the mandates
of which are related to resolution 1540 (2004).

10/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

The Committee will continue to enhance information-sharing, coordination
on visits to countries, technical assistance and other issues of relevance to the
Committee and the 1267 Committee and the CTC, as appropriate, and will jointly
brief the Security Council with these two Committees accordingly once a year.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that a cooperative approach and
dialogue with Member States continues to inform the 1540 Committee’s activities.

20-1606311/37

S/2020/1143

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
China thanks Ambassador Ladeb and Ambassador Djani for their
respective briefings.
Over the past year, the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) maintained normal operations and actively carried out their
work despite the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). China commends
the Chairs of the three Committees, as well as their teams and the Secretariat staff,
for their efforts in that regard.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction seriously
threaten international peace and security. Currently, the coronavirus disease
continues to rage throughout the world. The socioeconomic fallout from the
pandemic could exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism and increase mediumand long-term terrorist threats. It could also upset international non-proliferation
efforts and increase the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The international community should pay special attention to this issue and respond
effectively through cooperation.
The 1267 Committee is an important United Nations and Security Council
mechanism for counter-terrorism sanctions. Despite the challenges posed by
COVID-19, the Committee has continued to fulfil its mandate in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, conduct regular reviews of the sanctions
list, strengthen cooperation with the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson and improve its working methods. Those
efforts have achieved positive results.
China supports the 1267 Committee in communicating closely with the
countries concerned, strengthening cooperation with regional and subregional
counter-terrorism mechanisms and maintaining its important role in assessing
terrorist threats and strengthening sanctions. We hope that, with regard to such
issues as listing, exemptions and delisting, the Committee will strictly abide by the
relevant Security Council resolutions as well as the guidelines for the conduct of
its work, and uphold the principles of objectivity, impartiality and professionalism,
based on solid evidence and broad consensus, so as to safeguard the authority and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is mandated by the relevant
Security Council resolutions to track new terrorism threats and trends and provide
technical assistance to the relevant countries. The Committee plays an active role
in the international fight against terrorism. China hopes that the CTC will continue
to strengthen dialogue with Member States, analyse the impact of COVID-19 on the
counter-terrorism efforts of Member States, especially developing countries, and
prevent terrorist organizations from profiting from the pandemic.
China supports the Committee’s cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations to jointly tackle new challenges associated with the

12/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Internet and new technologies by terrorist organizations to instigate, plan, fund and
implement terrorist attacks.
The 1540 Committee is an important part of the international non-proliferation
mechanism. China supports the Committee in continuing to abide by the mandate of
Security Council resolutions, while comprehensively advancing the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), strengthening international non-proliferation cooperation
and capacity-building and focusing on meeting the international assistance needs of
developing countries.
Last month, China adopted an export control law and a biosafety law. In
October last year, China and the 1540 Committee jointly organized the third
Non-Proliferation Points of Contact Training Course in the Asia-Pacific Region.
China has taken concrete actions to continuously improve its own non-proliferation
and export control regime. We have contributed to strengthening the capacitybuilding of countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
The novel coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about challenges for
international non-proliferation efforts and hampered the work of the Committee.
We hope that the Committee will remain steadfast in performing its duties to ensure
that next year’s comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) is open, transparent
and inclusive. That would guarantee the participation of developing countries, take
into account the international obligations and national contexts of each country and
promote the lasting and effective implementation of the resolution.
Over the past year, the three Committees have strengthened communication
and coordination and achieved positive results, which is precisely what the
Security Council aims to achieve by holding joint briefings. China hopes that, after
the pandemic is brought under control, the three Committees will resume full normal
operations as soon as possible and continue to strengthen information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation through joint meetings and joint visits so as to form
even greater synergies.
China firmly rejects terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. We
will continue to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions and support
the work of the 1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1540
Committee. We hope that the three Committees and their respective expert bodies
will strengthen coordination, complement each other, continue to improve their
work and pay greater attention to the views of member States in order to contribute
more significantly to promoting international counter-terrorism cooperation and
improving the international non-proliferation system.

Second statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
It is late now, and I apologize for requesting the floor to make a further statement.
In his statement, the representative of the United Kingdom made a baseless
attack against China for the counter-terrorism and deradicalization measures it has
taken in Xinjiang. I must respond. The statement made by the delegation of the
United Kingdom fully exposes its double standards on counter-terrorism, which are
neither responsible nor constructive. I would like to remind the representative of the
United Kingdom of three facts.
20-1606313/37

S/2020/1143

First Xinjiang province enjoys political stability, economic growth and social
harmony, and its people are safe and at peace. Not a single act of terrorism has
occurred in the province for quite some time. The human rights situation of people
of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang continues to improve.
Secondly, during the deliberations on 6 October on issues related to the Third
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, the representatives
of approximately 50 countries opposed the attacks on China by a certain country and
supported China’s measures in Xinjiang.
Thirdly, the purpose of today’s joint briefing is to review the work of the
three Committees, discuss how to enhance communication and coordination
among them so as to better implement relevant Security Council resolutions and
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation. The statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom did not match those made by the representatives
of the majority of countries on the issue and was inconsistent with the atmosphere
of today’s meeting.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China rejects terrorism in all its
forms and, as always, will actively participate in and promote international counterterrorism cooperation and make its relevant contributions.

14/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex VI
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Ambassador Ladeb and Ambassador Djani for their briefings on
cooperation efforts among the three Committees they chair. We welcome the details
on the increasingly close collaboration among the Committees, in particular given
the major constraints and challenges caused by restrictions imposed due to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Indeed, unyielding cooperation efforts and renewed energy are needed
to continue to address the ongoing threat to global peace and security caused by
terrorist acts, as we grapple with the devastating impact of the pandemic.
The cruelty demonstrated by terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) knows no bounds. We are concerned that such groups will take
advantage of the global disruption caused by the pandemic to incite and perpetrate
new attacks. We see an increase in the number of incidents in conflict zones and
further evidence of their ability to mutate and adapt to new modalities in response
to external events.
We commend the achievements of the offensive against ISIL — in particular the
leaders of the organization — as a result of various strategic operations, which must
continue to be strengthened. However, we again stress the importance of addressing
in a holistic manner the key factors that incite violence and exacerbate the conditions
that lead terrorism, in particular socioeconomic, political and humanitarian issues,
which have been worsened by the pandemic.
We also applaud efforts made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to ensure the prompt continuity of its work, despite the interruption
caused by COVID-19, and provide us with materials and reports on the most
recent trends in the activities of these terrorist groups. We trust that it will soon
be able to resume its visits to States and the monitoring of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, as a mechanism for prevention and action against these
dangerous groups.
The resurgence in the use of chemical weapons and the development and
ongoing efforts to enhance nuclear and ballistic programmes and their means of
delivery again underscores the importance of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the need to achieve the resolution’s universal adoption
and full and effective implementation.
We welcome the progress made by the States Members of the United Nations
in this regard and recognize their commitment, as well as the tireless efforts of
the Committee in support of these goals. Notwithstanding the progress made, the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task that
requires greater coordination among States, organizations and civil society at the
national, regional and international levels.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). In the process ahead of the 2021 comprehensive review of
the status of implementation, we submitted to the Committee our updated national
report and national action plan, as well as substantive information on updating our
matrix to reflect the significant progress made in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) since our 2015 report. In this regard, we take this opportunity to acknowledge
the hard work of the Group of Experts, in particular in the process of reviewing the
matrices. We sincerely thank the Group for its assistance, close collaboration and
availability, despite the complex circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
20-1606315/37

S/2020/1143

Annex VII

Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
First, I would like to join other Security Council Members in thanking
Ambassador Djani and Ambassador Ladeb for their insightful briefings and excellent
work as Chairs of their respective Committees.
I would also like to thank the expert groups, who, despite the challenges
posed by the pandemic, have continued to make that work possible, especially the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Group of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
With regard to the Counter Terrorism Committee (CTC), let me underline
our appreciation for transparency and cooperation as key tools in enhancing and
streamlining our concerted efforts to counter terrorism.
Estonia welcomes the efforts made to integrate human rights, including
gender issues, throughout all of the activities of the CTC and CTED. That includes
assessment visits and thematic briefings.
The Council has recognized the differential impact of terrorism on the
human rights of women and girls and their frequent targeting by terrorist groups.
This includes sexual and gender-based violence used as a tactic of terrorism. The
recognition of the importance of women’s leadership and participation is key in
developing strategies to counter terrorism.
Estonia commends the patience and flexibility that CTED has shown in finding
ways to continue its work and the virtual deep-dive assessment missions despite the
pandemic. Let us continue our efforts to implement hybrid working methods that
allow the CTC and CTED to continue their mandated work.
With regard to the influences of the pandemic on the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, it is a matter of regret that the format
of the meetings is still considered to be informal. That also applies to the CTC
and most other subsidiary bodies that conduct their meetings on a virtual platform.
We do not see any valid reason that the meetings of the Committees should not be
considered formal.
When countering terrorism, the standards of due process and human rights
need to be respected for the regime to remain effective. Therefore, Estonia reiterates
its full support to the work of the Ombudsperson. The arrangements regarding the
status and conditions of service of his Office need to be specific to the distinct role
of the Ombudsperson.
The use of chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant is a recent reminder of the risk of non-State actors gaining access
to weapons of mass destruction. The gaps and inconsistencies that persist in Syria’s
chemical weapons declaration indicate that the Syrian regime continues to keep
unaccounted stockpiles and that there is a serious risk that chemical weapons will
again fall into the hands of terrorists. In this regard, resolution 1540 (2004) remains
one of the most critical instruments in ensuring that these threats do not materialize.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of ensuring that all counterterrorism measures are carried out in accordance with international law, including
international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.

16/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex VIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations, Sheraz Gasri
[Original: English and French]
I, too, would like to thank the Chairs for their briefings and for their leadership
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) over the past year.
As others have said before, terrorist groups have never been more organized,
while continuing their efforts to utilize radicalized individuals to commit deadly
attacks in our countries. Da’esh, similar to Al-Qaida, is proving to be resilient and
capable of adapting to clandestine operations. The pandemic makes the threat even
more nebulous, in particular through the massive use of the Internet and social
networks. Faced with a scourge that spares no country, more than ever before we
must coordinate our efforts, including among the Security Council, its Committees
and Groups of Experts.
We demonstrated solidarity and coordination on resolution 2462 (2019), on
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism, adopted at France’s initiative.
Resolution 2462 (2019) calls for coordinated action by the 1267 Committee and the
CTC. In this regard, it is important that the joint meeting of the two Committees on
trends and threats related to terrorist financing and the implementation of resolution
2462 (2019) be held as soon as health conditions allow. Such coordination and joint
action are essential for enabling the normative framework established by the Council
be fully effective. I would also like to underscore three points.
First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee must continue its evaluation work,
while finding ways to tailor visits in the current health context. Cooperation between
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of CounterTerrorism must also continue.
Secondly, the activities of the 1267 Committee show both the extent of the
work to be undertaken to hamper the operational capabilities of terrorist groups and
the ability of member States to cooperate and demonstrate unity in response to this
common threat. This unity must absolutely be maintained, because the threat posed
by Al-Qaida and Da’esh remains despite the end of the territorial hold of Da’esh in
the Levant.
It is essential that the fight against terrorism and radicalization be in full
compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, in accordance with Security Council resolutions, which are unequivocal on
the matter. I would like to commend the work of the Ombudsperson of the 1267
Committee, who plays an essential role in matters relating to rights of the defence.
I also applaud the contributions made by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team.
Thirdly, and lastly, the risk of radiological, biological, chemical and nuclear
materials and delivery systems falling into the hands of terrorists remains acute,
and proliferation channels are diversifying. Against that backdrop, the role of the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts is ever more relevant, whether in securing
sensitive materials and goods, strengthening border controls or establishing export
control mechanisms. Cooperation among the 1540 Committee and the other
Committees is essential for the effectiveness of our collective security system.
20-1606317/37

S/2020/1143

France has a solid and unique national legal framework for the practical
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and will fully participate in the process of
reviewing the resolution with the other members of the Security Council.
In conclusion, France will continue to fully cooperate with the 1540 and 1267
Committees and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

18/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
First of all, let me say a few words on counter-terrorism. Some colleagues have
already raised the issue of right-wing extremism and terrorism. We welcome the
fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Committee keep track of evolving trends and developments, including
the threat posed by violent right-wing extremism and terrorism. In this context, I
would like to point out a recent study commissioned by the German Federal Foreign
Office on the issue of transnational connectivity and violent right-wing extremism
and terrorism. This is an issue that we take very seriously. We are firmly committed
to pursuing it further and see an important role for the United Nations to play in
this regard.
We encourage the Committees and United Nations experts to continue to put
very strong emphasis on four principles in their counter-terrorism work.
The first is human rights. Counter-terrorism measures must never serve as
a pretext for human rights violations. They are counterproductive to all efforts to
sustainably eradicate the root causes of radicalization and terrorism. Let me express,
in this context, that we are very concerned about what is happening in Xinjiang.
Let me remind the Council of the declaration that Germany presented in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly on behalf of 39 States.
The second principle we believe is essential is that of accountability and
prosecution for terrorist crimes. That brings me to the principle of the rule of law
and ensuring due diligence. In this regard, we commend the Ombudsperson to
the Da’esh (ISIL) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, Mr. Kipfer-Fasciati, for his
excellent work.
Thirdly, international humanitarian law must be respected. Counter-terrorism
measures must not hinder humanitarian activities carried out by humanitarian actors
and based on humanitarian principles.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize the importance of the gender dimension and
the role of women, both as the solution and part of the problem. Women are crucial
actors in addressing effectively the root causes of conflict and radicalization. They
are at the same time also victims and survivors and, in some cases, even perpetrators.
With regard to the issue of weapons of mass destruction, in the Council we are
currently discussing the terrible effects that the use of weapons of mass destruction
can have. Syria is just one example, where the Al-Assad regime is using chemical
weapons against its own population. This shows how important this issue is.
Let me turn now to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the resolution since its adoption. However, to guarantee
full and effective implementation, it is ultimately important to assist those States
requiring support. We therefore particularly welcome increased cooperation among
the Committee and its Group of Experts, the regional centres of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and international organizations, such as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
We regret that the ongoing comprehensive review has been delayed due to
the coronavirus disease pandemic. We believe that, in preparing for an extension of
the 1540 mandate, it will be worthwhile to think about how to best address threats
resulting from new technologies. We believe that this element should be taken into
20-1606319/37

S/2020/1143

account. In this context, I would like to draw the Council’s attention to a process that
Germany has organized since 2012 — the Wiesbaden Conferences. The Wiesbaden
process raises awareness and furthers the exchange of information and effective
practices and promotes private-sector engagement as the first line of defence, which
is vital for successful non-proliferation in a globalized world.
In conclusion, let me reiterate another core principle — working together to
solve those problems that do not stop at national borders. International, regional and
subregional cooperation efforts remain vital, as does the collaboration with a variety
of actions, including in particular those of civil society. A transnational threat can
be overcome only when our response is unified.

20/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
In my national capacity, I would like to express my delegation’s appreciation
to my brother Ambassador Tarek Ladeb for his briefing and work as the Chair of
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We have been working very closely with our brothers
from Tunisia on this very important issue of terrorism and will continue to do so in
future, with Tunisia as well as with other members of the Security Council, even
though we will no longer be serving in the Council. This is a very important issue
that is near and dear to our hearts. I would like to make three very brief points.
First, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Group of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), the Office of the Ombudsperson and the secretariats of
the Committees. We commend them for continuing to carry out their activities
in accordance with their respective mandates despite the difficult circumstances
caused by the pandemic.
Secondly, with regard to the implementation of the mandates of the
Committees, my delegation applauds their continuous efforts to cooperate and
coordinate better. Joint briefings and working visits to several countries, including
to Indonesia earlier this year, are examples of the coordinated efforts that need to be
strengthened. We hope that this will continue to be on the agenda of the Committees
after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) because, without the visits, we will not
have a very clear picture of the situation on the ground.
And that brings me to my last point — that of advancing the mandates of
the three Committees. We must acknowledge that there have been encouraging
developments. However, we also share concerns about the fact that, during this
challenging time, threats have evolved and transformed but have far from diminished.
This situation has forced us not only to be flexible but also creative in
finding solutions to make sure that we can continue to work effectively, but without
compromising our rules and guidelines. We have shown that, during this time of
COVID-19, we can also be adaptive and flexible enough to ensure that this very
important work of addressing the issue of terrorism does not fall behind simply
because of procedural issues.
Once again, I underline our collective responsibility to continue to explore ways
and means, find compromise and ensure the continuity of work of the Committees
for as long as they are needed. This is not a parting statement, but we wish the next
Chairs of the Committees all the best in undertaking their very important work. And
just a simple suggestion on my part — maybe it is time for all of us to rethink the
names of the Committees, because they are quite a mouthful.

20-1606321/37

S/2020/1143

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Allow me to thank the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning
counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on non-proliferation, for the detailed briefings on their work.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remain
challenges to international peace and security. It is clear that the persistence of
terrorist activities throughout the world, their capacity to cause harm and their
re-emerge, even when believed to have been destroyed, in addition to their violent
nature, remain the primary threat to global peace and security.
The skill developed by terrorists enabling them to disregard borders, their
ability to recruit followers and even acquire weapons of all kinds, as well as the
threat of their use, remain of great concern. As we have seen in the Middle East, the
two issues are linked. We know that the main threat comes from jihadists linked to
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliated networks, who stand ready to act and adopt
new strategies to sow the seeds of terror.
That is why we believe it is essential to strengthen collective tools in order to
control weapons of mass destruction, combat terrorism and provide support for, and
strengthen the individual capacities of, the most vulnerable States facing the greatest
threats. This issue is of the utmost urgency and must be a priority for the international
community given the capabilities — dare I say — of terrorists in regions such as
the Sahel and East Africa, as we saw earlier today in Somalia. Already facing the
proliferation of weapons of war, this region, along with many others in Africa, needs
innovative and forward-looking measures now more than ever so as to avoid the
worst — that is, the proliferation of chemical weapons.
The Niger is therefore very committed to the effective implementation of the
mandates of these three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. We just listened
to their Chairs with rapt attention. We appreciate the efforts of the Committees and
the groups of experts that assist them in their respective missions. We welcome
the dynamic cooperation among these bodies and call for the further strengthening
of mechanisms on counter-terrorism, threat assessment and technical assistance
needs assessment.
Given the many challenges in the fight against terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, our action must also be focused on strategies to
prevent radicalization and violent extremism by addressing the root causes of these
challenges, such as poverty and youth unemployment. The same applies to combating
the financing of terrorism and the illicit use of communications technologies and
social media for criminal purposes.
More than anyone else, we firmly believe in the goal respecting human rights
in the fight against terrorism. It is for that reason that, in the context of the Group
of Five countries for the Sahel, we joined the compliance framework on respect for
human rights.

22/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the commitment of my country, the
Niger, to the fight against terrorism and terrorism-related activity and our readiness
to cooperate closely with counter-terrorism and non-proliferation bodies.

20-1606323/37

S/2020/1143

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
Allow me to thank the presidency for convening the traditional briefing of the
Chairs of the three Committees with a mandate related to counter-terrorism issues.
It is almost a year and a half since our last meeting in this format (see S/PV.8528).
During that time, counter-terrorism security has changed.
The pandemic has had an impact on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Nonetheless, over the
past six months, we generally managed to adapt to the changing conditions, and
the Security Council continued its intense work in the areas of counter-terrorism
and non-proliferation. We would like to wish the Chairs of the three Committees
continued success and thank them for their briefings on the implementation of their
respective mandates.
Restrictions on air travel as well as quarantine measures imposed by States
have forced the Counter-Terrorism Committee to suspend all monitoring visits. In
order to support work in this priority area, we agreed to try an unusual solution.
On 19 November, the CTC approved temporary procedures for conducting hybrid
visits — virtual meetings. We believe that it is crucial that, despite the virtual
component, such visits be conducted on the ground by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and with the participation of other
specialized entities of the United Nations. It is important that all agreed rules and
regulations for such visits be followed. This is a temporary measure. In six months,
we will consider the possibility of extending it or returning to the regular work of
the Committee.
It should be borne in mind that the monitoring of the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions in the first few months of the pandemic
did not stop, even in the absence of country visits. Furthermore, CTED managed
to significantly increase its assessment rate of States on the basis of detailed and
evaluative reviews of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). During the
current cycle, 177 countries have already been reviewed. In the near future, the
Committee will be approving reviewed procedures for analysing States’ antiterrorist systems. It is important to maintain the balanced nature of the instruments
used for review without being distracted by secondary topics. At the same time, the
key criterion for the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism remains the ability
of States to create safeguards against financial and ideological support for terrorists,
as well as to ensure that there is no statute of limitations for the punishment of
crimes committed.
Unfortunately, this year it was not possible to hold two central CTC events
that would have been dedicated to the topics I mentioned. We hope that a joint
briefing with the 1267 Committee on countering the financing of terrorism and an
open meeting of the CTC on combating the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes
will be held as soon as the pandemic-related restrictions are lifted.
We note the efforts of CTED in the analytical field, in particular in cooperation
with the Global Research Network — for example, a summary of the impact of the
coronavirus on terrorist activity was very useful. The report mentioned today on
24/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

the implementation of resolution 2462 (2019), which was prepared by CTED and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2020/493, annex), further
confirmed the high expertise and potential of those structures.
Unfortunately, the approaches of Member States have not been so closely
coordinated on all thematic clusters discussed by the CTC in recent months. We are
particularly concerned about the high level of politicization of issues related to the
protection of human rights and the fight against violent extremism and extremist
ideology, as well as the issue of collecting evidence of terrorist crimes in conflict
zones. In our view, at this stage it would be more useful to focus on the more
pressing problem of the repatriation of terrorists and their family members from
Syria and Iraq.
We acknowledge the work of the 1267 Sanctions Committee, which remains
one of the Council’s most effective counter-terrorism mechanisms.
The key task at hand remains the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the anti-terrorist sanctions regime against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Russia attaches paramount importance to the
fulfilment of that goal.
We also note the continued terrorist activity by ISIL in Afghanistan. Despite
some losses by the group in the north, it remains one of the major factors in
destabilizing the situation in the country. An additional danger is posed by their
expanding ideological, propaganda and recruitment activities with the skilful use of
information and communication technologies.
Currently on our radar are the activities of foreign terrorist fighters who
received combat experience in Syria and Iraq and in various regions of the world,
including Afghanistan. In that connection, we stress the need to continue to focus on
the problem of foreign terrorist fighters on the anti-terrorist sanctions lists in order
to prevent and suppress their criminal activity.
We support the effective work of the Monitoring Team, the reports of which
form an important basis for the work of the Committee. We call on Member States to
work in close collaboration with the experts. For our part, we stand ready to continue
providing the experts with appropriate assistance. At the same time, we hope that
the reports of the Monitoring Team will be as objective as possible and rely only on
verified sources of information.
Country visits by the Monitoring Team are of particular importance but,
unfortunately, due to the pandemic, this year’s trips were cancelled. As soon as the
epidemiological situation allows, we expect them to resume immediately. At the
same time, we believe that visits to countries in situations of armed confrontation
with international terrorism and States that are directly impacted by manifestations
of terrorism should remain a priority.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the only universal international document
in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destructions (WMDs), as it
obliges all countries to create effective national control systems in order to prevent
WMDs, their means of delivery and related materials from falling into the possession
of non-State actors.
Coordinated work among all Member States is the key to the successful
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), an issue to which Russia attaches priority
importance. We are interested in finding common ground with our partners in order
to advance the non-proliferation agenda. Overall, we are satisfied with the progress
made in the implementation of the document and the international community’s

20-1606325/37

S/2020/1143

recognition of its importance. We also greatly appreciate the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), chaired by Indonesia.
Providing technical assistance to States remains a priority in the 1540
Committee’s work. It is of fundamental importance that the Committee can
effectively act as a central coordinator of global efforts to implement the resolution,
while defining the goals and priorities of such work. The value of resolution 1540
(2004) also lies in the fact that it is an instrument of cooperation. It is important
to remember that, while the 1540 Committee operates on the basis of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, its mandate does not include coercing or
imposing so-called services on Member States. Such practices will only undermine
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Much remains to be done to implement that basic premise, namely the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), by all and in full. Unfortunately, this year
the force majeure circumstances of the pandemic have had a negative effect, causing
many areas of the non-proliferation agenda to suffer, in particular the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which has been postponed to
2021. However, we are convinced that the current circumstances will not undermine
the effectiveness of the Committee’s efforts, and we hope that it will continue to
work as dynamically as it has done in the past.
In the light of the activities of ISIL and other terrorist groups in the Middle
East that have mastered the technology to produce chemical weapons, which they
are actively using, decisive collective measures are needed to prevent the horrific
phenomenon of chemical terrorism. There is a real risk that, once the situation in
one country is normalized, terrorists with practical experience in that area will try to
hide in other countries. The spread of such knowledge is no less a threat than the very
use of that type of weapon of mass destruction. In that context, Russia’s initiative
to develop and adopt a convention on combating acts of chemical and biological
terrorism is gaining increasing relevance.
Perhaps then we would not hear such irresponsible declarations as those we
have heard from the representative of the United States regarding so-called examples
of the use of chemical weapons. Such issues will be resolved only through the legal
sphere, not loud political declarations.

26/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I would first like to thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb and Ambassador Dian
Triansyah Djani for their briefings and for their excellent work and outstanding
leadership of their respective committees. I also wish to thank Ambassador Djani
for his commitment to the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two years.
Terrorism and the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) continue to present a grave threat to international peace
and security. Like other contemporary threats to international peace and security,
such risks cannot be effectively addressed by a single State. Consequently, bilateral
and multilateral diplomacy to counter terrorism and proliferation are more crucial
than ever. For our part, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to
building durable and strategic partnerships — globally and within Latin America
and the Caribbean — to enhance our security efforts on counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation.
Despite the ongoing challenges produced by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the three committees and their respective groups of experts
continued joint efforts in the implementation of their respective mandates. We
welcome the measures adopted by the committees to mitigate the impact of the
pandemic and encourage them to enhance collaboration, information-sharing and
coordination within their respective mandates.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) must be commended for its efforts
to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with international, regional and subregional
organizations acting in the areas outlined in resolution 1373 (2001) amid the COVID-19
pandemic. Equally, the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) continued uninterrupted engagement with representatives of
Member States on a virtual basis to help ensure the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
My delegation acknowledges the 112 Member States that completed the
questionnaire that facilitated the joint report of CTED and the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team on actions taken to disrupt terrorism financing
(S/2020/493, annex).
Regarding the evolving threat to international peace and security posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team assessed in its latest report that
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on terrorism has varied between conflict zones
and non-conflict zones, and between short and longer-term threats (see S/2020/717).
ISIL, Al-Qaida and their global affiliates continue to generate violence around the
world, and we remain deeply concerned about the evolving relationship between
ISIL and Al-Qaida, particularly in West Africa and the Sahel. We are also concerned
about the surge in ISIL activity in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and elsewhere
in the region, as its strategic direction, propaganda, recruitment and fundraising
activities during the pandemic remain unclear.
We recognize the important role of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
20-1606327/37

S/2020/1143

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, its Monitoring Team and the Office of the
Ombudsperson, and encourage Member States to enhance cooperation by providing
updated information about the individuals and entities placed on its sanctions list.
We reiterate that any measures we undertake to prevent and combat terrorism must
comply with our obligations under international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant international conventions and protocols.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
would like to express our appreciation to the Committee’s Group of Experts for
its continued efforts in carrying out its mandate. We encourage the Committee to
continue working with Member States to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery. While several events planned
for the comprehensive review were postponed or cancelled due to the COVID-19
pandemic, we welcome the virtual outreach and training events that the Committee
hosted. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to doing its part to
ensure that we fully eradicate weapons of mass destruction, and will continue to
support the work of the 1540 Committee.
In conclusion, we call upon Member States to continue their collaborative
efforts to address terrorism and proliferation by promoting the highest standards of
regional and international safety and security.

28/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
As South Africa prepares to conclude its two-year term on the
Security Council, allow me to take this opportunity to commend the work of the
Security Council’s subsidiary bodies represented here today. They continue to work
diligently and consistently in parallel to the main meetings of the Council itself on
critically important components of international peace and security, namely, counterterrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The efforts of
the committees and their groups of experts are invaluable in keeping Member States
abreast of new and emerging threats and in assisting in the implementation of the
relevant instruments, including via technical assistance to those who request it, as
well as capacity-building initiatives.
I also wish to commend Indonesia, which will conclude its term on the
Security Council at the same time as South Africa, for its excellent chairmanship
of both the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) over the course of the past two years. Its skilled leadership and diplomacy,
through the tireless efforts of Ambassador Djani and his team, have ensured that
those important subsidiary bodies have effectively delivered on their mandates,
ultimately contributing to keeping the world more peaceful and secure.
We also wish to commend Tunisia, a fellow African country and valued
partner in the configuration of the three African members and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines in the Security Council, on its chairing of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). It is a source of pride to Africa that this important subsidiary
body is being chaired so ably by an African country, and we are pleased to know that
the continent’s interests are in good hands.
All three subsidiary bodies have made sterling efforts to ensure business
continuity during these challenging times under the strains of the global coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The counter-terrorism-related subsidiary bodies have
also shown impressive agility in rapidly incorporating the impact of the pandemic
into their analyses and assessments of the global terrorism threat, taking into
consideration, inter alia, emerging conspiracy theories surrounding the pandemic
and the disturbing possibility of attempts to weaponize the COVID-19 virus for the
purposes of terrorism.
The CTC, supported by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), has continued to pursue its active and busy agenda, developing
innovative approaches to its core responsibilities such as temporary hybrid visits to
Member States under assessment, virtual informal-informal meetings and a series
of meetings held virtually on important thematic issues in the counter-terrorism
domain. Those issues include maritime security, terror financing and, recently, the
role of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in bringing terrorists to justice,
including the effective use of battlefield or military-collected evidence.
Likewise, the 1267 Sanctions Committee has remained equally active. It
has been holding virtual meetings that have allowed for continued engagement on
the excellent reports of its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
which continues to track and report on the evolution of the threat of the groups it
monitors, most notably the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida.
Regrettably, its reports have confirmed a concerning increase in the establishment
20-1606329/37

S/2020/1143

of ISIL affiliates and a commensurate increase in terrorist attacks on the African
continent over the two years that we have served on the Security Council.
Turning now to the 1540 Committee, allow me to state that resolution 1540
(2004) remains one of the most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors
from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
It is evident that there are important links between the 1540 Committee and its
resolution and the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations in ensuring
that terrorist organizations never have access to the types of materials covered by
resolution 1540 (2004).
South Africa believes that the full and effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is a long-term task, and we therefore value the collaborative role of the
1540 Committee in assisting States with their obligations under the resolution. With
regard to the implementation of the mandate contained in resolution 1540 (2004),
South Africa believes that the 1540 Committee should continue its awareness-raising
activities to ensure that all States are aware of their obligations under the relevant
resolutions. However, it remains the prerogative of States to decide which measures
are effective, appropriate or necessary as per their national procedures, as set out in
paragraph 2 of resolution 1540 (2004).
To that end, South Africa welcomes the significant progress made towards the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we renew our commitment
to working with the other members of the Committee to address the challenges that
remain, particularly in terms of national implementation and assistance.
We welcome the continued integration of the 1540 Committee’s mandate into
the work of international and regional organizations in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation, which has provided a wealth of expertise and experience for States
to draw upon in their implementation efforts.
We valued the opportunity to engage with the 1540 Committee during our
term on the Security Council in championing those positions, not only on our behalf
but also on behalf of Africa, the developing world and all of humankind. We are
confident that the international community is making great strides in ridding the
world of the threat of weapons of mass destruction.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating South Africa’s steadfast condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and our strong commitment to
supporting the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As always, we call
for the further development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships,
including with the African Union, in both critical areas of the international peace
and security architecture maintained by the Security Council. We also emphasize
the vital importance of ensuring that all of our counter-terrorism measures, across
the board, are conducted in full accordance with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
We also reiterate our strong call for a holistic approach to counter-terrorism
that seeks to engage with and address the root causes of radicalization and terrorism,
not least underdevelopment and poverty. Of equal importance is the need to provide
the requisite technical and capacity-building assistance to the Member States that
request and require it in order to implement the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).
That will ensure that the horrendous consequences of an attack employing a weapon
of mass destruction are not visited upon the world as a result of the lack of resources
or capacity to implement such an important resolution.

30/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
We have witnessed that, despite our efforts, the terrorist threat changes but
does not disappear. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Al-Qaida and their affiliates have adapted to their military defeat in Iraq
and Syria. Similarly, they are learning to adjust, and even exploit, the current global
coronavirus disease pandemic. We express our concern in particular regarding the
growth of terrorism and violent extremism in conflict zones, which exacerbates
and prolongs those conflicts while rendering them bloodier and more complicated
to resolve.
As Member States, our duty is to always be one step ahead. Our approaches
need to respond to the volatile and challenging circumstances, and our mechanisms
need to keep up with new and emerging trends, all while fully respecting our
international human rights obligations and commitments.
Terrorism has always been a top priority for Tunisia, both domestically and
throughout its first year as an elected member of the Security Council. We have
worked extensively, with the support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and alongside the other members, to ensure continuity,
transparency and efficiency. We managed, despite the restrictions, to make
considerable progress on key issues and to continue monitoring, facilitating and
promoting the full implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is essential to maintain vigilance and unity in our collective response to
terrorism both during and after the pandemic. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
deployed by CTED, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and
the Group of Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to maintain constructive dialogue with Member States and
interagency coordination with the relevant United Nations entities.
I also seize this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Djani and his team
on their successful chairmanship of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the 1540 Committee during Indonesia’s term
in the Security Council. Together with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, those
committees constitute the foundation of the Council’s counter-terrorism work and
are a vital tool for dialogue with Member States and other relevant stakeholders.
It is therefore crucial to continue the coordinated and concerted efforts of
these three subsidiary bodies in the implementation of our respective mandates.
We remain committed to a multilateral and multi-stakeholder action as an essential
prerequisite for our common objective of a world free of terrorism.

20-1606331/37

S/2020/1143

Annex XVI
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I wish to thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb for his comprehensive briefing
on behalf of the three committees, and Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his
stewardship of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). As we all adapt to new working conditions, we greatly appreciate the
efforts made to deliver on those critical mandates during this period of disruption.
Despite the coronavirus disease pandemic, terrorists continue to inspire and
perpetrate violence. In Syria, Iraq and beyond, Da’esh continues to pose a threat,
while recovery from their reign of terror remains a struggle for many. The United
Kingdom is committed to pursuing all available avenues in seeking justice and
accountability for those who have fought alongside Da’esh, whatever their nationality,
through prosecution in the most appropriate jurisdiction, which is often in the region
where the crimes took place. Any justice mechanism must respect human rights and
the rule of law, as well as ensure fair trials and due process.
To strengthen accountability for terrorist crimes, we continue to work through
the 1267 Committee to sanction individuals and groups associated with Da’esh and
Al-Qaida. We also strongly support the work of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and, in June, together with Ms. Nadia Murad, we launched the
draft Murad Code to ensure investigation into sexual violence crimes is safe, ethical
and effective. There must be no impunity for the use of sexual violence and human
trafficking to fund and support terrorism.
The United Kingdom condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
We are very concerned by the increased violence perpetrated by right-wing terrorists.
While we may use different terms to describe the phenomenon, we join like-minded
partners in recognizing the need to prevent and address the threat.
Since 2016, we have proscribed several right-wing terrorist groups, such as
National Action, Feuerkrieg Division and Sonnenkrieg Division. We are pleased to
partner with the United States, Germany and Norway in hosting events bringing
together policymakers, researchers and practitioners to increase understanding of
the international dimensions of the threat, as well as emerging responses.
Prevention remains a cornerstone of our approach to counter terrorism. The
United Kingdom’s Prevent programme seeks to tackle the causes of radicalization,
and we have seen a marked increase — from 10 per cent to 24 per cent — in referrals
relating to right-wing terrorism.
As more people, especially young people, are staying at home and spending
time on screens, terrorist groups have increased opportunities to radicalize
and recruit online. The United Kingdom is working closely with technological
companies, including through the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, and
with international partners, law enforcement and industry to coordinate our efforts.
The Security Council has frequently affirmed that all counter-terrorism
measures must comply with international human rights obligations. Promoting
and protecting human rights, integrating a gender dimension and engaging with
32/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

civil society partners are critical elements of credible, sustainable and effective
counter-terrorism.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned about the human rights
violations being perpetrated against Uighurs and other minorities in Xinjiang.
Culture and religion are severely restricted, and we have seen credible reports of
forced labour and forced birth control. Staggeringly, up to 1.8 million people have
been detained without trial. China’s actions are disproportionate and indiscriminate
and will be counter-productive from a counter-terrorism perspective, as they will
exacerbate ethnic tensions.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004) to
address emerging threats from weapons of mass destruction. These persist and,
indeed, have evolved. We therefore thank the States that have shared information
with this Committee, some for the first time. We look forward to working with
partners through the forthcoming comprehensive review to ensure that the work of
the Committee remains both relevant and practical to addressing such threats.
The United Kingdom wishes to take this opportunity to reaffirm its
commitment to other key elements of the disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture that are also critical to maintaining international security, such as the
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and other bodies.
With the prospect of a vaccine, our thoughts turn to the process of building
back better. That should be reflected in our counter-terrorism efforts too. In both
the Security Council and the General Assembly, we will have several opportunities
to consider the United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, the achievements of States
and what more needs to be done. In terrorism we have an enemy that does not rest.
We must ensure that the architecture we helped to develop remains fit for purpose
and that we hold ourselves to the very standards we set out in our resolutions.

20-1606333/37

S/2020/1143

Annex XVII
Statement by the Acting Political Coordinator of the United States
of America to the United Nations, Trina Saha
I thank Ambassadors Ladeb and Djani for their briefings and their leadership
to ensure the uninterrupted work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning
counter-terrorism; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
and their expert bodies throughout the pandemic.
Over the past year, the global terrorist threat has substantially evolved.
Thousands of suspected foreign terrorist fighters and their families remain stranded
in conflict zones. The threat from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will
likely increase if the international community does not meet its obligations under
international law to repatriate its citizens. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team to closely observe that global threat and continue to guide the
Office of Counter-Terrorism’s initiative on the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of terrorists.
Beyond conflict zones, there is a surge in the threat posed by ISIS affiliates
around the world, including alarming new levels of coordination in Africa. We
look forward to working closely with our partners to tackle that challenge in the
1267 Committee.
While the world rallies to respond to the serious challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), terrorists are exploiting the pandemic to disseminate
disinformation to advance their agenda and garner support for their cause. Terrorist
organizations are evaluating the extent to which Governments in regions where
they operate are vulnerable. Terrorists are adapting their messages to undermine
confidence in such Governments, threaten legitimate governance and provoke
violence to further their agendas. Through its partnerships with Governments, civil
society and the private sector, the United States is helping to counter COVID-related
disinformation by rebutting terrorist narratives wherever they arise.
The fear, anxiety and isolation caused by the pandemic have created especially
fertile ground for what we term racially or ethnically motivated terrorism. That form
of terrorism promotes the collapse of society as a precursor to a radical restructuring
of political systems to marginalize certain ethnic and racial groups. With many people
now working and socializing online, the pandemic has expanded opportunities for
those spreading violent radical views to recruit and mobilize sympathizers. We need
to counter them globally and systematically.
On the non-proliferation front, resolution 1540 (2004) continues to guide
actions taken by States to protect weapons of mass destruction-related goods, data
and know-how from unauthorized use and transfer by non-State actors, especially
terrorists. Resolution 1540 (2004) complements United Nations counter-terrorism
resolutions by requiring, under its own provisions, that Member States take account
of the tangible and intangible technology needed by terrorists to manufacture and
use improvised weapons of mass destruction.
Such work is all the more important today as we witness the rising use of
weapons of mass destruction, particularly chemical-weapons use in Syria, the
United Kingdom and Russia, and the increasing possibility of the use of deadly
biological weapons by terrorists owing to technical advancements and increased
34/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

access amid the profound global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Let me be
clear — anywhere and at any time, the use of chemical weapons is abhorrent and an
affront to all humankind.
We are therefore pleased with the Council’s efforts to enhance cooperation
among the 1540 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We encourage the Committees and their expert
bodies to continue to include civil society groups in discussions throughout the
pandemic so that we can learn from their experiences and recommendations on how
best to prevent and counter violent extremism.

20-1606335/37

S/2020/1143

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Hai Anh Pham
Over the past year, the international community has been facing a two-pronged
assault from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and from new attacks
and tactics by terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida and their affiliates, especially in conflict areas. Terrorists use every
opportunity to exacerbate the harsh socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic and
sow discord and radicalization. Proliferation and advances in digital technologies
are prone to exploitation by malicious non-State actors. The risks of terrorists
developing, acquiring, using and trafficking in weapons of mass destruction threaten
to cause unprecedented consequences. These are strong reminders that terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations continues to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security.
In that regard, I thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb of Tunisia and Ambassador
Dian Triansyah Djani of Indonesia for their statements and for their important work
in the respective committees.
At today’s meeting, allow me to share the following three points.
First, the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) are among the
most important tools available to the Security Council in countering terrorism
and proliferation. We commend the three Committees, as well as their respective
expert bodies, namely, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Expert Group of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the good work
and cooperation during the reporting period. That includes joint visits to Member
States, joint open briefings, the development of guidelines and outreach to regional
organizations. Their rich expertise and close cooperation have been instrumental in
achieving the successes and in assessing and responding to the threat of terrorism
in a timely and proactive manner. In times of the COVID-19 pandemic, we count on
the Committees’ and expert bodies’ adaptation and innovation to ensure business
continuity and maintain communication with Member States and relevant partners.
Secondly, the full implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation is a key component in our joint efforts and
a central task in the mandate of the Committees. We are pleased to note significant
progress in their implementation by Member States. We warmly welcome the
constructive engagement by Member States with the 1267 Committee and the
Monitoring Team, including in the 2019 annual review of its sanctions list, which is
crucial to keeping its listing and delisting work up to date and achieving the effective
implementation of sanctions measures. We further encourage the three Committees,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, to continue
to closely monitor and assist States in the full and effective implementation of
the Security Council resolutions through dialogue, the sharing of information
and good practices, developing implementation guidelines and other technical
assistance activities.
Our strategies and policies to counter terrorism and proliferation must be
responsive to the evolving threats of terrorism. In that connection, we believe that
the challenge of foreign terrorist fighters and their family members returning to
36/37

20-16063

S/2020/1143

their home countries must be tackled in unity and cohesion if we are to preserve
and sustain our gains over terrorism. We look forward to the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will provide an important
opportunity to strengthen the global non-proliferation architecture, including
preventing terrorists from obtaining weapons of mass destruction.
Last but not least, my delegation continues to stress the importance of
international and regional cooperation, as no country is safe until all are safe. The
multidimensional threat of terrorism requires a comprehensive and holistic approach,
which includes addressing the root causes of, and the conditions conducive to,
terrorism. We must remain firmly committed to preventing and resolving conflicts,
sustaining peace, promoting development, ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law and building strong societies
that are resilient to terrorism and radicalization.
In conclusion, Viet Nam will continue its steadfast implementation of
the Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation and
work closely together with bodies of the Organization and all relevant partners in
advancing our common fight against terrorism on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

20-1606337/37
