A

UNITED

NATIONS

General Assembly

•

Distr.
GENERAL

......,.~

A/RES/47/129
22 February 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 97 (Q)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/47/678/Add.2)]
47/129.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly.
Recalling that all States have pledged themselves to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recognizing that those rights derive from the inherent dignity of the
human person,
Reaffirming that discrimination against human beings on the grounds of
religion or belief constitutes an affront to human dignity and a disavowal of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it
proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling its resolution 46/131 of 17 December 1991, in which it
requested the Commission on Human Rights to continue its consideration of
measures to implement the Declaration,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/17 of
21 February 1992, 1/ in which the mandate of the special Rapporteur appointed
to examine incidents and governmental actions in all parts of the world that
are incompatible with the provisions of the Declaration and to recommend
remedial measures, as appropriate, was extended for three years, and taking
note also of Economic and Social Council decision 1992/226 of 20 July 1992,

1/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A.

93-10666

I •••

A/RES/47/129

Page 2

Recognizing that it is desirable to enhance the promotional and public
information activities of the United Nations in matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and that both Governments and non-governmental
organizations have an important role to play in this domain,
Emphasizing that non-governmental organizations and religious bodies and
groups at every level have an important role to play in the promotion of
tolerance and the protection of freedom of religion or belief,
Conscious of the importance of education in ensuring tolerance of
religion and belief,
Alarmed that serious instances, including acts of violence, of
intolerance and discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief occur in
many parts of the world, as evidenced in the report of the Special Rapporteur
of the Commission on Human Rights, Mr. Angelo Vidal d'Almeida Ribeiro, l/

Believing that further efforts are therefore required to promote and
protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief and
to eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on
religion or belief;
1.
Reaffirms that freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief
is a human right derived from the inherent dignity of the human person and
guaranteed to all without discrimination;
2.
Urges States to ensure that their constitutional and legal systems
provide adequate guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience, religion and
belief, including the provision of effective remedies where there is
intolerance or discrimination based on religion or belief;
3.
Recognizes that legislation alone is not enough to prevent
violations of human rights, including the right to freedom of religion or
belief;
4.
Urges all States therefore to take all appropriate measures to
combat hatred, intolerance and acts of violence and to encourage
understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief;
5.
Urges States to ensure that, in the course of their official
duties, members of law enforcement bodies, civil servants, educators and other
public officials respect different religions and beliefs and do not
discriminate against persons professing other religions or beliefs;
6.
Calls upon all States to recognize, as provided in the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, the right of all persons to worship or assemble in
connection with a religion or belief, and to establish and maintain places for
these purposes;
7.
Also calls upon all States in accordance with their national
legislation to exert utmost efforts to ensure that religious places and
shrines are fully respected and protected;

2/

E/CN.4/1992/52.

I • •.

A/RES/47/129
Page 3

a.
considers it desirable to enhance the promotional and public
information activities of the United Nations in matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to this
end in the World Public Information Campaign for Human Rights;
9.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to
the dissemination of the text of the Declaration, in all the official
languages of the United Nations, and to take all appropriate measures to make
the text available for use by United Nations information centres and by other
interested bodies;
10.
Encourages the continued efforts on the part of the Special
Rapporteur appointed to examine incidents and governmental actions in all
parts of the world that are incompatible with the provisions of the
Declaration and to rec,:immend remedial measures as appropriate;
11.
Encourages Governments to give serious consideration to inviting
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries so as to enable him to fulfil
his mandate even more effectively;
12.
Recommends that the promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion be given appropriate priority in
the work of the United Nations programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights, with regard to, inter alia, the drafting of basic legal texts in
conformity with international instruments on human rights and taking into
account the provisions of the Declaration;
13.
Encourages the Human Rights Committee to give priority to its
announced intention to prepare a general comment on article 18 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1/ dealing with freedom
of thought, conscience and religion;
14.
Welcomes the efforts of non-governmental organizations to promote
the implementation of the Declaration;

15.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite interested
non-governmental organizations to consider what further role they could
envisage playing in the implementation of the Declaration and in the
dissemination of its text in national and l0cal languages;
16.
Urges all States to consider disseminating the text of the
Declaration in their respective national languages and to facilitate its
dissemination in national and local languages;
17.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its
consideration of measures to implement the Declaration;
18.
Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance at its forty-eighth session under the item entitled
"Human rights questions".
92nd plenary meeting
18 December 1992

1/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
