U,.ited Nations

317tb

GENERAL
rASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Monday, 4 December 1950, at lO.45a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing Meadow, New York

-

1

CONTENTS
Page

f

Draft first international covenant on human rights and measures of implementation: report of the Third Committee (A/l559 and Corr.l) .........• 533

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).

Draft first international covenant on human rights
and measures of implementation: report of the
Third Committee (A/1559 and Corr.l)

acter, since it confiued itself to proclaiming a few human
rights in an extremely general and incomplete form,
without stating the ways and means of implementing
these rights. Yet the effective implementation of human
[Agenda item 63]
rights and fundamental freedoms is vitally important to
.
Mr. Noriega (Mexico), Rapporteur oftke Third - millions of ordinary people.
Committee, presented the report of that Committee and
6. The draft covenant not only contains all the faults
'the accompanying draft resolutions (A/l5S9 and of the Declaration, but it also omits any mention of
Corr.t).
certain rights which are vitally important to :millions
of people, such as the right to work, the right to social
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : Besecurity,
the right to leisure, the right to education and
fore putting the three draft resolutions of the Third
many
other
social, economic and cultural rights which
Committee to the vote, I shall recognize the various
are contained in the Universal Declaration of Human
speakers who wish to explain their votes. I trust that
Rights, although in a proclamatory, unsatisfactory and
speakers will confine themselves to the seven-minute
incomplete
form. As a result of these inadequacies of
time limit. The first speaker on my list is the representhe
draft
covenant,
the United Nations, two years after
tative of the SovietUnion~
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
2, Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re- Rights, is even further from solving the problem of
publics) (translated from Russian) : The delegation of
protecting and ensuring respect for human rights.
the USSR wishes to exphin the motives which will
7. These circumstances make it incumbent upon the
guide it in voting on draft resolution I submitted by the
General
Assembly not to confine itself to making proThird Committee concerning the future work of the
visions
of
an extremely general nature, but to point out
. Commission on Human Rights.
these deficiencies to· the Commission on Human Rights
. 3. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that and to recommend concrete measures for remedying
! the Third Committee's draft does not stress the dethem.
ficiencies of the draft covenant prepared by the Com8. With this object in view, the USSR has submitted
mission on Human Rights at its sixth session. Not only
the necessary amendments [AjlS76 and Corr.l]. My
does it not contain enough concrete provisions which
delegation's
vote on draft. resolution I will depend upon
might be used as a basis for the further elaboration of
the
results
of
the consideration of these amendments.
the covenant, but it inclu<1es a number of incorrect prothe purpose of which is as follows:
posals, which may mislead those who are to draft the
various provisions of the r ''Jvenant.
9. First, to ensure that all citizens, without distinction~
have an opportunity to take part in tbe government of
4. It was particularly necessary to point out those dethe State and therefore to abolish all restrictions, based
ficiencies because the draft covenant on human rights
on property, education, or anytbif'.g else, on the right to
in its present form is an even less consistent and
take part in elections of ca.ndiaates to repr~sentative .
effective document than the Universal Decla..'~aon of
organs, and to afford aU citizens the opportunity of
HItttnan Rights adopted by the General Assembly in
occupying any State or public office;
948 [resolution 217 A (111)].

5. The delegation of the USSR pointed out at the
third session of the General Assembly that. the chief
fault of that Declaration was its f6rmal, legalistic char...

10. Secondly, to ensure the right of every peo~1e and
every nation to national se1£·determination nnc1.' to the
development of their national culture;

SS3
AjPV.311

G0nel'al Assembly-Fifth Se8lion-Pienuy Meetings
------------...
._----------11. Thirdly, to provid~\ that the State should be ciples and provisions of the constitutiolls of socialist
obliged to guarantee toev~ryolle the right to work and
States, such as the Soviet Union and the peoples'
democracies1 where the above-mentioned human rights
to choose his profession, so that conditions may be
created in which the threat of death from hunger or are confirnled by law and ate guaranteed in practic(!
exhausti(ln will be ruled out; .
on the basis of the socialist system of social relations.
12. Fourthly, to ens~re access tu education without It must be borne in mind that such legislation is possible
in the USSR and in the peoples' democracies because
any discrimination whatsoever", and to ensure this by
all
exploitation of man by man has been eliminated in
the provision of free elem.entary education and the orthese
countries and a firm foundation has thus been
gani1.ation of a system of scholarships ~d schools;
established for the universal respect for and implemen13. Fifthly, to ensure the right to rest and leisure by
tation of ~~an rights. The posiu on in capitalist counproviding by law for a reasonable lim.itation of working
tries is different, and that fact has to be taken into
hours and for periodic holidays with pay:
consideration in drafting the covenallt of human rights.
14. Sixthly~ to introduce social security and sodal in- 24. In defining the future work of the Commission
surance for workers and employees at the expense of on Human Rights, the General Assembly cannot, of
the State or at the expense of the employers, in accord- course, ignore the particular economic and social cir. ance with the laws of each country;
cumstttnces of the various States Members of the 0,,15. Seventhly, to take all the necessary ~c:asures to ganization, circumstances which prevent many of them
ensure decent living quarters to every person;
at the present time, from settling in a consistent and
16. Eighthiy, to guarantee the strict observance of satisfactory manner the problem of establishing living
conditions which are really worthy of human beings.
trade union rights and to create conditions in which
The Soviet Unie!? delegation considers, however, that
the unhampered activities of trade union organizations
even so, the Genen\l Assembly can recommend to the
(all beeusured;
.
on Human Rights that it should include
17. Ninthly, to ensure that the rights proclaimed in Commission
in the covenant the aforementioned minimU1l1 rights,
the covenant are not used for purposes hostile to huthe
implementation of which affects millions of people.
manity and,. in particular, for purposes of war propa- .
This
is particularly essential because it is impossible
ganda, for fomentin~ hostility among nations, for incitotherwise
to state seriously that the draft covenant
ing to racial discrittllnation, or for spreading slanderous
guarantees. real, and not imaginary, human rights.
nunours;
25. Hence, if the above-mentioned amendments are
18. Finally, to provide that the activities of any fascist
lrejected and if the proposals rontained in sections C and
or- anti..clemocl""cltic organization must be prohibited by
F are adopted, the dehgation of the USSR will abstain
law, subject tt,l p(ma1ty.
from voting on draft resolution I and will reserve the
19. But while the draft resolution submitted by the right to submit, at the appropriate stage in the further
Third Connnittee (ltnits many of the aforementioned elaboration of the draft covenant, its proposals for the
important provi$Sions, itcontams proposals which can
radical improvement of that document.
serve only to complicate the further elaboration of the
26. Mr. COULSON (United Kingdom) : The United
covenant.
Kingdom delegation feels obliged to vote against draft
20. The delegation of the USSR, therefore, cannot
~esoluti?n I because we consider it both inadequate and
yote for proposals such as that the Commission .of
ImpractIcable.
.
Human Rights should be ;llvited to continue to study
27. We consider it inadequate because the General
the qll~$tion of. establishiag a sp~cial system for the
Assembly has not, in our view, given a satisfactory
fulfilment by federal States of obligations undertaken
answer to the request of the Economic and Social Coununder the covenant. The Soviet Union delegation can
cil
[resolution 303 I (Xl)] to give policy decisions on
only interpret tr..a.t proposal as an attempt to establish
four important matters. One of these questions was the
a pretext for not implementing the pro\<isions of the
general adequacy of the measures ofimplement.ation in
covenant in the future.
draft covenant. Part F of this draft resolution fails
21. We are also unable to agree to the proposal, al- the
to
give
such an answer.
legedly intended to facilitate the implementation of the
covenant" for the establishment of various international 28. We have two further reasons for considering this .
draft resolution b-npracticabIe. One 'is tha,t it instructs
organsJ such as a tonunittee on human rights; such a
measure would constitute interference in the internal the Economic and Social Council to insert artides dealing with economic and social rights. With regard to
aftairsof States and a violation of their sovereignty,
many of these, my delegation has an open mind; but
since the implementation of the provisions of the covenant in every State falls entirely within. the domestie many others we consider cannot possibly be included
jurisdiction of the Stetes signatories to the covenant in this first covenant. The second reason is that we do
and must allow for th~ specific ecOfi-~mic, national and not think that the COlUmission on Human Rights can
do tlte task which the General Assembly is going to
other characteristics of each ~ountry.
ask
it to do within the specified time, without skimping
22.· The 6tlegatio:l of the Soviet Union has therefore
its
work
and so producing a draft which would not be
submitted its proposal for the modification of tlt~se
sections and, should that proposal be rejected, it will worthy of the United Nations.
vote against sections C and F in the form in which 29. On the queation of the colonial application clause
they have been submitted by the Third Committee.
referred to in draft resolution: !I, I wish to explain.
quite simply why we are obliged to vote against. it. It is
23~ The USSR delegation believes that it cannot be
expected that the coyenant should reproduce the prin- the first duty of the United Kingdom Government to

555

317th Meeting--4 December 1950
g1Jide our N on..Self..Governing Territories to respon..
sible self..~overnment within the Commonwealth. This
we are dOIng. We shall not arrest the process of devolv..
iog upon the peoples of our territories the responsibility
for conducting their own affairs. We shall therefore
adhere in the case of the covenant to the normal prac..
tices and procedures which in such matters regulate
the constitutional relationship between the United King..
dom and the territories for whose international relations
we are responsible. That is" to say, we shall consult
them in thIS matter" but not dictate. The process of
consultation will take' time, and the effect of a decision
by the General Assembly to delete a colonial application .
clause front the covenant may be to dela) unduly the
United Kingdom Government's accession to the cove..
nant at'-d the application of the covenant to several territories. 11 that were the result, it would be aconsequenc.e
of the Assembly's decision and not of any action On the
part of the Udted Kingdom Government.
30. Sir Keith OFFICER (Australia) : The Australian
delegation will abstain in the vote on draft resolution I
as a whole for thel'eason that, while we agree with
some parts of it, we are opposed to others. This is due
not only to our inability to agree with particular parts
of the draft resolution but because, more than that, we
feel that the· draft resolution is not sufficiently precise in
its form to be presented 'to the Commission on Human
Rights as an authoritative and binding expression of
opinion from the supreme organ of the United Nations.
I am sure that many delegations share this, view and
believe that the draft resolution is long, repetitive and
unwield)T."
,,'
,

31. Except in one or two respects, it fails to give the
Economic, and Social Council the basic policy decision
which the Council sought. Indeed, the draft resolution
seems to my delegation to go in the opposite direction
and to confide to the Commission the' study of matters
extraneous' to the field of human rights as such, and to
propose the inclusion of rights which will certainly
delay the drafting and final preparation of a covenant.
32. The Commission on Human Rights, is, as we all
know, a ,small body of eighteen experts. Certainly it is
proper that this Assembly should give it general guid..
ance and lay down policy in broad terms, but it seems
to u~ unwise for the General Assembly to go further
than this and to butden the Commission with rigid
directions on det(ail and, extraneous assignments, and
all this at a titn.e when the Commission is nearing the
end of a first, though admittedly limited, achievement.
33. Section, B of ~ the draft resolution requires the
Commission to take into consideration the inclusion in
the covenant of economic, soCial and cultural rights,
and that is a section of which we approve., But then,
again, section E contall\1S an express directive to the
Commission to include such rights in the covenant. The
basis of this latter directive was in essence those proposals which would seem to have been reasonably pro..
vided for und~1" section 1\\. The net result of such de, cisions, as we see it, is that the Commission will be
making no immediate headway in its work.
34. Australia by no means contests the importance of.
the rights whicf1 are not included in the present eighteen
articles, but We do recognize that for lour years now
the Commission has been working on the formulation

.......

of basic civil rights appearing in the existing articles.
Moreover, the Commission-decided last Mayl to complete this limited but basic first covenant and to go
ahe:.d with other instruments relating to such rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural,as were not
yet formulated. The decisions now recommended to the
General Assembly appear to mean that progress is not
contemplated in the short gradual steps by which we
know all real progress is measured, but in one big com...
prehensive and probably very slow stride., This, we
think, will not britlg the results the supporters of the
draft resolution hope to achieve. It must be remembered that the Commission is scheduled to meet for a
session of only five weeks beginning iti April. For these
reasons we shall vote against part E.
35. The Australian delegation finds serious defects
also in the reference in section F to implementation.
We do not think that the ,question of individual and
group petitions was fully and clearly 'Considered", or
that the whole question of implementation received the
careful treatment it merited. Accordingly, we shall
vote against section F as it now stands.
,
36. Another specific objection we have to the draft
resolution is in respect of section D, where there is
a directive to the Commission to study the whole questionof self-determination, We shall abstain on this
clause because we consider that self-determination is
more in the nature, of a group political right, not the
sort of individual right with which the Commission is
competent to deal. .
'
.
3i'. We shall vote for sections G and H, which con..
ce1.'t1 procedural1l1atters.
38~ Finally, my delegation is concerned about the
omission of a colonial app1ic~tion clause, for this means
that no real account has been taken of the constitutional
dmk:ulties which will face certain countries in the application of the covenant to the territories for which
they are' responsible. Therefore' we shall vote against
draft resolution II.
'
39. As to draft resolution III, we shall ask that it
should be voted upon in two parts, because we wish the
words "and interested organizations," in the last
paragraph, to be omitted., We beli~ve that such report...
ing is for governments ,and, not for organizations. We
shall vote against that par~graph as it stands, and if it is
included we shall abstain on the vote on draft resolution
III asa whole. If those words are omitted, we shall vote '
in favour of draft resolution
40. Although obliged to vote against parts of the text
before us and to abstailt"on draft resolution I as a whole
so long as the sections we, object to remain in it, the
Australian' Government will continue to work to find
common ground with other delegations, at, the next
session, so that the long efforts of the United Nauons
to draft and approve its first covenant on human rights
"
will be successful.
41. Mr. NORIEGA (Mexico) (translated from
Spanish) : I explained in the Third Committee? on be...
half of my delegation, why J had voted in 'favour of

rn.

1 See Official Records of the Economic and Soeial CDUne",
Fifth Year3 Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 5.
' ,

2 For the discussion on this subJect in the Third Connnittee,.
see Official Records of the General Assembl" Fifth Session, ,
Third Committee, 287th to 316th and 318th meetings•

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

------,----------

draft resolution I, which is included in the Committee's

re~rt, in spite of the fact that it contained provisions

wtth which I did not agree.

42. I explained that, after giving full consideration to
the draft resolution, the Mexican delegation had come
to the conclusion that its positive aspects outweighed
the negative ones, with regard to which it wished to
make reservations. On that condition, Mexico voted
in favour of the draft resolution, and will do the same
when the final vote is taken at this meeting.
43. However, I should like to refer particularly to section C of draft resolution I, in which tb~ Economic
and Social Council is called upon to request the Commission on Human Rights to study an article on federal
States and to prepare for the consideration of the General Assembly, at its sixth session, recommendations
whose purpose will be to secure the maximum extension of the covenant to the constituent units of federal States and to meet the constitutional problems of
federal States.
44. My delegation maintains exactly the same attitude as regards this text as it did du~ng the discussion
in the Third Committee.
45. The so-called federal clause has all the characteristics of a reservation and of an escape cL~use. We
know that such a clause is included in the macrJner)
for implementation of the recent conventions of the
International Labour Organisation. Its negative effects will be observed when it comes to carrying out
the instruments which that ~~cy establishes.
46. It was a tenet of the International Labour Organisation, before its Constit\l~~ion was revised, that
there should be no reservatil ilS in the conventions
which it established.
47. Why was that? It was because conventions relating to scdal matters could not be subject to reservatiCiks, since such reservations provided loopholes which
permitted differences to subsist in the various coun...
tries of the world with regard to the treatment of workers, standards of living, wage scales, etc., in other
words~ in all matters connected with labour conditions.
The task of fhe Internationid Labour Organisation is
to bring about conditions for workers which are as uniform as possible throughout the world, in order to
check the kind of competition whi~h is injurious to the
very life of the worker; hence the reservations to the
conventions established by that agency were not accepted prior to the revision of its Constitution.
48. , It was at the time when the Constitution of the
International Labour Organisation was revised that
the so-called federal clause made its first appearance
on the international scene. The result will be that the
conventions of the International labour Organisation
will not be uniformly implemented; they will be implemented partially in some States and in their entirety
in others, according to the views or convenience of a
particular gover11l11ent and to the extent that that
government deems it advisable. This, of course, entirely destroys the operative force of a convention.
49. I have referred in detail to the repercussions of
the federal clause on the implementation of conventions regarding labour because the covenant on human
rights must also include economic and social rights,

and it may be expected that the implementation of those
economic and social rights, should they be included,
will suffer in the same way if there is a federal clause.
50. Technically, the inclusion of a federal clause in
the covenant on human rights would result in inequality
between, on the one hand, non-federal States and
federal States which automatically incorporate the
provisions of a covenant in their national legislation
and, on the other hand, those federal States which use
the federal clause as a pretext for not implementing
the covenant in its entirety thfoughout their territories.
51. I should like, therefore, to point out to those who
hope that the covenant will be universally implemented that, if the federal clause is included, there will
be many States whichg in view of the privileged position of federal States which take advantage of the
federal clause, will think twice before signing, ratifying or acceding to such a document.
52. You all know that the so-called colonial clause
has been diminated from the covenant. I do not intend
to recapitulate here the noble and humane reasons on
which this decision of the Third Committee was based.
However, if a comparative study is made of the two
clauses, the federal and the colonial, it will be seen that
their character and purpose are identical, since in
both cases it is left to the federal State or to the
mother country to decide whether or not to make a
convention applicable to any part of the territories
under its jurisdiction and responsibility.
53. The difficulty which the Commission on Human
Rights encounters in studying this matter and in arriving at a solution agreeable to all who ~Lre in favour
of the federal clause has already been proved by two
successive failures to draw up an agreed text. I referred, in the discussion in the Third Committee, to
the difficulty experienced by the Third and Sixth Com
mittees, at the preceding session of the General Assembly, in approving a federal clause; in point of fact,
no text could be approved a year ago.
54. This difficulty in which the Co~mission on
Human Rights is going to find itself will be ,even
greater, given the scope of draft resolution II
[A/1559 and CO". 1], for under this draft resolution,
which refers to the elimination of the colonial clause,
federal States which are responsible for Non-Self-Governing Territories will automatically be deprived of the
benefits of a federal clause. The text of draft resolution
II runs as follows: "The provisions of the present
Covenant shall e.xtend to or be applicable equally to a
signatory metropolitan State and to all the territories,
be they non-seU-governing, trust, or colonial territories,
which are being administered or governed by such
metropolitan State/' This makes it perfectly clear that
federal States which are responsible for Non-Self-Gov..
erning Territories or Trust Territories will not be able
to avail themselves of the federal clause.
55. I do not know how th~ Commission on Human
Rights can' produce a text ~,,·hich would be in direct
cuntradiction with the text I have just read.
56. Mr. ALTMAN (Poland) (translated from
French) : I should like to explain my delegation's vote
on draft resolution I and on the amendments submitted
by the USSR delegation [A/1576 and Corr.1].
M

311th Meeting--4 December 1950
57. The Third Committee's task was to determine
the po1icy~ and principles to be followed by the Commission on Human Rights in preparing the definitive draft
covenant. It must be admItted that, in many respects,
the Third Committee has not accomplished that task.
58. Although the Committee points out, in sub-paragraph (a) of section B of draft resolution I, Uthat the
list of rights in the first eighteen articles of the draft
covenant on hu.."'an rights does not include some of the
most ele..tnentary. rights,'1 and "that the present wording of some of the first eighteen articles of the draft
covenant should be improved in order to protect more
effectively the rights to which they refer", that same
Committee failed in its duty to indicate clearly to the
Commission on Human Rights what were the most elementary rights that should be included in the revised
draft covenant and in what respect the present wording
should be improved.
59. The ~t>olish delegation is of the opinion that the
rights included in the first eighteen articles of the draft
covenant should be supplemented by the inclusion of
such very elementary rights as the right of every citizen
to take part in the government of the State, the opportunity to elect candidates and to stand for election
to all government bodies, and the opportunity to hold
any State or public office. Without such very elementary rights there is no effective guarantee of enjoyment of the other rights included in the draft
covenant.
60. The right of every people and every nation to
self-determination on a national scale, and· the right
of national minorities to use their mother tongue and
have their own educational institutions and national cultures, are equally elementary.
61. \Ve are of the opinion that the present wording
of the first eighteen articles should be changed so that,
while guaranteeing to every person his right to freedom of expression, assembly, public demonstration,
parading, etc., there would be a clear statement that
these rights could not be used for war propaganda or
to incite racial discrimination or hatred among peoples,
and that the propagation. of fascist ideas in any manner would be prohibited by law.
62. Only if the question is dealt with in this way will
there be conformity with the spirit and purposes of the
Charter and with the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights approved by the General
Assembly on 10 December 1948 [tresolution 217 A
(Ill)].
63. The Third Committee decided to include economic, social and cultural rights in the covenant. That
goes on the credit side of the Committee's work. On
the other hand, the Committee refused to give precise
instructions to the Commission on Human Rights as
to the formulation of the elementary rights in the fields'
just mentioned. Vve believe that this is a very serious
shortcoming in section E of draft resolution I submitted
by the Third Committee to the General Assembly, and
we believe that this shortcoming must be remedied by
amplifying this section. It must deal with the right
to work, the free choice of employment, the right to rest
and leisure, . the right to housing' wcrthy of a human
being, the right to social security, trade union rights,

551

the right to education, and the duty of the State toguarantee the enjoyment of all these rights.
64. The most defective and, as it were, most unacceptable part of draft resolution I is section F. In this
section, the Committee is supposed to give a reply to
question whether the measures of implementation' in
articles .19 to 41 of the draft covenant are adequate.
The Committee has refrained from glving a reply,
although, according to many of its members, the measures are not adequate. The Polish delegation believes
that articles 19 to 41 of the draft covenant should be
deleted for the following reasons:
65. First, to retain them would result in an attempt
to interfere in the internal affairs of States, which would
be tantamount to a violation of their sovereignty;
66. Secondly, the implementation of the provisions of
the covenant must be the exclusive responsibility of the
governments concerned;
67. Thirdly, the setting up of the human rights committee discussed in the draft covenant would not
only 110t strengthen the covenant but, on thecontrary~
would weaken it.
68. With respect to the implementation of the covenant, we demand direct responsibility on the part of
States rather than an indirect procedure which would
in fact hinder the application of the compulsory provisions of the covenant.
69. In our opinion, the General Assembly must correct the shortcomings of draft resolution 1. It can do so
by accepting the amendments submitted by the USSR
delegation. The Polish delegation will vote in favour
of those amendments. If they are not adopted, it will
abstain from voting on draft resolution I asa whole.
70. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The delegation
of the Ukrainian SSR will explain how it propos.es to
vote on the draft resolution.
71. The question of the draft covenant on human
rights and measures for its implementation was placed
on the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly because the'. Commission on Human Rights~
which had been drafting the covenant, had reached an
impasse. The Economic and Social Council accordingly
submitted a number of questions to the Gen~ral Assembly, the answers to which were to guide the Com.
mission in its future work.
72. A detailed examination of the draft resolutionsulr
mitted by the Third Committee shows that, so far fromgiving dear and precise instructions to the Commission, the draft contains a number of basically wrong
provisions which, if adopted by the General Assembly.
could misdirect the endeavours of the Commission in
preparing the covenant.
73. The Third Committee's draft resolution, for. instance, contains no indication that the first eitlhteen
articles of the covenant drafted by the CommiSSIon on
Human Rights are unsatisfactory both as regards the
enumeration of the rights to be included in the covenant and as regards the effective .guarantee of the
rights referred to in those articles. As we ·know, the
first eighteen articles of' the covenant contain no
reference to most important human rights-the right to
employment, recreation, social insurance, education,

.

l

I

·1

1

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
national self-determination and other rights in the
political, economic, social and cultural fields. Obviously,
unless those rights are included in the covenant, unless governments are bound in practice to guarantee
the enjoyment of rights and freedoms to their citizens,
the covenant will always remain a dead letter, having no
binding force for anyone. But the Third Committee's
draft resolution contains no instructions to the Commission to include these provisions in the draft covenant on human rights.
74. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will therefore support the amendments proposed by the Soviet
Union delegation to sections Band E of the draft
resolution; those amendments contain a detailed list of
the rights to be included in the covenant. My delegation regards those amendments as most important if
the Commission on Human Rights is to succeed in
drafting a covenant which will serve the purpose for
which it is intended.
75. In the opinion of the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR, the recommendations contained in sections G and
F of the Third Committee's draft resolution are directly contrary to the United Nations Charter and to
the ~enerally recognized princi~les of intemationallaw.
Section e, for example, prOVIdes for the special application of the provisions of the covenant to the constituent units of federal States. The recommendations
in that section are designed to deprive part of the
population of federal States of the possibility of enjoyIng the rights embodied in the covenant and to place
that part of the population at a disadvantage.
76. It is only just that a federal State signatory to the
covenant should extend the provisions of that document, without any exceptions or restrictions, to all
1}arts of the federation. That is the proposal made in
the USSR amendment to section C, for which the
delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will vote. If that
amendment is rejected, it will vote against section C.
77. With regard to se don F of the draft resolution
of the Third Committee, which contains a recommendation concerning the so-called implementation of
the provisions of the covenant, the delegation of the
Ukrainian SSR considers that this recommendation
is.based on an erroneous concept of the methods and
procedures to be used in implementing the provisions
of the covenant "and that it is therefore mistaken. In
our opinion, the implementation of the provisions of the
covenant ia a matter which is entirely within the domestic juri"dic':~bt.. uf every State party to the covenant.
That !)rl~f'}ple should, as the USSR amendment proposes, .be expressed in the preamble to the draft resolution of the Third Committee.
78. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR supports the
proposal of the Soviet Union that articles 19 to 41
should be deleted from the covenant drafted by the
Commission on Human Rights on the ground that they
have no connexion with measures for the implementation of the provisions of the covenant and aim at permitting interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign
States.
79. In the opinion of the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR, the Commission on Human Rights can successfully carry out its task of preparing a covenant on
human rights only if the General Assembly adopts a

resolution embodying the USSR amendments, which
contain clear and precise instructi.ons for the drafti~g
of the covenant. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
will therefore vote for the Soviet Union amendments
and, if those amendments are not adopted by the Gen..
eral Assembly, it will abstain from voting on the draft
resolution submitted by the Third Committee.
80. Mr. DE LACHARRIERE (France) (wan$lated
from French): As I may speak for only a limited time,
1 shall confine the explanatIons of mJ~ delegation to the
first-a.nd most important-of th.e draft resobtions re..
ferred to us by the Third Committee.
81. This lengthy draft most certainly contains a number of quite acceptable things in favour of which my
delegation would be prepared to vote.

I

82. Nevertheless, taken as a whole, the text has some
serious defects. In the first piace, it is wordy and vague
in form, and contains a number of repetitions, loosely
connected proposals and p<?orly draftea phrases; some
of the statements made in it are <)uite superfluous and;
at times, the text is sheer verbIage. But even more
serious than the superfluous statements are the contradictions to be found in the text before us.
83. Inelegance of style is accompanied by incoherence
of thought. The most flagrant example of this is to be
found in the contradiction between section B and sec..
tion E. In the former, the problem of economic and
social rights is resolved in one way, in the latter, in
another. Section B provides that the views on the
subject contained in the Yugoslav and Soviet Union
proposals should be transmitted to the Commission for
discussion and decision; that is one solution. Yet sec..
tion E provides for the adoption in full of the Yugoslav
proposal; that is another solution, which is clearly in
contradiction with the first.
84. Such incoherence naturally weakens the draft resolution. At the same time, the draft includes provisions
which are dangerous because they are the outcome of
over-ambition. Immediately, at a single stroke of the
pen, all rights-economic, social, cultural-are to .be
included in the first draft covenant, as though the sub..
ject were not vast and complex, and as thou~h it were
not obvious that to do so makes it almost Impossible
for the Commission on Human Rights to carry out its
task if, that is, it is expected to do serious work.
There is no right with which the Commission is not
called upon to deal, even the right of peoples to selfdetermination, although we all know that that right
involves an extremely broad political principle already
covered by other provisions, by those of the Charter
itself which define the powers of the various organs
of the United Nations, Including the Security Council
and the Trusteeship Council.
85. On the one hand, the covenant is overloaded in
this most unwise fashion; on the other hand, we are
unpleasantly surprised to find that, with resr3,rd to im..
plementation, the draft resolution is very - weak--extremely weak-empty and, indeed, practically useless.
86. All the various proposals concerning implemen..
tation made in the Third Committee are referrea to the
Commission on Human Rights pen-men, despit~ their
divergent nature, despite the fact that they have not
been discussed, despite the fact that the conflicting
views on" this subject have not been reconciled-in

~

-S17th Meeting-4 December 1950

-other words, despite the fact that one of the principal

questions which the Economic and Social Council put
to the General Assembly on this essential point has
been left unanswered.
87. In addition, these proposals concerning implementation are referred to the Commission together with
a statement which appears to indicate that they refer
only to petitions, whether individual or collective, to
the exclusion of complaints submitted by States themselves. Yet we know that it would seem that, for the
time being at least, measures of implementation can
be taken only in respect of complaints submitted by
States. Thus there is practically no provision for implementation.
88. This profusion of clauses on the one hand, and the
extreme weak-ness of the covenant-not to say its complete lack of any provisions on implementation-on
the other hand, offer a really very unfortunate contrast. That, in the opinion of my delegation, is the most
serious defect of this draft resolution, that is what
arouses our most serious objection to it.
89. The covenant must not be another version of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Either it is
nothing at all or it is a legal instrument embodying
specific and agreed obli~tions. The commitments entered into should be weighed with care. It is nec~s­
sary to go forward, even if the rate of progress is slow,
but is is also necessary to take into account the legal
consequences of implementing such commitments;
otherwise the covenant will be meaningless.
90. No, I am wrong; it could have a meaning if the
only purpose of having such a covenant were to secure
some political and propaganda advantage by means of
oftwrepeated democratic slogans. It could have a meaning if the ohly purpose were to use a phraseology
savouring of progress as a cloak for continuing the
old errors d the policy of the reason of State. The
vanity of a resolution such as this would, perhaps,
be justified if it simply met the intentions of governments which wished to pay a harmless tribute to the
human rights proclaimed in the Charter, a verbal
tribute which could be very strong but which safeguarded the traditional policy of not allowi~g individuals' access to the international community. I cannot believe that that would be the intention of any
delegation. Yet that is practically the only construction that can be placed on the empty and controversial draft resolution now before us. The French
delegation is therefore unable to accept the proposed
text.
91. France, from the very beginning, has given its
ardent and purposeful support to the building up of
the great international edifice of human rights; it has
pursued that task with a conviction which I would
almost call personal and which goes back to the
Declaration on the Rights of Man, which it drew up in
1789, not for French nationals alone but for the citizens of the whole world; it desires that the principles
embodied in the Charter should really be put mto practice. It is for all these reasons that the French delegation will not vote in favour of the draft resolution now
before us.
92. Mr. CASSIMATIS (Greece) (tr:ansluted from
French): In voting on the three draft resolutions sub-

mitted by the Third Committee, and on the amend..
ment submitted by the USSR delegation, we shall be
guided by our !conscience.
93. That will permit us to vote for draft resolution III
without any hesitation. The wording of draft resolution
Il, however, is such that we are compelled to abstain
from voting on it. Although it directly expresses an
ideal which we cherish, the necessary measures have
unfortunately: not yet been taken to ensure its effective
application. Without them, the resolution would be
,
purely academic.
94. Draft resolution I, which deals with the provisional text of the draft international covenant on
human rights and the future work of the Commission
on Human Rights, has given rise to serious problems.
The Committee's long and arduous discussions have
shown that there are two points of view on the
question.
.
95. The first point of view takes two essential factors
into account.
96. In the first place, as the representative of France
has just pointed out, it is now a question of dr~
a legally binding covenant and not justa declaration
with psychological and moral significance. A declaration of this kind has already been adopted ,and the
world is about to celebrate its second anniversary to
the noise of murderous guns. The. purpose of the covenant we areca1led upon to draft shoUld be to implement the rights already proclaimed. It must accordingly
be drafted with all the care due a universal covenant
which is intended to be carried out, and must not be
confined to the enunciation of simple precepts, which,
as everyone knows in advance, cannot be put into
practice ;n certain countries; those countries, I ani
proud to say, do not include my own. .
97. Secondly, this point of view recognizes the need
to take into account the evolution of moral and political
ideas on the subject of human rights. Much blood has
been shed since the French Revolution proclaimed the
rights of man and the citizen, while leaving their implementation dependent on the caprice of national law.
The conscience of the peoples now demands interna... i~ed righ.t5, a
tional protection of universally recogn
protection not dependent on the good will of govern...
ments. Without that protection, free men would be left
to lament the futility of their sacrifices. Limited rights,
enjoyed by as many people as possible, but rights which
are real and are really observed-that is what an
honest, sincere and realistic conscience demands.
98. But there is also another point tJf view. Those
who hold it take advantage of this question-as of so
many others - to make propaganda; to advocate the
widest possible - but entirely theoretical- extension
of human rights, and to give the appropriate commission a task which it cannot possibly carry out. At the
same time, they reserve the sovereign rIght of every
State to leave the most elementaty human rights on
paper without seeing that they are observed - elementary rights such as the. right to choose freely
among different political parties or the right to the
free choice of employment.
99. We regard the clause proposed in the USSR
amendment, under which the implementation of the
provi~ions of the international covenant on human

General Alsembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
rights would be a matter for governments, as a nega..
tion of those rights and as the most glaring manifesta'tion of a reactionary and anachronistic point of view.
100. This second point of view opens the door wide
to demagogy; unfortunately it has had the support of
men of good will, who have consented to embark on
the path of unreality. Draft resolution I is the result.
101. We must shoulder our responsibilities in the face
of these facts. At the height of an international crisis
on the outcome of which perhaps the peace of the
world and certainly the fate of the United Nations
depends, Greece, realizing thoat it is its duty not to let
itself be influenced by danger or demagogy, cannot
associate itself with a resolution which appears to mark
an advance but in fact merely postpones the day when
teal human rights are effectively and universa.lly protected. My delegation will abstain from voting on draft
resolution I as a whole because it will !lot bow to the
will of those who, so far from serving human rights,
wish to make use of them for· propaganda purposes.
102. If, however, the draft rlesolution is voted on in
parts, we shall vote for certain clauses for which we
voted before in the Third Coml~ittee.
103. In any event, Greece will do its utmost to remove
the obstacles which draft resolution I puts in the way
of the effective protection of human rights; it will do
its utmost to promote the universal application of those
rights and to ensure their protection. That is and always
has been our ideal.
104. Mr. HOFFMEISTER (Czechoslovakia): The
Czechoslovak delegation voted hI the Third Committee
and will vote in the Assembly {or draft resolution 11,
on the territorial application of the internationai covenant on human rights. This draft contain~ an Utiequivocal directive to the Commission on Human
Rights and, in this way, corresponds to the demands
.
for basic policy decisions.
105. Further, the Czechoslovak delegation Will cast
its vote in favour of draft resolution Ill, which refers
to Human Rights Day.
106. On the other hand, it has been extremely difficult for our delegation to decide how to divide its vote
among the constructive and clear provisions contained
in .the draft international covenant on human rights
and the less clear and certain unacceptable formulations. Sometimes we had the impression that the
statements made in the Committee were influenced by
the political situation and the news from the battle
front. But this covenant is not being tlraft~G lor U'::1'l at
this very hour, nor for the salvation Cl the past; Ll)is
international covenant should be ahead of time, at least
aheadot our time. And, in that, we mety find the kernel
of misunderstanding as to the concept of the draft before us, which has resulted in rather regrl~ttable shortcomings.
107. The attempt to include a federal ,,~la-use has
aroused much suspicion, ani:: we have noted the stubborn struggle of the United States delegation to have it
included in the draft covenant. We could not help but
hear, in the interventions of the United States del1egation. a certain accent and a vague hope of evasion of the
provisions prohibiting discrimination. All of us being
equal, great or small, we cannot act :~. 'Jt the introduction

of a preferential system for federal States claiming
equal sovereignty but only a conditional responsibility.
108. The most inadequate part of draft resolution I,.
a draft which concerns, inter alia, measures of implementation of the covenant on human rights, is precisely
the entire part dealing with implementation. A covenant on human rights must necessarily invite States tOo
provide for the inclusion, in their constitutions or in
their national or local legislations, of provisions con..
tained and d.efined in the covenant. I think the majority
in the Assembly agrees with my delegation on this.
point. Yet articles 19 to 41 are quite inadequate, since
the implementation of the provisions of the covenant
are regarded in those articles solely from one incH..
vidualistic point of view; they are concerned only with
questions of procedure, omitting this primary and essential condition for the effectiveness of the measures
in .question. The provisions on implementation should
be binding and should force the States to act in accordance with the obligations they have undertaken
by the very act of ratifying the covenant by adapting
their legislations to include all the rights of individuals.
listed in the covenant.
109. I do not wish to pile up arguments for this clearand fil'1u attitude, which any State with a clear con
science in regard to human rights can take, because we
think it is the simplest, most effective and most logical
way of implementing an international covenant.
110. The often quoted authority on international law,
Professor Lauterpacht, states in chapter XVI of his.
book International Law and Human Rights:
"The preoccupation with the enforcement of the
Bill of Rights ought not to conceal the fact that the
most. effective way of giving reality to it is through
the normal activity of national courts and other organs applying the law of the land."
111. For these reasons, the Czechoslovak delegation
finds that the proposal of the delegation of the Soviet
Union [A/1576 and Corr. 1] for the deletion of articles 19 to 41 from the draft international covenant on
human rights, since their inclusion would constitute an
2ttempt at intervention in the domestic affairs of States
and would encroach on their sovereignty, is the best
solution of this problem, which ('~n be settled by the
mere fact of ratification of the covenant by a signatory
State and by the incorporation of the provisions of the
covenant in the legislation of that State.
112. The Czechoslovak delegat~oll, therefore, will support the amendments proTJosed by the USSR delega..
tion. Should those amendments not be accepted, the
Czechoslovak delegation feels that it will not be in a
position to vote for draft resolution I as a whole, and
will abstain from voting.
.
113. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (translated from
French): At first sight the draft resolution submitted
to us by the Third Committee seems progressive, for
it invites the Commission on Human Rights to go for"
ward with its work. My delegation, and all those who
have closely followed the progress of the Commission's
work are aware, however, that this draft is an-obstacle
to the advancement of work on human rights ;,md is,.
indeed, a step backwards.
114. The question of the proclamation and observ"
ance of human rights has a long history in the United
ft

317tb Meeting-4 December 1950
Nations and its various organs. Like the world, it be-

~ in a nebula. That nebula was a vague and general

iaea of a single text which would include everything
concerning human rights. After the Commission on
Human Rights had set to work and faced the facts and
the difficulties, some clear ideas began to take shape
in the nebula.
115. The first clear idea which emerged from the
Commission's proceedings was that there should not be
a single document containing everything relating to
human rights, but several documents. That gave rise
to the idea of a separate, independent declaration of
human rights and a separate, independent. covenant on
bum~.n rights. ,
116. When it had completed the first document-the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights-the Commission hegan work on the international covenant on
11uman rights. Facing the real issues and exatnining
them carefully, we again found that the covenant, too,
was nebulous. At first, it was to have included all the
rights stipulated in the Dec1aratioltl, regardless of the
special circumstances,. conditions or characteristics
~istinguis~ing a covenan~ from a declaration. Little by
little a number of clear Ideas have emerged out of the
nebulous idea of an allQembracing covenant.
117. The first is that it is impossible to include in the
covenant, immediately and simultaneously, all the rights
enunciated in t.lte Declaration. The second is that it is
necessary to take into account the specific character
of the covenant, which distinguishes it in nature and in
scope fro111 the Declaration. The third is that there must
be several covenants and documents, each concerned
with a particular category of rights. The fourth is that
the first task must be to draft the articles or rights
which are the easiest to formulate and the most likely
to be accepted immediately by the international com..
munity, the rights which require the least contribution
from other. United Nations organs and the specialized
agencies; Acc.ordingly the Commission on Human
Rights envisaged a first covenant devoted to personal
rights.
118. The Third Committee's decision thus amounts
to requesting the Commission on Human Rights to
turn back to the nebulous, the confused and the vague,
in other words, to something which can be neither
acmeved. nor implemented. What is general can have no
~!ty unless it is reduced to its separate" specific and
dlsttnct component parts.
119. Draft resolution I submitted by the Third Committee invites the Commission on Human Rights to disregard its own experience and all the difficulties it encountered during its practical study of the question of
the covenant on human rights, to forget the special nature of the .covenant-an international contract to be
signed voluntarily by nations-and to forget that economic, social and cultural rights differ from personal
~nd civil rights in the sense that their implementation
Implies the existence of economic, political and social
conditions which do not depend merely on the will.of
authorities or governments. The draft resolution asks
Us to forget realities and return to the first vague and
nebulous generalizations.
120. This tendency, which does· not take sufficient
account of the need for a covenant signed by the largest

1Ih,.~.

561

possible number of States and implemented by them;
appears in its most extreme form in the amendments
submitted today by the USSR delegation. But for that
delegation that is a normal and logical attitude. After
calling for the deletion of provisions on implementation,
after saying that the resP.oflsibility for. seeing. that the
provisions on human rights are observed should not
rest with the United Nations, and after .setting aside
the means of supervising the observance of those rights,
it is easy to pose as the champion of human rights
throughout the world and to call for the inclusion in
the covenant of every conceivable right. But if anyone honestly and sincerely desires to sign a covenant,
he will not oppose a covenant which guarantees even
a single right; if at least that one right were observed
in the world, that would be a step forward.
121. In the circumstances, my delegation has no other
choice than between the following alternatives: either
that the Commission on Human Rights should be reques~ed to draft the first eighteen articles and then leave
them aside and start work on the otherartic1es; or that
the Commission should .be requested to complete the
first eighteen articles and transmit them to us for adoption and presentation to States for signature, and then
immediately start work on the other articles.
122. As my delegation is anxious that the United
Nations should make progress in its study of human
rights, it can only vote in favour of the second alternative, that is, not to shelve the first eighteen articles and
wait indefinitely-perhaps until the othet's are drafted
-but to refer them immediately to the General As...
sembly so that we may have a first covenant straightaway and others later, Instead of trying to include every..
thing in a single covenant which could never be
concluded.'
.
123, Having to choose between these twoaltematives,
my delegation will vote in favour of preparing, first, a
covenant devoted to personal rights, and then of start, ing, immediately and without delay, on the drafting of
covenants concerning the other human rights, until one
day we have the full list of those rights, which would
then be safeguarded in an effective and practical
manner.
124. Therefore we shall at least abstain from voting
on the decisions taken by the Third Committee, and
shall vote against the amendments proposed by the
Soviet Union, because both the Third Committee's pro..
posals and the USSR amendments would retard the
work done by the Commission on· Human Rights in
this field, and prejudice the progress already made.
125. Mr. GARCIA BAUER (Guatemala) (translated from Spanish) : '1Nhen the draft resolution on the
covenant on human rights submitted by the Third Com..
mittee is put to the vote as a whole, my delegation will
support it. I should like, however, to make a few comments on certain paragraphs of that draft.
126. My delegation has given serious consideration to
section C,·concerning a federal clause•. Such a clause is
clearly contrary to traditional legal doctrine. But my
delegation has also carefuUyexamined the argumenta
raised by some delegations, and chiefly by the United
States delegation, concerning the serious difficulties
of implementing a covenant in all the States of a
federation.

General As,.embly-Fifth Se.sion-Plenary Meetings
127. On the other hand, my delegati(on has watc;hed
with sympathetic interest the efforts of the Urdted
States Federal Government to n1ake human rights pre·
vail throughout i+~ territory. That being so, my delegation cannot but give serious attention to this problem
of the federal clause.
,
128. \'"~ shall'therefore support section C, which calls
upon, the Commission on Human Rights to study the
question of the federal clause. '
129. As regards section E, which refers to the inclusion of economic, social and cultural rights in the
first cO'venant on human rights, we have grave doubts
as to the desirability of induding those rights in the
covenant at this stage. The economic, social and cultural rights listed in the USSR amendment [A/1S76
and Corr. 1] and in the Universal Declaration 0:£ Human Rights, are included in the Constitution f)f my
country, in force since 1945; accordingly we should
have no objection to their inclusion, in the first covenant
on human rights. However, our concern is lest we
jeopardize the whole question of the international protection of, h~an rights by going too far at' this stage.
130. Consequently my delegation does not wish to
commit itself at present;' it will reserve its position
pending a final decision of the Guatemalan Government
on this point. It will abstain from voting on that section of the draft resolution at this meeting, and, as a
member of the Commission on Human Rights, it will
announce its position in the matter when the question
is discussed in the Commission.
131~ My delegation ,attaches the greatest importance
to sectionFt on the implementation of human rights;
it would have liked the Assembly to give a more definite
reply to the question of the Commission on Human
Rights ,concerning that point. Nevertheless, despite the
indefinite character of the reply and the form in which
it is made, my'delfegation is prepared to support that
section. We know that the Commission on Human
Rights will examine the General Assembly's recommendations with its customary care, and will take the
most appropriate dedsions.
132. Draft resolution II concerns the so-called colonial
clause; ,the Guatemalan delegation will support that
draft. We hav~ a1ways opposed the colonial clause.
We do not s~e any reason why the provisions of the
c(wenant shol:tld not be applicable to all States, whether
self-governing or not; States which have difficulties in
ratifying th~ covenant on behalf of non-self-governing
territories which they administer have other ways of
achieving the desired result, without there being any
need for a colonial clause. The Guatemalan delegation
took the same attitude with regard to that clause when
other documents were being discussed.
133. My delegation, as it explained in the Third Committee, strongly supports draft resolution HI, in which
all States and interested organizations are invited to
adopt 10 December of each year as "Human Rights
Day" and observe that day to, celebrate the proclamation of the 'Universal Declaration of Human Rights by
the General Assembly on 10 December 1948.
134. We shall vote against the USSR amendment
[A/157& and Corr. 1] calling for the insertion, between
the third and fcurth recitals in draft resolution I, of a
recital to the effect that the implementation of the pro..

visions of the covenant on human rights falls exclusively
within the domestic jurisdiction of States. We do not
consider that in the present state of progress in international law, when the United Nations Charter refers no less than seven times to human rights, when it
includes such definite provisions on them, when efforts
are being made on every side to ensure the observance
of human rights and their universal recognition, we do
not feel that we can now take a step backwards and
say that the question of human rights is a matter solely
of domestic jurisdiction.
135. Those were, the comments I wished to make;
as I said in the beginning, when the General Assembly
comes to voting on the Third Committee's proposal as a
whole, the delegation of Guatemala will support it.
136. Mr. KUSQV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Re·
public (translated from Russian) : The delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR deems it essential to explain how it
will vote on draft resolution I.
137. This draft resolution is unsatisfactory. It does
not bring out the inadequacies of the first eighteen ai."~
tides of the draft covenant and does not give the Commission on Human Rights proper or specific instructions as to what it should do in order to eliminate the
basic defects of the draft covenant.
138. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSRconsiders the main defect of the draft covenant to be t~Lt
it does not include many extremely important pro..
visions -guaranteeing human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It contains, for instance, no mention of the
right to employment, to education, to leisure, to social
security and to housing fit for human beings. It contains no provisions on the trade union rights of citizens
and makes no mention of equal rights for women in all
aspects of the political, economic, social and cultural
life of nations. We find no mention, either, of democratic principles in the government of States. There is
no artIcle in the draft covenant on the right of peoples
and nations to self-determination; but there can be no
hope for the observance of any other human rights
and freedoms unless peoples and nations are given an
opportunity of deciding their own fate.
139. The drafting of the first eighteen articles of the
covenant is inadequate, and does not fully ensure the
rights to which those articles relate. Those articles pro·
claim rights and freedoms, but do not guarantee their
implementation. The draft covenant not only constitutes
no advance in extending fundamental rights and free·
doms to peoples; it is a step backwards. It is much
weaker than the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights which, as we know, is seriously defective.
140. Thel General Assembly is thus confronted with
the serio'l1s problem of giving the Commission on
Human R§ghts specific and clear 'instructions enabling
it to draft. a ccvenant which will meet the needs and
aspirations o~ lmndreds of millions of working people.
141. Does the draft resolution approved by the Third
Committee,' which is now before us, give the Commission such instructions? As we have already stated, this
draft resolution not only fails to give the necessrt:..y
instructions; but it also contains certain incorrect pro..
posals which, if approved by the Gener.al Assembly,
are liable to give a wrong direction to the drafting of
many provisions of the covenant.
.,'~

317th Meeting-4 December 1950
142. Thus section C of the draft resolution provides
for the inclusion in the covenant of a special article
on the application of the covenant in federal States.
Clearly, the inclusion of such a provision in the covenant could be used to evade discharge of the delegations assumed under the covenant. Section E does not
adequately indicate what specific ect:momic, social and
cultural rights should be included in the covenant. Section F, which recommends the inclusion in the covenant of an article on its implementation, is directly
contrary to the United Nations Charter. The problem
of the implementation of the covenant, which is a matter within the domestic jurisdiction of each State, is
dealt with by setting up various international control
and pressure organs. Such articles cannot be included
in the covenant, for that would be an endorsement of
the right to interfere in the internal affairs of States.
143. The draJt resolution under discussion must be
substantially amended and amplified by including in it
the concrete proposals contained in the amendments
proposed by the Soviet Union to sections B, C, E, and
F as well as to the preamble of the draft resolution.
The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR supports those
amendments and will vote for their inclusion in the
draft resolution. We support them because they give
clear instructions for the future work of the Commission on Human Rights and are calculated to speed up
the elaboration of the draft covenant, which Rhould
contain not only a proclamation of the fundamental
rights and freedoms of citizens, but also guarantees
that every State, in accordance with its partiCUlar internal circumstances, will observe those rights.
144. The representative of Greece, speaking from this
rostrum, was frightened by the clear and concrete
proposals contained in the USSR amendments. He
considered that they were unreal,. propagandistic, and
demagogic, and he also said that the Greek people enjoyed all rights. The representatives to the General
Assembly and the peoples of the world are, I am sure,
aware of the rights enjoyed by the Greek people. They
are the rights of the monarcho-fascist regime, the unlimited right to terrorize, to imprison people and keep
them in concentration camps and to execute innocent
people without trial. The representative of Greece believes that these rights, the tights to oppress the people, are precisely what the people need. That is why
he considers that Greece serves as an international example in respect of the observance of human rights. The
Greek representative's statement merely serves to confirm the views of many dele.gations on the kind of covenant on human !rights they would like to have, namely,
a covenant whicl) would include eloquc..~t declarations
of human rights, but which would not enable the peoples to enjoy those rights.

145. By adopting the Soviet Union amendinents, the
General Assembly will not only substantially improve
the draft resolution before us, but will supply all the
necessary recommendations for drafting a covenant on
human rights which will meet the needs and aspirations of the vast majority of humanity.

146. That is why the delegation of the Byelorussia,p
SSR will vote for the inclusion of these amendments
in the draft resolution submitted by the Third Commit-

tee. If these amendments are not adopted by the As-

h

sembly, our delegation will abstain from voting on the .
draft resolution as a whol~.
147. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The list of speakers who wish to explain their delegations' votes is exhausted. We shall now go on to the
.
vote.

148. I propose that there should be a separate vote
not only on each draft resolution, but also on the different parts of each draft. Some delegations have requested such division, and, moreover, that would
facilitate the President's task in putHng the various
amendments to the vote..
149. Let us first take draft res llution I. The USSR
delegation has proposed an amendment rA/1576, paragraph 1] to the preamble.
150. Mr. GARCIA BAUER (Guatemala) (translated from Spanish) ~ I request a roll-call vote on the
first amendment of the Soviet Union.
A vote was taken by lV'oll-call.
Iraq, having been drawn by lot by the President, was
called upon to vote first.
In favour: l\1exico, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Afghanistan, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Czechoslovakia.
Against: Lebanon, Luxembourli{, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pan~Lma, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Sweden, Thailand, Tut'key, Union of South
Africa, United IGngdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Australia, Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cnirta, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India.
Abstaining: Iraq, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Syria,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Argentina,
Burma, Egypt, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran.
The amendment was rejected by 37 votes to 7, with
14 abstentions.
.
151. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put the preamble to draft resolution I to the vote.
The preamble was adopted by 52 votes to none, with
3 abstentions.
152. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): .
We shall go on ~o section A, to which there is no
amendment. The USSR representative has requested
that the vote should be taken in parts. I accordingly put
the first paragraph to the ·vote.
The jir$t paragraph wdSadopted by 51 votes to none,
with 6 abstentions.
153; The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put the second paragraph of section A to the
vote.
The second paragraph 'was aJopted by 56 'tIotes to 1~
154. The PRESIDENT (tr(mslated from French):
put section A as a whole to the vote.
Section A was adopted by 53 'i/otes to 1} with 5
ab$tentions.

--

r

564

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

155. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
We shall go on to section B of draft resolution 1. The
USSR delegation has proposed an amendment
[A/1576" paragraph 2] to sub-paragraph (a). I put
tbat amendment to the vote.
The amendment was rejected by 40 votes to 7" with
5 abstentions.
156. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
Since the amendment has been rejected, I put section
B to the vote.
; Section B was adopted by 49 votes to none" with 5
abstentions.
157. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
With regard to section C, an amendment [A/1576"
paragraph 3] has b(~en submitted by the USSR delegation.
I put that amendment to the vote.
The amendment was rejected by 36 votes to 7" with
9 abstentions.
158. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
I put section C, as drafted by the Third Committee, to
the vote.
Section C was adopted '?y 37 votes to 7, with 3
abstentions.
159. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
No amendment bas been submitted to section D. I put
that section to the vote.
Section D was adopted by 30 votes to 9, with 13
abstentions.
160. The PRESIDENT (translated from French ) :
With regard. to section E, the Soviet Union delegation
has submitted an amendment [A/1576, parag,#aph 4]
comprising thirteen paragraphs to sub-paragraph (a),
as well as an amendment [A/1576, paragraph 5] to subparagraph (b). Does the USSR delegation wish me to
put· these paragraphs to the vote separately or as a
whole?
161. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : As a whole.
The amendments were rejected by 41 votes to 6,
with 6 abstentions.
162. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put section E, as drafted by the Third Committee, to
the vote.
Section E was adopted by 35 votes to 9, with 7
abstentions.
163. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The USSR delegation has submitted an amendment
[A/1576., paragraph 6] to section F. I put that amendment to the vote.
The amendment was rejected by 43 votes to 5, with
9 abstentions.
164. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put section F, Cl$ drafted by the Third Committee to the
vote.
Section F ,was adopted by 31 votes to 14, with 9
abstehtions.
Printed in U.S.A.

165. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
No amendments have been submitted to sections G and
H. I put those sections to the vote.
Section G was adopted by 54 votes to none" with 1
abstention.
Sect'ton H was adopted by 52 votes to none" with 1
absteni'il'Jn.
.
166. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before putting draft resolution I as a whole to the vote,
I call upo:n the representative of Mexico, who wisbes to
speak either on a point of order or as Rapporteur of the
Third Committee.
167. Mr. NORIEGA (Mexico)' (translated from
Spanish) : I propose tJ speak not as Rapporteur, but in
order to explain my vote.
168. My delc:gation desir-es that the official record of
tbis meeting of the General Assembly should make it
absolutely clear that Mexico has 'not been inconsistent
in voting in favour of the first amendment of the
Soviet Union, which reads: "Recognizing that the implementation of the provisions of the Covenant on
Human Rights falls entirely within the domestic jurisdiction of States", and in abstaining from voting on the
amendment to section F, which reads: "Considers that
articles 19 to 41 of the draft covenant should be deleted, since their inclusion would constitute an attempt
at intervention in the domestic affairs of ~tates and an
encroachment on their sovereignty".
169. I am sure that all the delegations here present
agree that the implementation of the provisions of the
international covenant on human rights is a matter
which is solely within the domestic jurisdiction of
States; indeed, as signatories to the covenant, they assume responsibility for ensuring its implementation in
their territories. It is clear that because of that responsibility, the question of the extent to which States desire
to co-operate with othe:- signatory States in ensuring
the. widest possible observcmce of the rights recognized
in the covenant is a question which must be decided by
each State individually, as an act of national sovereignty.
170. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
shall put draft resolutions I and II as a whole to the
vote in succession.
Draft resolution I as a whole was adopted by 38 votes
to 7, with 12 abstentions.
Draft resolution 11 was adopted by 36 votes to 11,
with 8 abstentions.
171. The PRESIDENT (translated j'lom French):
We shall now go on to vote on draft resolution Ill.
172. The Australian delegation proposes that the
words "and interested organizaticr.s" ~hottld be deleted
from the last r::n'agraph of the draft resolution. The beginning of th\'~ last paragraph of draft r~solution III,
thus amell.J.r:d, would read: "Invites all States to re"
port annually.·. . ".
The amendment was adopted by 25 votes to 10, with
19 abstentio~.
Draft resolution Ill, as amended, was adopted by
47 votes to none, with 5 abstentions. '
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
A-40464-February 1951--3,600
