UNITED
N ATIO N S

General Assembly
DlBtr.
GENERAL

A/RES/46/38
31 December 1991

Forty-sixth eession
Agenda item 62
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/46/67S) and A/46/L.38]
46/38.

Review of the, implementation of the recommendations
and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its
tenth special session
A
Report of the Disarmament Commission

The General Assembly.
Having considered the annual report of the Disarmament Commission, 1/
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called
upon to play and t.he contribution that it should make in examining and
submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and
in the promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions of the tenth
special session.
Recalling its resolution 45/62 В of 4 December 1990,
1.

Takes note of the annual report of the Disarmament Commission;

2.
Notes with satisfaction that the Disarmament Commission has
successfully implemented its reform programme and has made considerable

1/
Official Records of,_the_ General Assembly, Portv-^sixth Session.
Syppiennent:. No. 42 (A/46/42).

91-42760

A/RES/46/38
Page 2

progress on substantive items on its agenda, pursuant to the "Ways and means
to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament Commission” adopted at its 1990
substantive session; 2/
*
3.
Recalls the role of the Disarmament Commisison as the specialized,
deliberative body within the United Nations multilateral disarmament machinery
that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament issues, leading
to the submission of concrete recommendations on those issues;
4.
Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in
accordance with its mandate, as set forth in paragraph 118 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 3/ and with
paragraph 3 of resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982, and to that end to make
every effort to achieve specific recommendations on the items on its agenda,
taking Into account the adopted ”Ways and means to enhance the functioning of
the Disarmament Commission";
5.
Stresses the importance for the Disarmament Commission to work on
the basis of a relevant agenda of disarmament topics, thereby enabling the
Commission to concentrate its efforts and thus optimize its progress on
specific subjects in accordance with resolution 37/78 H;
6.
Notes with satisfaction that the Disarmament Commission, at its
1991 organizational session, adopted the following items for consideration at
its 1992 substantive session:
(1)

Objective information on military matters;

(2) Process of nuclear disarmament in the framework of international
peace and security, with the objective of the elimination of nuclear
weapons;
(3) Regional approach to disarmament within the context of global
security;
(4) The role of science and technology in the context of international
security, disarmament and other related fields;
7.
Also requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not
exceeding four weeks during 1992 and to submit a substantive report to the
General Assembly at its forty-seventh session;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmwent
Commission the annual report of the Conference on Disarmament, 4/ together
with all the official records of the forty-sixth session of the~General
Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that
the Commission may require for implenranting the present resolution;

2/

A/CN.10/137 of 27 April 1990.

1/

Resolution S-10/2.

1/

P^flgial. RecoEd.8_Qi_tbe General Assembly, Forty-sixth Session.
yo. 27 (A/46/27).

A/RES/46/38
Page 3

9.
Also reouesta the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to the
Commission and its subsidiary .bodies of interpretation and translation
facilities in the official languages, and to assign, as a matter of priority, ,
all the necessary resources and services to this end;
-10. Decides to.include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission".
65th plenary, (neetinq
6 December 1991
В
Comprehensive programme of disarmament
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it
declared the decade of the 1970s as a Disarmeunent Decade and requested, inter
alia, the then Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to work out "a
comprehensive programme, dealing with all aspects of the problem of the
cessation of the arms race and general and complete disarmament under
effective international control, which would provide the Conference with a
guideline to chart,the course of its further work and its negotiations".
Recalling also its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, by which it
adopted the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, which,
inter alia, called for the elaboration of the comprehensive programme of
disarmament with.the utmost urgency,
,
Recalling further its resolution 45/62 E of 4 December 1990, in which it
requested the Conference on Disarmament to re-establish, at the beginning of
its 1991 session,, the Ad Hoc Committee on the Comprehensive Programme of
Disarmament,
.
. Bearing in mind the conclusions reached, by the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament in its report of 1989 to the effect
that "it should resume work with the view to resolving the outstanding issues
in the near future, when circumstances are more conducive to making progress
in this regard", 5/
. .
- Convinced that a comprehensive programme of disarmament.would provide an
appropriate framework for the various multilateral,bilateral andunilateral
initiatives and proposals put forward recently.
Considering that the present international situation is conducive to a
renewed effort towards the conclusion of the comprehensive programme of
disarmament, .
.
.
.
Considering also that the conclusion of the elaboration of the
comprehensive programme of disarmament would constitute an important
contribution to the success of the Third Disarmament Decade and to the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament.
5/
Ibid., Forty-fourth Session. Supplement No. 27 (A/44/27), para. 100
(para. 7 of the quoted text).

/...

A/RES/46/38
Page 4

1.
Requeata the Conference on Disarmament to re-establish, at the
beginning of its 1992 session, the Ad Hoc Committee on the Comprehensive
Programme of Disarmament;
2.
Recommends that the Ad Hoc Cooanittee on the Comprehensive Programme
of Disarmament resume its work, building on the texts already agreed to, with
the view to resolving the outstanding issues and thus concluding negotiations
on it;
3.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Comprehensive programme of disarmament".
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991

Report of the Conference on Disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular resolution 45/62 D of
4 December 1990,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, ^/
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral
negotiating body on disarmament, should have the primary role in substantive
negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Expressing its reoret that the Conference on Disarmament was not able in
1991 to commence negotiations on the nuclear issues on its agenda.
Expressing its expectation that the Conference on Disarmament, in view
of the positive current process in some fields of disarmament, will be in a
position to reach concrete agreements on disarmament issues to which the
United Nations has assigned the greatest priority and urgency and which have
been under consideration for a number of years.
Considering that in the present international climate it is more than
ever imperative to give additional impetus to negotiations on disarmament at
all levels.
Taking note with satisfaction of the relevant paragraphs of the report
of the Conference on Disarmament on the progress towards improved and
effective functioning of the Conference, £/ and expressing the hope that the
process will continue in all aspects of its %югк.

£/
14-17.

Ibid., fgrtY-gjJrth SgggjÇni g4PBl«D9nt WPt 27 (A/46/27) paras.

A/RES/46/38
Page 5

1.
Reaffirms the .role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community;
2.
Welcomes the progress in the negotiations on the elaboration of a
draft convention on the complete and effective prohibition of the development,
production, stockpiling and use of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction, and urges the Conference on Disarmament to intensify its work
with a view to completing negotiations on such a draft convention in 1992;
3.
Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to strengthen its work,
within the framework of ad hoc committees as the most appropriate mechanism,
and to adopt concrete measures on the specific priority issues of disarmament
on its agenda, in accordance with the Programme of Action set forth in section
III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly; 3/
•
4.
Urges the Conference on Disarmament to provide negotiating mandates
to ad hoc committees on all agenda items, in keeping, with the fundamental role
of the Conference as identified in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session;
5.
Reguests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its
work to the General Assembly at its forty-seventh session;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Report of the Conference on Disarmament".
,

65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1'991

The transfer of high technology with military applications
The General Assembly.
Having considered the annual report of the Disarmament Commission, 1/
Taking note of the report of Working Group IV of the Disarmament
Commission on the agenda item entitled "The role of science and technology in
the context of international security, disarmament and other related
fields", 7/
Considering, in this connection, the interest expressed in the Working
Group in continuing the consideration of the question of the transfer of high
technology with military applications, bearing in mind the proposal for
seeking universally acceptable international norms or guidelines to regulate
such transfer.

2/

Ibid., gupBleroept ^о._ Ц

(A/46/42), para. 42.

/...

A/RKS/46/38
Page 6

Recognizing that norms or guidelines for the transfer of high technology
with military applications should take into account legitimate requirements
for the maintenance of international peace and security, while ensuring that
they do not deny access to high technology products, services and know-how for
peaceful purposes,
1.
Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to continue its
consideration, within the scope of its agenda, of all relevant aspects of the
question of the transfer of high technology with military applications at its
1992 session, with a view to concluding its work on this matter at its 1993
session;
2.
Invites all Member States to make available to the SecretaryGeneral pertinent information and comments on this subject, taking into
account arrangements, laws and regulations related to international transfers
of high technology with military applications, as appropriate;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session, taking into account the information and
comments transmitted by Member States.
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991
