S/2020/529

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 11 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution
751 (1992), concerning Somalia, in connection with the video-teleconference on
the situation in Somalia, convened on Tuesday, 9 June 2020. A statement was also
delivered by the representative of Somalia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07780 (E) 190620 080720

*2007780*

S/2020/529

Annex I
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve
As mandated by paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), I have the honour
of briefing the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, covering the
period from 28 February 2020 to 9 June 2020.
During the reporting period, Committee members met twice in the “informal
informals” format via closed video-teleconference. On 29 April, members met to
hear a briefing by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), in which
officials from the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of Experts also
participated. On 27 May, they met to hear a presentation by the Coordinator of the
Panel of Experts on the Panel’s mid-term update and to share initial views on the
recommendations contained therein. In addition to the submission of the mid-term
update, since my last briefing, the Panel has also submitted two monthly updates to
the Committee.
During the informal discussion of 29 April and through documents shared with
the Committee, UNMAS briefed the Committee on, inter alia, improvised explosive
device (IED) trends in Somalia and recommendations on the implementation of the
newly imposed IED-components ban. With respect to Al-Shabaab’s increased use of
homemade explosives since 2018, UNMAS stated the view that the continued effort
to clear mines and unexploded remnants of war across Somalia had seemed to reduce
the group’s access to military-grade explosives, thus apparently triggering a shift
away from military-grade explosives. If the current chemicals used for Al-Shabaab’s
homemade explosives were to become scarce, the group would shift to other sources
of explosive materials or precursors, possibly through illicit smuggling.
UNMAS encouraged the development of a coordinated approach to controlling
the supply of IED components via regional bodies and agreements, as well as donor
support for strengthening the Somali National Army, to counter the IED threat.
UNMAS also recommended continued sensitization of Member States with respect
to their obligations under the sanctions regime for Somalia. Earlier, the Committee
had also tasked the Panel of Experts with preparing a draft implementation assistance
notice that would provide guidance to all Member States on the implementation of
the IED components ban.
In her statement prepared for the informal discussion of 27 May, the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts highlighted four key areas of the Panel’s midterm update:
the reset in relations with the Federal Government of Somalia; the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab, including the group’s financial flows; the ban on the export of charcoal
from Somalia; and potential consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. I would like
to emphasize in this context that during the informal discussion, the Committee
members welcomed the resumption of cooperation and collaboration between the
Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel and stated that they looked forward
to the return of all Panel members to Somalia once the COVID-19 travel restrictions
had been lifted.
The Committee is currently considering the six recommendations contained in
the Panel’s mid-term update. Broadly speaking, these pertain to threats to peace and
security in Somalia, particularly Al-Shabaab’s military and financial capabilities;
the implementation of the arms embargo through further improvements in weapons
and ammunition management; and international humanitarian law issues, including
strengthening the protection of civilians.
2/4

20-07780

S/2020/529

In a previous briefing (see S/PV.8735), I referred to a letter received from a
Member State on confidentiality issues, for which a reply was still pending. The
Committee dispatched the reply in the current reporting period. In the period, the
Committee also received another letter, which made reference to the work of the
predecessor of the Panel of Experts, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group,
which it is currently considering.
I will now summarize the statistics on arms embargo exemption requests and
notifications. The Committee approved an exemption request pursuant to paragraphs
10 and 13 of resolution 2498 (2019), submitted by the Federal Government of Somalia.
Pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 13 of the same resolution, the Committee received
six advance delivery notifications from the Federal Government of Somalia, and
pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 14 of the resolution it received an advance delivery
notification from the supplying Member State. The Committee further received two
post-delivery notifications pursuant to paragraph 16 of the resolution, submitted by
the Federal Government of Somalia. Lastly, the Committee received an advance
delivery notification from a supplying Member State in accordance with paragraph 17
of the resolution.
Finally, following the resignation of a member of the Panel of Experts owing
to personal and professional considerations, a new expert was appointed by the
Secretary-General on 29 May 2020.

20-077803/4

S/2020/529

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Somalia to the
United Nations, Abukar Dahir Osman
Allow me to begin by commending the Permanent Representative of France,
Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière, for his leadership as the President of the Security
Council during this month of June 2020. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
for his briefing.
I am pleased by the Committee’s commitment to the ideals of confidentiality
and accountability. The Somali Government has taken great initial steps to
re-establish relations with the Panel of Experts on Somalia, but in order to
fully restore trust and confidence between the Panel of Experts and the Federal
Government of Somalia, additional measures, including efforts aimed at resolving
pending matters, are necessary. These pending matters include issues that we have
already raised several times with the Chair and the sanctions committee. We are
looking forward to a new proposed course of action to be undertaken by the Panel
of Experts, as described in the November 2019 correspondence addressed to the
Federal Government of Somalia.

4/4

20-07780
