Resolutiona adopted on the reporta of the Foarth Committee

2424 (XXIII).

Question of Oman

Tl1e General Assembly,
Having considercd the question of Oman,
Having e.rnmined the statement of the petitioner, 6
Rccalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 ami other relevant resolutions,
Deploring the refusal of the United_ Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to 1mplement the
relevant General Assembly resolutions concerning
Oman,
l. Reafjirms its resolutions 2238 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2302 (XXII) of 12 December 1967;
2. Ca/Is upon the Government of the United Ki~gdom of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland to tmplement fully General Asse?1bly resolution 1514 (XV)
and other relevant resolut10ns;
3. Req11ests the Special Committee on the Situat~on
with regard to füe lmplementation of the D_eclarat1on
on the Granting of Independence to Colomal _Countries and Peoples to follow the developments m the
Territory of Ornan and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2425 (XXIII). Activities of foreign economic
and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in ali other Territories
under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa
The General Assembly,
H aving considercd the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the _Declaratio~ on the Granting of Independence to Col01y~l Countries. an1 Peoples
in Southern Rhodesia, Nam1b1a and Terntones under
Portuguese domination and in ali other T~n:itories under colonial domination and efforts to ehmmate colonialism. apartheid and racial discrimination in southern
Africa",
H aving e.i-amined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this
question, 7
Recal/ing its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof, and
its resolution 2288 (XXII) oí 7 December 1967,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV)
ancl which obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination
of colonia)ism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa and other colonial Territories is incompatible with the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United Nations,
a A/C.4/717.
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, "[wenty-third Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 68, documents A/1320 and Add.L

61

Recalling that the administering Powers have the
obligation "to ensure the politica], eco~omic, social and
educational advancement of the mhabttants of the Territories under their administration and to protect the
population and the natural resources of_ these Territories against abuses, in accordance wtth Chapters
XI and XII of the Charter,
l. Approves the report of the Special Com1:1ittee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementat10n of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question;
2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resourc~s of their Ter. ritories, as well as their right to d1spose of these
resources in their best interest;
3. Declares that any administering Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise of these_ rights
or by subordinating them to for~ign_ eco~orrnc and
financia! interests, violates the obhgat10ns 1t has assumed under Chapters XI and XII of the Charter of
the United Nations and impedes the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Condemns the exploitation of the colonial Territories and peoples and the methods practised in the
Territories under colonial domination by those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests which are
designed to perpetuate colonial rule ;
5. Deplores those policies of the administering
Powers aimed at encouraging the systematic inflow
of foreign immigrants to colonial Territories whi~h
jeopardize the rights and interests of the colonial
peoples of these Territories;
6. Deplores the refusal of the States concerned to
implement the provisions of paragraphs 7, 8 and 10 of
General Assembly resolution 2288 (XXII) ;
7. Reqiiests the administering Powers to take im
mediate measures to put an end to ali practices which
exploit the Territories and peoples under their administration and consequently violate the political, eco
nomic and social rights of the peoples ;
8. Requests ali States to take practica! m@asures to
ensure that the activities of their nationals involved
in económic, financia! and other concerns in dependeut
Territories do not run counter to the rights and in·terests of the colonial peoples, in conformity with th,:
objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
and other relevant resolutions;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue lo
study this question and to report thereon to the Ge11
eral Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to use ali the
facilities at his disposal to render assistance to thc
Special Committee in the pursuit of this study.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December .1968.

2426 (XXIII). lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence 1o
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the spt!•
cialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nation11
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementatw,i
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenet:

General A11embly-Twenty-third Se11ion

62

to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 2311 (XXII) of 14 December
1967 and other relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Talling into account the relevant reports submitted
by the Secretary-General, 8 the Economic and Social
Councilº and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples 10 concerning the implementation of the
Declaration by the specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that the national liberation movements in sever~l colonial Territories, and particularly
in Africa, require the urgent assistance of the specialized agencies, especially in the field of education, health
and nutrition, in their strnggle to attain freedom and
independence,
N oting with regret that some of the specialized
agencies and international institutions associated with
the United Nations, and in particular the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
International Monetary Fund, have not so far implemented General Assembly resolution 2311 (XXII)
and other relevant resolutions,
Considering that, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapters IX and X, the
U nited N ations shall make recommendations for the
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the
specialized agencies,
l. Reiterates its appeal to the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
to extend their full co-operation to the U nited N ations
in the achievement of the objectives and provisions of
General Assembly rescilution 1514 (XV) and other
releYant resolutions;
2. E).·presses its appreciation ,to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to those specialized agencies and the international institutions which have co-operated with the United
Nations in the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions;
3. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
international institutions concerned should assist the
peoples struggling for their liberation from colonial
rule and, in particular, should work out, within the
scope of their respective activities and in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity and, through
it, with the national liberation movements, concrete
programmes for assisting the oppressed peoples of
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and the Territories under
Portuguese domination ;
4. Appeals once again to ali the specialized agencies
and international institutions, and in particular the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund, to take all
8 !bid., agenda item 69, A/7301.

9[bid., Twenty-third Sessio11, S11pplement No. 3 (A/7203),
chapter XVI, section C; ibid., Supp/ement No. 3A (A/7203/
Add.1), chapter VII, section A.
10 ]bid., Twenty-tltird Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter III.

necessary steps to withhold from the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa financia!, economic, technical and other assistance until they renounce their
policies of racial discrimination and colonial domination;
5. Recommends that the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development should withdraw the
loans and credits it has granted to the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa, which are being used by
those Governments to suppress the national liberation
movement in the Portuguese colonies and in Namibia,
and against the African population of South Africa;
6. Requests al! States, through action in the specialized agencies and international institutions of which
they are members, to facilitate the ful! and speedy
implementation of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions;
7. Req11ests the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in consultation with the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for the co-ordination of the policies and activities
of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant
General Assembly resolutions;
8. I n·vites the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and international institutions concerned in working out
appropriate measures for implementing the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
( b) To obtain and transmit to the Special Committee for its consideration concrete suggestions from the
specialized agencies and international institutions concerrted regarding the best ways and means of achieving
the full and speedy implementation of the relevant
resolutions;
9. Req11ests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question lind to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2427 (XXIII). Queation of Papua and the Tnut
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
H aving examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1967 to 19
June 196811 and the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantin2
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1'1
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965, 2227 (XXI) of 20 December 1966
and 2348 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
11 /bid.,

Twe11ty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/7204).
Twenty-third Session, Anneres, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l), chapter XXIII.
12 lbid.,
