S/PV.8141

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8141st meeting

Tuesday, 19 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44978 (E)
*1744978*

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8141

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/1063, which contains the text of a
draft resolution sumitted by Egypt, Japan and Sweden.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uruguay
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational
Russian Federation,

State

of),

China

and

The President: The draft resolution received
12 votes in favour, none against and 3 abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2393 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is not every day that the
Council takes decisions that have a direct impact on
the people affected by conflict, but today is such a day.
On behalf of the co-penholders, Egypt and Japan, I
strongly welcome the adoption today of resolution 2393
(2017), which maintains a vital humanitarian lifeline
for 3 million people in Syria. There is no alternative
humanitarian route to access parts of northern and
southern Syria. Renewing the provisions of resolution
2165 (2014) for a full 12 months will without doubt save
lives and alleviate suffering.
Over the past weeks, we have worked very hard
with Council members to reach this agreement. The
2/8

19/12/2017

resolution requests the Secretary-General to conduct an
independent review of these humanitarian operations.
That will allow the Council to have an even more
solid basis for future decisions. On behalf of the
co-penholders, I would like to thank the representatives
of all delegations for their constructive engagement
during the negotiations on the resolution. I would
also like to thank the staff of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies, their implementing partners
and Turkey and Jordan for enabling these humanitarian
deliveries to take place, as well as Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock and his team here in New York.
Since the humanitarian situation remains devastating
and the needs enormous, agreement on the resolution
was imperative. Discussions on Syria in the Council are
often difficult. We therefore see today’s adoption as a
special accomplishment.
The world has been failing the Syrian people for
more than six years, and the humanitarian situation
will continue to deteriorate in the absence of a political
solution to the crisis. The Council must spare no effort
to end the conflict in Syria. We hope that today’s
agreement can help build momentum for constructive
and broader Council engagement on Syria.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): When the Security Council established a
regime for cross-border supplies of humanitarian aid
through the United Nations, we all assumed that it was
a temporary emergency measure that perforce infringed
on Syria’s sovereignty. It was introduced in 2014 when
the armed conflict was in an acute phase during which
at times there was no other way to provide the civilian
population with the necessary assistance.
It was intended, and as such written into resolution
2165 (2014), that humanitarian supplies transported
through specific border crossings would go to residents
throughout Syria, a provision that has never been met.
The mechanism mainly serves areas controlled by
illegal armed groups that dispose of incoming aid at
their discretion. The United Nations has not exercised
due control in this area, including of the distribution
of humanitarian assistance in Syria. In fact the United
Nations agencies do not play the leading role in this
plan, which essentially belongs to non-governmental
organizations. How and what they are supplying, and
to whom, continues to be a mystery wrapped in an
enigma. The authorities in Damascus are essentially
dealing with a chaotic situation that they are powerless
to introduce some order into.
17-44978

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

At this point, since our guiding light is first
and foremost the interests of the Syrians in need of
aid, we have not blocked the latest extension of the
transboundary regime. But the proposed text did not
take all our priorities into account, so we could not
support it. We deplore the unnecessary haste with
which resolution 2393 (2017) was adopted. We could
have continued the discussions for the sake of reaching
a consensus.
We expect the Secretary-General to review the
transboundary mechanism within the established time
frame with the aim of bringing its activities to their
inevitable end. We hope to see recommendations on how
to improve its monitoring during the current transitional
stage, while the Syrian Government’s opinion must be
taken into account without fail. The Secretary-General
must also give the Security Council detailed information
every month about where the aid is being sent, what it
consists of and in what quantities. We hope the reports
will not be a formality. We will double-check all the
information that the Council receives.
We are grateful to the delegations of Egypt and
Sweden for their careful, honest and constructive
work. Unfortunately, thanks to the position taken by
various Council members that attempts to present the
transboundary mechanism as an ideal plan that needs
no improvement, and to freeze it as it is indefinitely,
some important amendments that we proposed were
not included in the final draft. Within the framework
of the planned review, we would like to hear from the
Secretary-General as to how the effectiveness and
transparency of the mechanism could be improved,
as well as some details on the partners of the United
Nations in this area. Having given permission for these
cross-border shipments, the Security Council has the
right to know these things. But it would seem that there
is some mystery here involving some kind of carefully
guarded extraneous interests. The result is that the
people and the sovereignty of Syria suffer, despite the
fact that in every resolution we adopt we reaffirm our
commitment to those fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The situation in the country is radically different
now, and the mechanism for cross-border supplies is a
remnant of what is past. In our view, it will be important
to work to gradually end this rudimentary plan, based
on a divided Syria. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies should begin to reorient themselves to
traditional ways of working in the country in cooperation

S/PV. 8141

with its official authorities and in accordance with the
universal principles of humanitarian assistance. We
hope that the Secretariat will start making plans for the
gradual abandonment of the cross-border shipments. A
year from now, the question of whether to extend the
mandate of resolution 2165 (2014) will loom.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Today,
the Council came together on an issue of critical
importance. Our adoption today of resolution 2393
(2017) enables the United Nations to continue to provide
vital, lifesaving cross-border assistance to millions of
Syrians who need it to survive. Thanks to its mandate,
more than 1 million Syrians receive assistance from
the United Nations and its partners every month. This
includes clean drinking water, medicine and food. Since
resolution 2165 (2014) was first adopted in 2014, nearly
17,000 trucks delivering aid have rolled into Syria.
Each of those trucks was fully vetted by the dedicated
United Nations monitoring mechanism. It is no
exaggeration to say that this cross-border authorization
for humanitarian assistance has saved lives in Syria. We
reaffirm our commitment to supporting the delivery of
cross-line and cross-border humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian people.
While the unfettered provision of cross-border
assistance is crucial to reducing the suffering in Syria,
it is no substitute for a political solution to the conflict.
The United States remains committed to resolution 2254
(2015) as the sole legitimate blueprint for a political
resolution to this conflict. We call on all the parties
to reaffirm support for the Geneva process as the only
framework for a viable Syrian political process.
The United States was proud to vote in favour of
resolution 2393 (2017) today, and we will continue
our robust support to the people of Syria in the days
to come.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian
situation in Syria and attaches great importance to
efforts to mitigate it. With the implementation of the
de-escalation areas in Syria, the overall situation
has improved, which has in turn created favourable
conditions for such operations. The international
community should make concerted efforts to ensure
that progress in this area continues.
In our view, the international community’s
humanitarian operations in Syria must be based on the
guiding humanitarian principles of the United Nations

17-449783/8

S/PV.8141

The situation in the Middle East

and relevant international law. We must ensure that all
Syrians in the de-escalation areas receive timely help.
The cross-border delivery of humanitarian assistance
is a special measure taken in special circumstances,
and it must be carried out on a basis of full respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria and in strict compliance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
The associated operations should be subjected to
United Nations monitoring, whose transparency should
be improved, while efforts must be made to strengthen
coordination with the Syrian Government.
Against that backdrop, China participated
constructively in the negotiations on resolution 2393
(2017), which extends the mandate for cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance. China has on
many occasions underscored its hope that the parties
will continue their patient consultations in order
that consensus may be achieved. China commends
the sponsors, including co-penholders Egypt and
Sweden, for their efforts to promote consensus on
the resolution. We note that the sponsors took on
board recommendations by some members to enhance
monitoring over the delivery of cross-border deliveries.
We also note, however, that some of members’
legitimate concerns were not fully included. We
believe there is still room for improving the resolution.
Council members should have been allowed more time
to carry out consultations to reach consensus. In those
circumstances, China had to abstain in the voting.
The political process in Syria has entered a critical
stage. The international community must be firmly
behind the United Nations so that the Organization can
play a role as the main channel for mediation in order to
help the parties in Syria to find a settlement acceptable
to all through peaceful negotiations. That is the only
possible way to alleviate the suffering of Syrian people
and once and for all find a comprehensive, just and
proper solution to the question of Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2393 (2017), which
extends for a year the mandate of the cross-border relief
system for Syria. We thank the co-penholders in that
regard. In spite of differences in approach, the members
of the Security Council were able to move forward
given the humanitarian imperative. This renewal is in
fact vital in every sense of the word, for the provision
of cross-border assistance is a matter of life or death for
4/8

19/12/2017

millions of Syrians. This one-year renewal is crucial so
that humanitarian actors can enjoy a minimum degree of
predictability in their work. Continuing the functioning
of the mechanism, which to date has shown its value
on the ground, was also necessary. Lastly, the changes
made to the text — which, to tell the truth, not everyone
found appropriate — did not change the structure of the
text. In that way, the resolution makes it possible for the
United Nations and its partners to continue to work as
they have done up until now in order to respond to the
crisis and the humanitarian situation.
Of course, we would have preferred that this
assistance would no longer be necessary and that the
situation would have sufficiently improved so that
cross-line humanitarian aid would have been sufficient
to respond to the emergency. However, one must
necessarily acknowledge that the situation on the ground
continues to be catastrophic. Today more than ever
before, more than 13 million people need humanitarian
assistance — as compared with 10 million at the time of
the previous extension of the mandate.
In that context, I should like to underscore the
seriousness of the situation in eastern Ghouta, which
is stomach-churning even if, in many respects, it is
below the radar of the media. But let us be clear: a
tragedy on the scale of that in Aleppo is taking shape
in eastern Ghouta. Four hundred thousand people
are under siege, practically without access to food
or medical assistance. Approximately 500 people,
including 137 children, still await emergency medical
evacuation, as requested by the United Nations weeks
and weeks ago but never authorized. The regime is
starving the population to cause the collapse of all
remaining opposition, which is unacceptable. That is
a grave violation of international law, in addition to
being a moral violation. It is essential that all those with
influence over the Syrian regime should pressure it to
put an end to that totally unacceptable situation. That
scenario makes it all the more crucial to keep in place
the United Nations mechanism for providing crossborder assistance. Today’s resolution also makes clear
reference to the situation in eastern Ghouta and calls
for the lifting of all sieges.
We all know that the only way to put an end to
the humanitarian crisis in the long term is through a
return to stability, which requires a political solution.
As President Macron said yesterday, we must develop
a political solution that leads to lasting peace and
ensures that all minorities will be protected. It is
17-44978

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8141

just such an inclusive political solution that we want
promote together, as it is the only one that can put an
end to the Syrian tragedy once and for all. There is no
other legitimate framework to achieve that than the
intra-Syrian talks being held under the auspices of the
United Nations at Geneva. In that regard, we reiterate
our full and unrestricted support for Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, to whom we shall listen with great
interest later this morning (see S/PV.8142).

death, in contravention of international humanitarian
law. The situation has now reached a critical point:
more than 10 per cent of all children under the age of 5
suffer from acute malnutrition, which is the highest rate
recorded since the conflict began. Medical facilities are
overwhelmed. Five hundred and seventy-two people
urgently need medical evacuation, including 65 who are
under the age of five. Eighteen children are at imminent
risk of death.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the renewal of resolution 2165 (2014)
today for a further 12 months. Resolution 2393 (2017)
will allow us to continue to deliver urgently needed
humanitarian aid across conflict lines and borders to
reach the people of Syria. We thank the co-penholders
for their work, and we regret that the adoption was not
unanimous, especially since the penholders ensured,
over many weeks, that they listened to concerns of all
members of the Security Council and took on board
proposals from many of us, including Russia.

Therefore, once again I urge Russia to use all its
influence over the regime to ensure the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance and to ensure that
those in urgent medical need can be evacuated. It is just
a 30-minute journey from eastern Ghouta to Damascus
to receive treatment. It really is a matter of life and
death. We call on Russia to use its influence over the
regime so that one more person does not die waiting
for treatment — 15 is already too many — and so that
another child does not die for want of a 30-minute
journey — six is already too many. Those who require
treatment must be allowed to leave now. The people
of eastern Ghouta have suffered enough. Karim is a
two-month-old baby. His mother was killed by regime
artillery bombardment. He lost his eye and had his skull
broken in the same attack. We must stand in solidarity
with Karim. The siege must be lifted immediately.

The renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) gives the
people of Syria a small ray of hope. The delivery of
cross-border aid provides a lifeline for millions of
Syrians who would be impossible to reach in a sustained
manner from within Syria. However, we must take
stock. It is three years since resolution 2165 (2014) was
adopted. Despite the intention to ease the suffering of
the Syrian people, the situation for them has worsened:
13 million people are still in need of humanitarian
assistance, which is 2 million more than when we
adopted 2165 (2014). On top of that, an additional
2.3 million people have fled Syria, countless others
have been killed and, in some areas, malnutrition has
increased fivefold during this year alone.
Yes, the renewal of the resolution will ensure that
aid will continue to reach some of the millions who
depend upon it. But, despite the resolution, the vast
majority of the 420,000 people in 10 besieged areas
will be denied access to aid because of blockages
imposed by the regime — 94 per cent of those people
are in eastern Ghouta, a so-called de-escalation zone.
Such zones are meant to ensure a cessation of hostilities
and an increase in the amount of humanitarian aid. In
reality there is little or no actual de-escalation taking
place in eastern Ghouta.
The regime has used the de-escalation designation
to cut off access to life-saving medical and food aid.
The regime is starving the people of eastern Ghouta to

Ultimately, the suffering of the Syrian people
will only end when the conflict ends. There must be
a political settlement. We must all unite to support
Staffan de Mistura. The Geneva talks represent the
only sustainable path to peace, and all international
efforts must support that process. We commend the
opposition, which has maintained their commitment
to direct negotiations without preconditions and have
engaged constructively in the talks. The opposition’s
efforts presented a perfect opportunity for real progress
to be made in the last round of talks with respect to
the substance of a political transition. Those hopes
were dashed by the regime. They showed their utter
contempt for the talks. They arrived late. They took a
long weekend in Damascus. They refused to engage in
direct negotiations with the opposition.
The Al-Assad regime has made aid a weapon of
war. It is restricting humanitarian access to the besieged
populations. Blocking aid convoys from the United
Nations and other impartial humanitarian organizations
after approving them is abominable, and it must stop.
The renewal of the resolution today is a clear signal to
the regime that the international community is united in

17-449785/8

S/PV.8141

The situation in the Middle East

its determination to ensure that aid must not be used as
a weapon. Aid must be delivered at speed, unhindered,
to those who need it.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2393 (2017), and should like to
thank the three penholders, Egypt, Japan and Sweden,
for the tireless efforts that made it possible for us to
adopt this important resolution today.
Italy voted in favour of resolution 2393 (2017)
because it authorizes the continuation of life-saving
cross-border assistance in Syria. Such activities continue
to be complemented by other modalities of assistance
and are indispensable for the survival of civilians living
in areas serviced by them. Significantly, the resolution
we have just adopted renews the authorization for these
operations for a period of 12 months, thereby giving
both beneficial humanitarian actors a predictable and
sustainable time horizon going forward. Given the
volatility of the situation in Syria and the continued
high level of humanitarian needs, such a time frame
represents the necessary minimum extension for the
meaningful renewal of the measures authorized by
this resolution.
As we have repeatedly heard in this Chamber, the
true limit of humanitarian access in Syria lies in the
persistent low level of cross-line delivery to rebel-held
areas within the county, which are not being reached by
cross-border assistance. Sadly, several previous Council
resolutions regarding the obligation to provide timely,
unhindered and unfettered access for humanitarian aid
have not been implemented. That is due notably to the
obstacles set up by the Syrian regime, which have led to
the humanitarian tragedy we have heard of month after
month in this Chamber.
Eastern Ghouta is where this humanitarian tragedy
is currently being played out. It is there that the civilian
population, despite the de-escalation agreement, is
being besieged and bombarded by the regime. It is there
that while humanitarian convoys are prevented from
reaching those in need, the staples that are entering
Ghouta through commercial flows have seen their prices
increase by up to tenfold, and the profits thereof line the
pockets of those who control such flows. It is there that
children and women die due to the lack of medications
and the regime’s denial of emergency evacuation to
hospitals just a few kilometres away. We would have
therefore liked to have seen in this resolution a clear
commitment to reviewing not only the cross-border
6/8

19/12/2017

operation but also the cross-line operation, due to the
repeated failure to deliver.
We welcome the renewal of this resolution and the
continuation of the cross-border assistance that is so
greatly needed on the ground. We reiterate the call to
lift all sieges so as to ensure that cross-line assistance is
promptly delivered, to allow urgent medical evacuation
and to ensure that nationwide humanitarian access is
rapid, safe and unhindered.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
should like to highlight the work carried out by the
penholders, whose substantial efforts resulted in a text
that all members could support. Nevertheless, Bolivia
abstained in the voting due to changes in the situation
on the ground.
As a result of the Astana agreements, it was
possible to establish four de-escalation zones, reduce
violence on the ground and thereby provide better
humanitarian assistance to certain areas. However, we
believe that the text does not fully reflect the changes
on the ground. Some proposals made during the
negotiation process were not reflected in the final text,
such as regarding the transparency of the monitoring
mechanism, the management of information and control
over those non-governmental organizations involved in
humanitarian operations, including beneficiary reports,
distribution sites and all other aspects of their work.
That is why today Bolivia abstained in the voting.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We voted in favour of
resolution 2393 (2017), on cross-border assistance in
accordance with the following points. We thank everyone
who took an active part in the process of drafting this
important document, and we would like to thank the
penholders for humanitarian issues — the Missions of
Sweden, Egypt and Japan — for their excellent work.
We express our gratitude to all delegations that have
made important compromises in this matter. That is a
demonstration of the fact that by showing unity we can
do much.
Kazakhstan remains committed to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at resolving humanitarian
issues in Syria. We believe that it is very important
to preserve all possible humanitarian access
modalities, including cross-border systems, which are
indispensable in bringing humanitarian aid to millions
of people in northern and southern Syria. Cross-border
assistance, as authorized under resolution 2165 (2014)
17-44978

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and subsequent resolutions, remains a critical element
of the humanitarian response in Syria. However,
we urge United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their implementing partners to closely monitor the
management of cross-border aid in order to benefit
those in need. Kazakhstan supports all international
efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the
Syrian crisis. We hope that agreements reached within
the frameworks of the Astana platform and the Geneva
process will be fully implemented.
Lastly, we are convinced that only full compliance
with the ceasefire agreement will directly improve
the humanitarian situation and reduce the level of
violence. However, we stress that no initiative aimed at
establishing peace in the world’s conflict zones can be
successful without the support of the Security Council.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): As we see from the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1057), as from
previous ones, the key negative trends that characterize
the Syrian humanitarian track continue. Despite the
appearance of active political engagement, we have
not seen any steady progress in the area of sustainable
humanitarian access.
The situation with respect to the delivery of
humanitarian aid remains basically the same as last
year. There are still nearly 420,000 people trying to
survive in conditions of total siege. That is unacceptable.
Eastern Ghouta stands out particularly, with drastic
food shortages and a lack of basic services. That area
accounts for nearly 96 per cent of all the besieged
population of Syria. There needs to be an immediate
lifting of all sieges. Humanitarian access should never
be employed as a war tactic.
Against that backdrop, the preservation of the
mechanism of cross-border humanitarian assistance
delivery is a matter of life and death for thousands of
Syrians. In fact, as has already been pointed out here,
the mechanism constitutes a vital humanitarian lifeline
for 3 million people in Syria. In such circumstances,
Ukraine strongly supported and wholeheartedly
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2393 (2017) by
the vast majority of Council members. It also highly
appreciates the efforts invested in that endeavour by
the humanitarian penholders. Our sincerest hope is
that the cross-border assistance will continue to make a
life-saving difference on the ground.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2393 (2017), renewing resolution 2165

S/PV. 8141

(2014) for one year. We express appreciation to all three
penholders — Egypt, Japan and Sweden — for their role
in facilitating the negotiations on the resolution. The
extensive consultation they held with all members and
the extra efforts they exerted to ensure a participatory
process made it possible to narrow differences to
a large extent. It is our view that they made all the
necessary efforts, and that they did so in good faith.
We have always felt that it would not be impossible to
make progress if we put the humanitarian needs and
continued suffering of the Syrians at the centre of our
deliberations. We seem to have made some progress in
that regard, and we commend Council members for their
constructive engagement and flexibility in that regard.
The cross-border programme is a vital mechanism
for reaching millions of Syrians in need of
humanitarian assistance. The Council’s decision today
will certainly contribute to saving lives. We hope that
the implementation of the resolution will facilitate
the delivery of aid to millions of Syrians in need of
urgent assistance through the cross-border and crossline deliveries.
The resolution goes a long way towards addressing
the concerns of some delegations by requesting the
Secretary-General to conduct a review of the crossborder operations with the objective of further
strengthening the United Nations monitoring
mechanism, while taking into consideration the views
of relevant parties, including the Syrian Government,
relevant neighbouring countries, the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners. The resolution also provides
an opportunity to receive detailed information about
cross-border and cross-line deliveries, thereby further
enhancing transparency. We therefore saw no weighty
reason why we should not support the resolution.
Finally, we all know that it is only through a
comprehensive political solution that the suffering of
the Syrian people can come to an end. One hopes that
all the necessary efforts will be made to achieve that
objective, no matter the existing and current difficulties.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2393 (2017), renewing for 12 months
the mandate of the mechanism for the cross-border
delivery of humanitarian aid to thousands of innocent
Syrian victims in need. For that reason, the Senegalese
delegation congratulates the penholder delegations
of Sweden, Egypt and Japan. We also commend all

17-449787/8

S/PV.8141

The situation in the Middle East

other delegations that contributed positively to the
proposed amendments.
The mechanism, of course, could be improved. In
that regard, we await the review to be conducted by the
Secretary-General. In the meantime, it is essential that
the resolution take into account the fact that millions
of Syrians remain victims and in need of humanitarian

8/8

19/12/2017

assistance. We are interested to hear what Mr. Lowcock
and especially Mr. Staffan de Mistura will have to
say with respect to the political process, given that
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) are yet to be fully implemented.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-44978
