S/PRST/2006/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5494th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 July 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Children and
armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to address the
widespread impact of armed conflict on children and its determination to
ensure respect for and implementation of its resolution 1612 (2005) and all its
previous resolutions on children and armed conflict, which provide a
comprehensive framework for addressing the protection of children affected by
armed conflict.
“As part of this comprehensive framework, the Security Council
welcomes the progress made since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) in
particular in the three following areas:
– the Security Council welcomes the appointment of a new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for children and armed conflict
(SRSG), Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. The Security Council also
welcomes her field activities in situations of armed conflict and her
intention to carry out new visits in such situations. The Security Council
urges parties to armed conflict to cooperate with the SRSG, as well as
with UNICEF and other relevant United Nations entities, with a view to
ending recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law and all other violations and abuses committed against
children by parties to armed conflict.
– the Security Council welcomes the ongoing implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict,
invites the Secretary-General to accelerate it in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005) and looks forward to receiving the forthcoming
independent review on the implementation of this mechanism. The
Security Council acknowledges that the application of the mechanism has
already produced results in the field and welcomes the efforts by national
Governments, relevant United Nations actors and civil society partners to
make the mechanism operational. The Security Council therefore invites
relevant States affected by armed conflict that are not yet involved in the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism to join it on
a voluntary basis, in cooperation with the SRSG and UNICEF.
06-44115 (E) 240706

*0644115*

S/PRST/2006/33

– the Security Council welcomes the activities of its Working Group on
children and armed conflict, as outlined in the report by its Chair
(S/2006/497). The Security Council welcomes the fact that the Working
Group has achieved commendable progress in its implementation phase
and is now discussing specific reports of the Secretary General on parties
in situations of armed conflict”. The Security Council invites the
Working Group to propose effective recommendations for consideration
by the Council.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of a sustained
investment in development, especially in health, education and skills training,
to secure the successful reintegration of children in their communities and
prevent re-recruitment. The specific situation of girls exploited by armed
forces and groups must be recognised and adequately addressed.
“The Security Council calls for a reinvigorated effort by the international
community to enhance the protection of children affected by armed conflict. In
this regard, it invites all parties concerned, including Member States, regional
organisations, relevant United Nations entities acting within their mandates
including UNICEF, UNDP, UNHCR, OHCHR, ILO and UNESCO,
international financial institutions including the World Bank, as well as civil
society, to build partnerships to that effect. In particular, the Security Council
invites donors to provide additional resources to fund the development of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the reintegration of children. The
Security Council also looks forward to the contribution of the newly
established Peace-building Commission and Human Rights Council to this
effort.
“The Security Council looks forward to the next report of the Secretary
General on the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and its previous
resolutions on children affected by armed conflict, to be submitted by
November 2006, and expresses its determination to address this important
issue.”

2

06-44115
