48

General A..embly-Twenty-seeond SeHion

( d) To put an end to the activities referred to in
paragraph 6 above;
9. Condemns the policies of Portugal for using the
Territories under its domination for violations of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent
African States, in particular the Democratic Republic
of the Congo ;
10. Draws the urgent attention of the Security
Council to the continued deterioration of the situation
in the Territories under Portuguese domination, as well
as to the consequences of these violations by Portugal
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
neighbouring independent African States that border
its colonies ;
11. Recommends the Security Council to consider
urgently the adoption of the necessary measures to make
mandatory the provisions of its resolutions concerning
this question, particularly resolution 218 ( 1965) of
23 November 1965, and those of General Assembly
resolutions 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and 2184
(XXI) of 12 December 1966;
12. Appeals again to all States to grant the peoples
of the Territories under Portuguese domination the
moral and material assistance necessary for the restoration of their inalienable rights;
13. Appeals once again to all the specialized agencies, in particular to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International
Monetary Fund, to refrain from granting Portugal any
financial, economic or technical assistance as long as the
Government of Portugal fails to implement General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
14. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized agencies concerned and other international relief organizations for the help they have given so far, and requests
them, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity and through it with the national liberation movements, to increase their assistance to the refugees from
the Territories under Portuguese domination and to
those who have suffered and are still suffering as a
result of military operations ;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to promote through the
various United Nations bodies and agencies the widespread and continuous publicizing of the work of the
United Nations concerning this question so that world
opinion may be sufficiently and accurately informed of
the situation in the Territories under Portuguese domination and of the continuing struggle waged by the
peoples of these Territories for their liberation and,
for this purpose, to prepare periodically special publications to be widely distributed in various languages;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into
consultations with the specialized agencies referred to
in paragraph 13 above with regard to its implementation
and to report thereon to the Special Committee;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to keep the situation in the Territories under review
and to examine the extent of compliance by States
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

1599th plenary meeting,
17 November 1967.

2288 (XXII). Activities of foreign economic and
other interests which are impeding the im•
plementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all
other Territories under Colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa and
Territories under Portuguese domination and in all
other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples concerning the activities
of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa
and Territories under Portuguese domination and in
all other Territories under colonial domination.4
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof,
RecaUing further its resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20
December 1965 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
and other relevant resolutions,
Considering that the colonial Powers have the obligation to ensure the political, economic, social and
educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Territories under their administration and to protect
the population and the natural resources of these Ter-ritories against abuses, in conformity with Chapters XI
and XII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV J
is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter,
1. Approves in general the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples concerning the activities of foreign economic and other
interests which are impeding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia,
South West Africa and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in all other Territories under colonial
domination ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
the colonial Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of these
resources in their Lest interests;
4 Ibid.,

agenrla item 24, documents A/6868 and Add.l.

~ A/C.4/700.

Resolution8 adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

3. Declares that the colonial Powers which deprive
the colonial peoples of the exercise and the full enjoyment of those rights, or which subordinate them to
the economic or financial interests of their own nationals
or of nationals of other countries, are violating the
obligations they have assumed under Chapters XI and
XII of the Charter of the United Nations and are
impeding the full and prompt implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Strongly condemns the exploitation of the colonial
Territories and peoples and the methods practised
in the Territories un<ler colonial domination by the foreign financial, economic and other interests which are
designed to perpetuate the colonial regimes contrary
to the principles embodied in resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Deplores the policies of the colonial Powers
which permit the exploitation of the natural resources
of the Territories under their administration contrary
to the interests of the indigenous population and which
promote or tolerate unjust and discriminatory work
systems and other practices ;
6. Calls upon all States concerned to fulfil their
fundamental obligation to ensure that the concessions
granted, the investments authorized and the enterprises permitted to their nationals in the Territories under colonial domination do not run counter to the
present or future interests of the indigenous inhabitants
of those Territories;
7. Further calls upon the colonial Powers to prohibit
the following practices, which run counter to the principles of the Charter, violate the economic and social
rights of the peoples of the Territories under colonial
domination and impede the rapid implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV) :
(a) The exploitation of human and natural resources
contrary to the interests of the indigenous inhabitants;
(b) The obstruction of the access of the indigenous
inhabitants to their natural resources;
(c) The promotion and tolerance of injustice and
discrimination in the remuneration of labour and in the
establishment of working conditions;
8. Calls upon the colonial Powers to review, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution, all the privileges and concessions which are
against the interests of the indigenous inhabitants;
9. Requests the United Nations Council for South
West Africa to take urgent and effective measures to
put an end to laws and practices established in the
Territory of South West Africa by the Government
of South Africa contrary to the purposes and principles
of the Charter ;
10. Requests the colonial Powers to stop immediately
the practice of alienation of lands from the indigenous
inhabitants and to take immediate action to return
to them all such alienated lands;
ll. Urges all States concerned to co--operate fully
with the United Nations in the rapid and effective im·plementation of resolution 1514 (XV) so as to ensure
to the peoples the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence and to the use of the
natural resources of their own Territorie.s;
12. Requests the Speciai Committee to continue its
<1tudy of the problem and to report thereon to the Gen~ral Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
13. Decides to maintain this item on its agenda.
1622nd plenar_y meeting,
7 December 1967.

2302 (XXU). Question of Oman
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Oman,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Oman,6
Having also considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral ,7
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,

Recalling further its resolutions 2073 (XX) of 17
December 1965 and 2238 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Deeply concerned at the serious and critical situation
arising from the colonial policies pursued by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland in the Territory,
1. Endorses the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Oman;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory as a whole to self-determination and independence and recognizes the legitimacy of their
struggle to obtain the rights proclaimed in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Deplores the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement with
regard to Oman the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV)
and of resolutions 2073 (XX) and 2238 (XXI) of
the General Assembly;
4. Further deplores the policies of the United Kingdom, which, by installing and strengthening unrepresentative regimes in the Territory without regard for
the basic rights of the people, is contravening the relevant General Assembly resolutions;
5. Reaffirms that the natural resources of the Territory of Oman belong to the indigenous population
and that the concessions granted to foreign enterprises
without the consent of the people constitute a violation
of the rights of the people of the Territory ;
6. Considers that the military presence of the United
Kingdom and the existence of military bases in the
Territory constitute a major hindrance to the exercise
by the people of their right to self-determination and
independence and are prejudicial to peace and security
in the region ;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to take the necessary measures to implement without delay the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV) and
all other relevant General Assembly resolutions;
8. Further calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom to give immediate effect in the Territory to
the following measures:
(a) The removal of British troops and military
bases:
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Snsion, Annexes, addend!lm to agenda item 23 (A/6700/
Rev.I), chapter XIII.
1 Ibid .. agenda item 70, document A/6909.
