A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/121
23 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/121. Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the vital
importance of family reunification
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development,2 family reunification of documented migrants is an important factor in international
migration and that remittances by documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very
important source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the well-being of relatives left
behind,
Recalling its resolution 51/89 of 12 December 1996,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
98-76873

/...

A/RES/52/121
Page 2

1. Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally recognized freedom of travel to
all foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;
2. Reaffirms that all Governments, in particular those of receiving countries, must recognize the
vital importance of family reunification and promote its incorporation into national legislation in order
to ensure protection of the unity of families of documented migrants;
3. Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international legislation, the free flow of
financial remittances by foreign nationals residing in their territory to their relatives in the country of
origin;
4. Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal if it already exists, legislation
intended as a coercive measure that discriminates against legal migrants by adversely affecting family
reunification and the right to send financial remittances to relatives in the country of origin;
5. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-third session under the item
entitled "Human rights questions".
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
