S/PV.6820

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6820th meeting

Wednesday, 8 August 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Berger
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

12-45451 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1245451*

S/PV.6820

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

peaceful coexistence, extremism, criminal activity and
violations of human rights have gained ground.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of August 2012, I
should like to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, and his entire team for
their services to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July 2012. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Salamatu Hussaini Suleiman,
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the Economic Community of West African States, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
welcome this opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the deeply troubling situation in Mali.
Since the start of the crisis, a few months ago,
the situation has only worsened, seemingly reaching
new heights of severity every week. A regional pillar
of democracy has completely fallen away from the
constitutional path, undermining years of progress.
An already terrible food and nutrition emergency has
grown even worse, exposing thousands more people
to severe shortages of food, water and basic services.
In areas where there was previously stability and

2

Those grave developments have caused the people
of Mali enormous suffering. They also pose a growing
threat to international peace and security. In adopting
resolution 2056 (2012) last month, the Security Council
showed its concern. Today, in view of the latest events,
it is clear that the Council may be required to go further.
(spoke in English)
Limited progress has been made in restoring
constitutional order in Bamako. Mali’s socio-political
forces remain divided over support for the transitional
arrangements and, more broadly, over future prospects
for the country. The military junta reportedly maintains
a strong influence over the transitional process. It
has retained control over the security and defence
forces, and continues to violently repress fellow
soldiers suspected of having supported the attempted
counter-coup of 30 April.
The heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have called for a more inclusive Government, and
mandated the ECOWAS mediator to urgently engage
in consultations with Malian stakeholders. They also
decided to deploy the ECOWAS Standby Force to Mali
and to send a technical assessment mission to Bamako
to prepare for its deployment. I understand that the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, Mr. Kadré
Désiré Ouédraogo, has submitted the mission’s report
and other relevant documents to the Council.
One positive development has been the return
of President Dioncounda Traoré to Bamako. His
presence enhances the constitutional legitimacy of the
transitional arrangements and can ensure that Malians
play a central role in leading the transitional process. I
commend the steps that the President is taking to ensure
the formation of a Government of national unity. I also
welcome his announcement of the establishment of the
National Transition Committee, the National Dialogue
Committee, and the High Council of State, which he
plans to chair.
Let me turn now to the situation in the north,
where the security situation remains volatile and
unpredictable. The Ansar Dine and the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa, which are reportedly
linked to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, took
control after pushing out the National Movement for

12-45451

S/PV.6820

the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA), and have illegally
imposed Sharia law on the residents. With the influx of
regional and international jihadists, there is reason to
be concerned that the north is becoming a safe haven
for terrorists and criminal elements.
The ECOWAS mediator, President Blaise Compaoré,
has taken initial steps to meet with representatives of
the MNLA and Ansar Dine. After travelling to northern
Mali yesterday, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Djibrill Bassolé, met with the leaders
of Ansar Dine and requested that they cut ties with
terrorist movements before any peace talks could begin.
However, no meaningful dialogue has commenced
between the Government of Mali and any of the groups
in the north. With the establishment of President
Traoré’s national commission for negotiations, it is
expected that a Malian-owned dialogue process, with
the assistance of ECOWAS and neighbouring countries,
will commence shortly.
For my part, I have used my good offices to help
address the crisis through my Special Representative
for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit. From the outset of
the mediation process led by ECOWAS, Mr. Djinnit
has been in close contact with the mediation team. He
has conducted good offices missions to Mauritania and
Algeria and participated in ECOWAS summits and
other meetings on Mali.
Here at Headquarters, the Department of
Political Affairs is consulting with the Permanent
Representatives of ECOWAS member States, the core
countries and other partners. United Nations military
planners have participated, in an advisory capacity,
in the ECOWAS technical assessment mission. As
the Malian transitional authorities prepare to initiate
a national dialogue, the United Nations stands ready
to offer its considerable expertise in designing such
processes and in facilitating such a dialogue.

Dine group deliberately destroyed nine of the 16
mausoleums in Timbuktu, in callous disregard of
sites that had been classified by UNESCO as part of
the indivisible heritage of humankind. I encourage the
Security Council to give serious consideration to the
imposition of targeted travel and financial sanctions
against individuals or groups in Mali engaged in
terrorist, religious extremist or criminal activities.
The crisis in Mali is complex and multidimensional.
Its resolution requires a holistic and comprehensive
approach, rather than partial and disconnected
measures. I strongly encourage the Government of Mali
to develop an overarching political strategy to return the
country to constitutional order and re-establish State
authority in the north. The strategy should clearly spell
out responses to genuine socio-economic and political
grievances, the modalities for political dialogue and
negotiations, and the aims of eventual military action
against extremist forces in the north.
(spoke in French)
Looking ahead, it is essential for Malians to take
ownership and show leadership. ECOWAS, the African
Union, the European Union, key regional countries and
bilateral partners should all assist in this endeavour.
Many challenges lie ahead. If we are to succeed in
restoring peace in Mali and the wider Sahel region,
there must be unity of vision and close coordination.
The United Nations will continue to do its part.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hussaini-Suleiman.

The conflict in Mali has exacerbated a perilous
humanitarian situation. More than 174,000 people have
been internally displaced and more than 253,000 have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries. A severe food
security and nutrition crisis is now affecting 4.6 million
people in Mali and more than 18 million people across
the Sahel region.

Ms. Hussaini-Suleiman: It is a great honour for
me to appear once more before this body on behalf of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to update the Council on the
latest developments regarding the political and security
situation in Mali, and the efforts being made by
ECOWAS and its partners to control the situation. First
of all, however, I would like to pay a glowing tribute to
you, Sir, for your excellent handling of the proceedings
and to thank France for sponsoring this interaction. I
wish also to acknowledge all the excellent statement
made by the Secretary-General on the situation.

I am also extremely concerned about reports that
armed groups in the north are committing serious
human rights violations, including summary executions
of civilians, rapes and torture. Moreover, the Ansar

The reprehensible acts of vandalism, criminality and
gross violations of human rights that have accompanied
the rebellion in the north of Mali since 17 January are
getting worse by the day. This is happening despite

12-454513

S/PV.6820

the solemn appeal of ECOWAS and the international
community to the armed groups in the north to respect
the sanctity of the holy month of Ramadan. The latest
addition to the litany of crimes was the stoning to death
of an alleged adulterous couple and the imposition
of a dawn-to-dusk curfew on women in the occupied
territory.
Meanwhile, as tangible progress is being made in
the transitional process, the marginal forces bent on
obstructing the timely execution of the transition have
lately increased their acts of incitement and obstruction.
These disturbing developments, and the ominous threat
that the double crisis in Mali poses to regional and
international peace and security must focus the minds
of the international community. The situation calls for
urgent and decisive measures from us all.
In the light of the active consideration being
accorded by the Security Council to the ECOWAS
request for a United Nations mandate to deploy a
stabilization force to Mali under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, I intend to provide further
information not only on the political process, but also
on the planned deployment of ECOWAS troops.
It will be recalled that, in paragraph 18 of resolution
2056 (2012), adopted at the 6798th meeting on 5 July,
the Council, among other decisions,
“[e]xpresse[d] its readiness to further examine
the request of ECOWAS [for the United Nations
mandate] once additional information has been
provided regarding the objectives, means and
modalities of the envisaged deployment and other
possible measures, [and] encourage[d] in this regard
a close cooperation between Malian transitional
authorities, the Commission of ECOWAS, the
Commission of the African Union, and countries
in the region”.
Since then, ECOWAS has intensified its efforts aimed
at stabilizing the situation in Mali, in close cooperation
with the African Union, the United Nations and other
partners, in the spirit of the resolution.
On 7 July, the ECOWAS mediator in the Malian
crisis, His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President
of Burkina Faso, and the Regional Contact Group on
Mali composed of the Presidents of Benin, Côte d’Ivoire,
Liberia, Niger, Nigeria and Togo, met in Ouagadougou
with a cross-section of the Malian socio-political
stakeholders with a view to implementing the decisions

4

taken by ECOWAS at its summit, held in Yamoussoukro
on 28 and 29 June. All the major socio-political groups
in Mali attended the meeting, with the exception of the
marginal parties supporting the military junta, who
declined the invitation.
The Regional Contact Group requested the
stakeholders to make proposals to the interim President
of Mali on the establishment of a Government of
national unity by 31 July. Further, the transitional
Government was tasked, within the same time frame,
to come up with a road map with concrete tasks and
timelines for resolving the crisis, organizing a free, fair
and transparent presidential election, and securing the
territory of Mali.
The decisions met with the full approval of the
vast majority of the Malian stakeholders, including
the transitional Government, the National Assembly,
political parties and civil society organizations.
Since then, the Prime Minister has presented the
Government’s road map for the transition to both the
Malian National Assembly and the ECOWAS mediator.
In another positive development, ECOWAS facilitated
the return from France of the interim President,
Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, on 27 July. In an address to the
nation on 29 July, Mr. Traoré urged the people of Mali
to warmly welcome the assistance being proposed by
ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations and
neighbouring countries, and promised to send a formal
request as soon as he forms the Government of national
unity as requested by ECOWAS, which process is
actively under way.
In the efforts to ascertain the current security
situation on the ground and to further assess the
requirements for the eventual deployment of the
Standby Force, the ECOWAS Commission dispatched a
technical assessment mission to Mali from 6 to 19 July.
The mission was also in fulfillment of the request of the
Security Council for greater clarity on the anticipated
deployment. In the spirit of the close cooperation
between ECOWAS and its partners, military and
political experts from the African Union, the United
Nations and other partners joined their counterparts
from ECOWAS on the mission.
The report of the technical assessment mission
was presented to the ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence
Staff at their meeting in Abidjan from 25 to 27 July.
A final planning conference to further refine the
strategic concept, with the participation of ECOWAS,

12-45451

S/PV.6820

the African Union, the United Nations, the European
Union and other partners, is scheduled to be held
from 9 to 13 August in Bamako to pave the way for
the deployment as soon as the expected United Nations
mandate is received.
Following the technical assessment mission,
detailed information about the planned deployment in
a report entitled “ECOWAS strategic concept for the
resolution of the crisis in the Republic of Mali”, was
submitted on 3 August to the Council through the
Office of the Secretary-General. The report captures,
among others, the following areas: strategic objectives,
the operational concept, military plans and details of
force generation, the political command and control
architecture, timelines for the operation, and the
means available and additional resources required.
It also captures the cooperation modalities with the
Government of Mali and other partners. ECOWAS
anticipates that the report and the outcome of the final
planning conference will clear up all lingering issues
with regard to the deployment intended by ECOWAS
and secure the United Nations mandate requested by
ECOWAS and the AU.
As indicated in previous submissions to the
Council, the ECOWAS strategy in Mali aims to
intensify mediation efforts with all stakeholders
while undertaking a phased deployment process. The
purpose of the ECOWAS stabilization force is to assist
the Government of Mali to achieve the following
objectives: ensure the security of the transition and its
institutions; restructure and reorganize the security
and defence forces of Mali; and restore the territorial
integrity of the country by extending State authority to
the north, combating terrorist and criminal networks
and responding to the humanitarian consequences of
the crisis.
The security and humanitarian situation in the north
of Mali is getting worse by the day. With the eviction
of the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad
(MNLA) from the north by the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO) and Ansar Dine, at
the end of June 2012, the international community can
today hardly characterize the happenings in the north
as acts of rebellion or expression of self-determination.
The removal of MNLA from the equation has replaced
political demands with outright terrorism and
criminality, which should be combated with all the
means available.

We are running out of time. Every day that we
dither and postpone concrete action in Mali provides the
terrorists and criminal networks yet another opportunity
to consolidate, commit atrocious war crimes and
worsen the plight of the populations in the north. The
objective of those terrorist groups and transnational
organized criminals is clear, namely, to create a safe
haven and a coordinating centre in the north of Mali
for continental terrorist networks, including Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, MUJAO, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab. If that objective is realized, no country in
Africa, or indeed outside the continent, will be safe.
The longer the precarious situation persists, the greater
the danger it poses to regional and international peace
and security. The time to act is now. A Council mandate
to deploy a stabilization force in Mali will constitute
concrete and decisive action.
Finally, may I take this opportunity to express the
sincere appreciation of ECOWAS to the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union and bilateral
partners for the strong support extended to ECOWAS,
in particular by making available their experts to
participate in the critical final planning conference.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Commission of the African Union (AU), I should like to
thank the presidency of the Security Council for kindly
having invited the African Union to this meeting on the
situation in Mali. The holding of this meeting reflects
the importance that the international community
attaches to the ongoing developments in that country.
I should also like to reiterate the AU’s gratitude
to the members of the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 2056 (2012). That resolution served
to confer greater authority on the outcomes of the first
meeting of the support and follow-up group, which was
held in Abidjan on 6 June under the joint auspices of the
African Union, the United Nations and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
I should also like to join Commissioner Suleiman
in thanking the Secretary-General for his detailed
briefing which, among other things, has highlighted the
scope of the challenges we face in Mali.
I welcome the presence of the representative of
Mali, the ECOWAS Commissioner for Political Affairs
and Security and the representatives from Côte d’Ivoire

12-454515

S/PV.6820

accompanying her, and the representative of Burkina
Faso, who is here in that country’s capacity as mediator
for the crisis in Mali. I would like to reiterate that the
tireless efforts being made by ECOWAS with a view
to resolving the current crisis in Mali deserve our full
appreciation.
I would also like to acknowledge the commitment
of the countries of the region that, by dint of their
proximity, have a crucial contribution to make to the
efforts under way. The statement issued following
the meeting of Foreign Ministers of neighbouring
countries held in Niamey on 6 August — with invited
participants from Libya, Nigeria and Chad — attests to
that commitment.
Like the other members of the international
community, the African Union is deeply worried about
the current situation in Mali, which poses one of the
most serious threats to peace and security facing the
continent. The developments that have taken place
in Mali threaten two of the AU’s most fundamental
principles. The first is respect for the unity and territorial
integrity of its member States — which is being
jeopardized by the occupation of a significant part of
the country’s territory by armed, terrorist and criminal
groups. The other is the rejection of unconstitutional
changes and of the seizing of power by force — being
undermined by the coup d’état of 22 March.
The crisis in Mali also serves to shed light on other
threats to peace and security in the continent. In that
regard, it is worth highlighting how commonplace the
use of armed rebellion has become for pursuing political
ends, especially as there are institutional mechanisms in
place that provide a framework for voicing and taking
into account all legitimate claims. This development
threatens to undermine the democratization process
taking place in the continent.
The situation in Mali is also of concern because of
the presence of terrorist and criminal groups in the north
of the country for many years. Thanks to the armed
rebellion and the 22 March coup d’état, those groups
have been able to expand their control and now pose an
exponentially larger threat both to the countries of the
region and to the international community as a whole.
In addition, there is the catastrophic humanitarian
situation and grave violations of human rights and other
criminal acts, among which the destruction of historic
monuments in Timbuktu is the most disgraceful.

6

All those aspects constitute the reason for the
African Union having become actively involved in
finding a speedy resolution to the situation in Mali. The
AU Peace and Security Council has devoted no fewer
than six meetings to this situation, including two at the
ministerial level and one at the level of heads of State
and Government. We have undertaken several initiatives
to facilitate both coordination among the various
stakeholders involved and the mobilization of support
from the international community for the continent’s
efforts, namely, by organizing and operationalizing the
support and follow-up group on the situation in Mali.
This Security Council meeting is taking place at
a time when encouraging signs seem to be emerging
when it comes to the process of institutional
normalization in Mali. Following the coup d’état last
March and the unacceptable physical attack, on 21 May,
on interim President Dioncounda Traoré, his return
to Mali and the speech he made shortly thereafter, as
well the consultations under way aimed at establishing
a Government of national unity, give hope for a swift
stabilization of the situation in Bamako. It must be
emphasized that that is an essential precondition
for the mobilization of efforts in Mali, as well as for
more sustained and coordinated commitment from
the international community to facing up to the grave
threats posed by the situation in the north of the country
to the very existence of the Malian State itself.
At the Council no doubt knows, following the 14 July
summit meeting held under the presidency of President
Alassane Ouattara, the AU Peace and Security Council
endorsed the outcome of the ECOWAS contact group
meeting held in Ouagadougou on 7 July concerning
the establishment of a Government of national
unity. Following that meeting, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Ramtame Lamamra, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa, Ambassador
Said Djinnit, together with representatives of ECOWAS,
the European Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie, met in Bamako in early August. The
purpose of that joint mission, which took place upon
the return to Mali of President Dioncounda Traoré,
was to show the international community’s support for
his endeavours and to encourage him to move ahead
quickly.
It is important that our meeting today serve to
encourage Malians to speed up the process of forming a
Government of national unity that will permit the lifting

12-45451

S/PV.6820

of the suspension of Mali’s participation in African
Union activities, imposed by the Peace and Security
Council last March. It is also critical that this meeting
underline that the transition must absolutely uphold the
rule of law, especially with regard to the atrocities and
human rights violations seen in Bamako.
The African Union urges dialogue among the parties
willing to negotiate on the basis of respect for the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali and of full rejection of
the armed rebellion, terrorism and attendant criminal
activities. In that context, we welcome the efforts of the
ECOWAS mediator, and we urge him to persevere in
his work, including through close coordination with the
core countries.
At the same time, as the Commissioner for Peace
and Security Council has repeatedly stressed, other
options must be pursued because we must absolutely
not allow the situation on the ground to continue
indefinitely. That is why the Peace and Security Council
stated from the outset its intention to impose sanctions
on the terrorist and criminal groups operating in the
north of Mali, as well as against any other armed group
impeding progress towards a solution to the crisis and
the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union. The
Commission of the African Union is in the process of
compiling a list of terrorist and criminal armed groups
operating in the north of Mali in order to add them to
the African Union list of terrorist groups.
It is also important to set in motion the security
and military plans necessary to safeguard transition
institutions, to restructure and reorganize Mali’s
defence and security forces, and to restore State
authority in the north, even as we fight the terrorist and
criminal networks on the ground. In that regard, the
African Union supports the ECOWAS planning process
and calls for similar support from the Security Council
and other international players.
Based on the Security Council’s request for
clarification at its annual consultation with the Peace
and Security Council this past June in New York, on
the relevant Peace and Security Council decisions, and
on resolution 2056 (2012), it is important to develop a
strategic concept for the political, security and military
measures to be taken for a timely settlement of the
crisis in Mali. The Commission continues to work with
ECOWAS and the core countries, as well as with the
United Nations, the European Union and other partners,
for such a document’s swift completion. As the Peace

and Security Council has stressed, that strategic concept
and ECOWAS planning must mutually reinforce each
other.
The severity of the crisis in Mali and the scope
of the stakes involved demand the mobilization of the
entire international community and close coordination
of efforts so as to maximize the impact of actions taken
and achieve the desired results. In that regard, it is
important to maintain and strengthen coherence among
African initiatives in the spirit of the declaration on Mali
adopted at the most recent African Union summit in
Addis Ababa in July. It is also important to continue to
work in a spirit of genuine partnership with the Security
Council and other international actors involved so that
they can offer the needed support to African efforts and
take all necessary decisions to that end. The African
Union, through the Peace and Security Council and the
Commission, is devoting every effort to that goal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
commend your initiative in convening this meeting on
the grave situation in my country, Mali. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
concise and comprehensive briefing and for all his
laudable efforts in search of a lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali, in keeping with the spirit of resolution
2056 (2012).
The situation in Mali has seen a significant
development in the return of interim President
Dioncounda Traoré after more than two months in
France undergoing medical treatment after the attack
on him on 21 May. In a speech to the Malian people on
29 July, the Head of State reiterated his forgiveness of
his attackers in a spirit of good will, magnanimity and
selflessness when he said:
“I have said and I repeat today that my life is nothing
compared to Mali, and I reiterate my forgiveness
of my attackers. I forgive all Mali. I forgive in the
name of Mali, because Mali will need all its energy
and all its children if it is to get back on its feet.”
Still, despite the generosity of spirit and humanism
that characterize the statesman who is President of the
transition, the law must also be enforced. Committed
to fighting impunity and true to its responsibilities, the

12-454517

S/PV.6820

Government opened an investigation and has charged
the alleged assailants with disturbance of the public
order, attempted murder, accessory to attempted murder
and failure to assist a person in peril. Their trial began
yesterday, 7 August, and a verdict is expected in the
coming weeks.
Today more than ever, Mali is determined to
meet the many brutal challenges to its sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity. In that light,
the interim President of the Republic has proposed a
new governmental structure for emergence from the
crisis through the creation of transitional institutions,
addressing the various concerns of various national
actors. These include a high State council, comprised
of the President and two Vice-residents; a Government
of national unity with representatives of all engaged
elements of society; an advisory national transitional
council, bringing together representatives of political
parties and civil society; and a national negotiation
council charged with conducting peace talks with the
armed groups in the north of Mali, in cooperation with
the mediator sent by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).
Moreover, the plan indicates that the security of
the President and other institutions of the country will
be provided by the Malian army and security services.
It also includes making a request to ECOWAS, the
African Union and the United Nations pursuant to the
conclusions of the ECOWAS assessment mission. A
week ago, the interim President launched consultations
with all actors in the country aimed at strengthened
efforts in the transition to a national unity Government.
Although significant progress has been made in the
past week towards re-establishing constitutional order
and stabilizing the country’s institutions, it remains
true that the situation in the northern regions of Mali
is one of great concern. Terrorist and radical Islamist
groups, with the complicity of Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, are perpetrating all sorts of abuses against
innocent civilians, trampling on fundamental human
rights and international humanitarian law. The terrorist
groups Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and
Jihad in West Africa are engaging in all sorts of criminal
activities, including destroying socio-economic
institutions and mausoleums classified as national
heritage sites by UNESCO, as was just mentioned by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union.

8

Allow me to also comment on the humanitarian
situation in the region, which has continued to
deteriorate and requires the international community
and all those of goodwill to act. At present, the
necessary funding to meet the most urgent needs of the
refugees and internally displaced persons are frankly
inadequate. The 167,000 internally displaced persons
and the 250,000 refugees in neighbouring countries,
in particular in the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mauritania,
Algeria, Guinea and Togo, are living in extremely
arduous conditions.
The Government of Mali, in cooperation with the High
Islamic Council of Mali, the Collectif de ressortissants
du Nord, the Malian Red Cross, l’Association Cri du
coeur and United Nations humanitarian agencies have
undertaken the organization of humanitarian convoys
in the north, in particular in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal,
Douentza, Hombori and Gossi. Food, medicine and
insecticide-treated mosquito nets have been provided to
those regions under the control of fundamentalists and
terrorist groups. Teams of doctors have been quickly
dispatched to deal with medical emergencies.
Improving the living conditions of those affected
by the crisis in the north and food insecurity are among
the priorities of the Malian Government, which has
launched a major resource mobilization campaign
addressed to the international community.
Most recently, the Malian Minister for Humanitarian
Action, Solidarity and the Elderly led a large delegation
to visit Malian refugee camps in Burkina Faso in order
to provide moral and financial support. The delegation,
which is currently in the Niger, where it was received
by the Prime Minister, intends to soon travel to
Mauritania, which has welcomed a large number of
Malian refugees.
I should like here to thank neighbouring countries,
United Nations humanitarian agencies and all bilateral
and multilateral partners for their support. I should also
like to take this opportunity to appeal urgently to the
international community for support in order to avoid a
humanitarian disaster in the region.
The Secretary-General earlier referred to the
various efforts being made by ECOWAS, neighbouring
countries and the Security Council to seek lasting
solutions to the serious crisis besetting Mali. I wish to
take this opportunity firmly to reiterate the unfailing
commitment of the Government of Mali to spare no
effort in working together with the African Union,

12-45451

S/PV.6820

ECOWAS, the Security Council and all other partners
to achieve the Government’s objectives, namely, to
free the northern region of Mali and organize free and
democratic elections throughout the country’s entire
territory.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

12-454519
