S/PV.7217

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7217th meeting

Tuesday, 15 July 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Hahn Choonghee
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Shearman
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its seventh session (S/2014/67)

14-46720 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1446720*

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Guinea-Bissau. That will continue to be a major priority
for the Commission.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
seventh session (S/2014/67)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent
Representative of Croatia and former Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/67, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its seventh session.
I now give the floor to Mr. Drobnjak.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): On behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I am pleased to
present the report of the Commission on its seventh
session, as contained in document S/2014/67. The
report presents the progress made in taking forward
the recommendations of the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex).
It is organized around the three main functions of the
Commission, namely, advocacy and sustained attention,
resource mobilization and forging coherence. Allow
me to highlight a number of issues from the report that
deserve the particular attention of the Council.
First, the Commission continues to place particular
emphasis on ways to capitalize on the wealth of
experience and diverse capacities that its membership
can offer in support of peacebuilding objectives for the
countries on its agenda. That was a key conclusion of
the 2010 review. During the reporting period, additional
emphasis was placed on engaging members from the
region and subregion in support of the peacebuilding
process in Burundi, the Central African Republic and

2/23

15/07/2014

Secondly, the Commission continues to recognize
that its membership structure should also shape the
nature and scope of its advisory role to the principal
organs of the United Nations. I am pleased to note
that, thanks to Rwanda’s efforts and commitment
over the past year, the reporting period witnessed
significant progress in identifying practical modalities
for informal interaction between the Commission and
the Security Council. The evolving practice of aligning
the Commission’s calendar of field visits with the
Council’s periodic consideration of mission mandates
has proven to be particularly useful. At the same time,
there is room for further improvement. In view of the
Commission’ s engagement in a variety of post-conflict
contexts, there is a particular need for greater clarity in
the Council with respect to the Commission’s areas of
strength and limitations in each specific context. The
members of the Commission that are also members of
the Security Council can play a central role in ensuring
that the Council is able to draw more effectively on
the Commission’s unique membership structure and
outreach.
Thirdly, through its engagement with Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, the Commission is constantly
reminded that peacebuilding is a process fraught with
challenges that are typically context-specific. Our
engagement therefore takes various forms at different
stages of the peacebuilding efforts. I would like to
highlight the following points in relation to the three
functions of the Commission.
First, the Commission’s country-specific engagement
over the past year has confirmed that its accompaniment
function depends first and foremost on the level of
commitment demonstrated by national interlocutors and
on the quality of the international response in support
of such commitment. The Commission therefore
continues to advocate for mutual accountability and
commitments between the countries on the agenda and
their main partners.
Secondly, while it will continue to prioritize its
resource mobilization function, the Commission has
repeatedly confirmed that it is not a viable fundraising
mechanism. Instead and as an intergovernmental body,
the Commission provides a platform for highlighting
the imperative for the timely deployment of targeted
resources, especially in crisis situations such as in
14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau, or
as countries approach critical milestones, such as
the elections that took place in Guinea last year and
in Guinea-Bissau this year. The enhanced synergy
with the Peacebuilding Fund has made these timely
interventions possible.
Thirdly, addressing the challenge of competing
agendas and the fragmentation of peacebuilding
activities remains a central objective of the Commission.
The Commission undertakes its function of forging
coherence by promoting greater focus on strategic
opportunities that must be seized and by pointing to
strategic gaps in response to peacebuilding priorities
in the countries on its agenda. The complementarity
between the roles of the Commission and the United
Nations senior leadership in the field is a key factor for
fostering the coherence of messages and actions. This
was increasingly manifest last year in the Commission’s
engagement with Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone.
The transition from security and politically
focused United Nations missions to developmentoriented United Nations country teams highlights the
interlinkage between the Commission’s three core
functions. In 2013, the Commission positioned itself to
support the Security Council’s decision to draw down
and subsequently close the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. The transition of
the United Nations presence to a United Nations country
team has ushered Sierra Leone into a new phase of its
transformation towards socioeconomic development.
The Council has also requested the Commission
to support the planned transition of the United Nations
Office in Burundi, where the dynamics and needs are
quite different from those that prevailed in Sierra Leone.
The Working Group on Lessons Learned decided to
dedicate its work in 2014 to identifying areas where
the Commission can effectively deploy the appropriate
combination of its three core functions in support of
transitions of Security Council-mandated missions.
Recognizing the important contribution of women
to peacebuilding efforts, the Commission approached
its thematic focus on economic revitalization and
national reconciliation during the reporting period
by considering the gender dimension of both themes.
A partnership with UN-Women has enabled the
Commission to explore the transformative role of
women in post-conflict societies. A high-level event
on women’s economic empowerment for peacebuilding

S/PV.7217

was convened in September 2013 and was chaired by
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Croatia. The event resulted in a
political declaration that affirmed the commitment
of the Commission’s members to women’s economic
empowerment for peacebuilding. A meeting of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned in December 2013
also reaffirmed the importance of gender mainstreaming
in the planning, priority setting, design and delivery of
national reconciliation processes.
The Commission convened it first-ever annual
substantive session on 23 June. The decision to convene
annual sessions was taken during the reporting period
with a view to potentially strengthening the Commission’s
contribution to the development of intergovernmental
policy in areas that can improve outcomes for the
people in countries emerging from conflict. The first
annual session demonstrated the Commission’s unique
power to convene Member States, United Nations
entities, international financial institutions, regional
development banks and civil society. It also confirmed
that the Commission is a unique platform for exploring
the multidimensional nature of peacebuilding and the
policy-related opportunities and challenges.
This year will mark the end of the second five-year
review cycle for the peacebuilding architecture. A
second comprehensive review by the General Assembly
and the Security Council will take place in 2015. The
Commission has initiated advance informal preparation
that is currently exploring the potential scope and
suggested terms of reference of the review. The outcome
of this informal preparation will be transmitted to the
General Assembly and the Security Council in the
context of the next annual report for consideration. I
wish to acknowledge the role of the Peacebuilding
Support Office and Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and her team in support of the
Commission’s work and activities during the reporting
period. I can only highly praise their contributions.
In conclusion, I must emphasize that the past
year has witnessed a number of positive and worrying
developments that call for further intensified efforts
both to seize opportunities and to address threats to
sustaining peace. While we continue to face systemic
challenges, we must commit to facing these challenges
with the requisite resolve and determination. We are
approaching a crucial year in 2015, where we can
collectively help shape the future socioeconomic and
peacebuilding agenda of the United Nations. These

14-467203/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

efforts must come together and must be mutually
reinforcing.
The President: I thank Mr. Drobnjak for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota: I thank the Rwandan presidency of
the Security Council for its continuing commitment to
advancing the Council’s consideration of post-conflict
peacebuilding, including by drawing on the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in a considered
and meaningful way.
My predecessor’s presentation of the Commission’s
report on its seventh session (S/2014/67) shed light on
its country-specific engagements, its ongoing efforts in
the area of policy development, and the progress made
in strengthening its advisory function to the Council.
The Commission believes, however, that the annual
briefings and follow-up informal interactive dialogue
present the two bodies with a valuable opportunity to
reflect on the critical challenges that continue to affect
the United Nations contribution to sustaining peace in
countries emerging from conflict.
The recent crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders that our efforts
to prevent a relapse into conflict remain insufficient
and that our tools are not fully adequate. Those crises
have also reminded us that the consequences of relapse
can cause untold human tragedy and create instability
across State boundaries. The Security Council has been
mandated to respond and seek to bring end to violent
conflicts using a variety of strategies and tools. The
Peacebuilding Commission was established, in 2005, to
help the United Nations to strengthen those strategies
and find complementary avenues to bring long-lasting
stability to countries emerging from conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission, along with the
Peacebuilding Fund, has continued to work intensively
in a variety of scenarios. In the case of the PBC, a
particular focus has been placed on supporting the
countries on our agenda. The nature of our support
and engagement varies according to the nature of the
challenges in each situation. Despite the re-emergence
of conflict in the Central African Repblic, the PBC
has continued to support the United Nations and
African Union missions, in order to seek to strengthen
collaboration in the region and to ensure backing
for early efforts at institution-building. In Burundi,
the Commission has worked closely with the United
4/23

15/07/2014

Nations leadership and the World Bank to intensify
and sustain regional and international engagement in
support of national attempts to address the country’s
political and socioeconomic challenges. In Guinea, the
Commission leveraged its political weight in support
of United Nations mediation efforts to help resolve the
political stand-off prior to this year’s parliamentary
elections. The Commission is now involved in efforts
for strengthening the capacity of the new Parliament
so that it can play its role as a key part of the country’s
institutions and fully participate in the definition
of Guinea’s political and economic development.
Similarly in Guinea-Bissau, the Commission threw its
political weight behind the efforts of the United Nations
leadership to ensure a smooth return to constitutional
order and more inclusive political arrangements in
the wake of the 2012 unconstitutional change of
Government. As Sierra Leone has approached the
milestone of transitioning from a Security Councilmandated mission, the Commission continues to provide
an inter-governmental platform that the Government
can rely upon to support its political and developmental
gains and to address outstanding issues and challenges.
In each of those situations, the political nature of the
Commission’s engagement was effectively reinforced
by the timely and strategic programmatic interventions
of the Peacebuilding Fund.
The PBC’s varied context-specific engagements have
highlighted areas in which broader intergovernmental
policy development is necessary to help countries
reduce the risk of conflict. For example, there is a need to
consider the development of international frameworks
that can help countries mobilize domestic resources to
fund development efforts and build key institutions.
During its first annual session convened on 23 June,
the Peacebuilding Commission examined mechanisms
for supporting domestic revenue-generation and
combating illicit financial flows out of countries
emerging from conflict. Those included, among other
things, combating trade mis-invoicing and developing
capacity and expertise to negotiate fair contracts with
companies responsible for the extraction of national
resources. Most States emerging from conflict struggle
to develop the domestic revenue-generation systems
necessary to sustain effective institutions and fully
re-establish the legitimacy and authority of the State.
The necessary political, technical and financial support
required for critical institution-building in this area is
slow to arrive. Support sustained over time is seen as
a requirement for new institutions to become resilient

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and act as an effective brake against renewed conflict.
At the same time, illicit financial flows deprive postconflict countries of vital resources needed or basic
services and recovery, often exceeding development
assistance in volume.
Drawing on the experience gained from its
engagement with the countries on its agenda, the
Commission is able to highlight three elements that
should underpin a new generation of political strategies
to reinforce our collective efforts to prevent a relapse
into conflict.
First, with regard to national ownership, national
leadership and national political commitment are
indispensable ingredients for durable peace. There is
a need for political strategies to include measures and
incentives that allow for broad inclusion in political
life, thereby ensuring that key national stakeholders
remain engaged and committed to the peacebuilding
process. As Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
underscored in his statement at the opening of the PBC
annual session, let us not forget that
“international aid is of course necessary in many
situations, but it rarely helps build a new social
contract. It can also weaken national ownership.
The best way to assist countries going through
post-conflict transition is to help them generate
their own resources and capacities.”
In that regard, we would emphasize as well the
importance of efforts towards national capacity
building.
Secondly, regional engagement and commitment
are potentially extremely valuable for stable and
sustainable peace. There is a need to ensure that the
perspectives, interests and concerns of regional actors
and neighbouring countries are factored into a broader
political strategy in support of countries emerging from
conflict. There is also the need to ensure that regional
coherence is attained through active engagement by
regional and subregional mechanisms and support from
the United Nations and other partners. In that regard,
one should highlight the positive dynamic that can
be now observed between and among the four WestAfrican countries on the PBC agenda — namely,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and Liberia — and
the role played by the Economic Community of West
African States and the Mario River Union, regional
organizations of which they are part.

S/PV.7217

Thirdly, a political strategy must be reinforced
by programmatic interventions with particular focus
on support to institution-building, involving bilateral
partners, regional development banks and international
financial institutions. There is also a need to prioritize
support to those institutions and mechanisms that
strengthen the capacity of societies to manage tensions,
and the capacity of Governments to deliver basic
services, protect human rights and facilitate access to
justice.
Those strategies should naturally be adapted to
country-specific contexts. At the same time, they need
to be pursued through long term, sustained and mutual
commitments between the country concerned and its
partners, regional and international organizations.
I also wish to highlight the importance of developing
improved interaction between the PBC and the Security
Council. As Chair of the country-specific configuration
on Guinea-Bissau, I have been encouraged by my
experiencing of a high degree of attention on the part
of the Council with respect to briefings I have made.
The diplomatic expertise demonstrated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
should inspire us to attribute greater value to mutually
reinforcing strategies between the Security Council
and the PBC. We can further refine our procedures in
future in order to maximize the potential gains from
enhanced interaction.
The Commission looks forward to further
exchanging views with members of the Council on
those and other elements in the course of the informal
interactive dialogue to be convened by the Council’s
presidency this afternoon.
Next year, the Security Council and the General
Assembly will embark upon the 10-year comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. Our collective approach to preventing
a relapse into conflict, as well as our successes and
failures, must be a central aspect of the review. There
is a need for deepening the analysis, supported by
country examples, of how multifaceted United Nations
efforts contribute to long-term and sustainable peace.
There is also a need to analyse how United Nations
political mandates and evolving operational practice
have made a real difference in the countries affected
by, or emerging from, conflict. The Commission will
benefit from that analysis and from the outcome of the
2015 review as it seeks to further strengthen, deepen

14-467205/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and focus its advisory function to the Council and its
support to the United Nations leadership in the field as
we collectively tackle the complexity of post-conflict
situations and try to prevent the recurrence of conflict.
Finally, before concluding, allow me to express
my gratitude and acknowledge the highly professional
and wise counsel that I have received from Assistant
Secretary-General Judy Cheng Hopkins, as she prepares
to assume new responsibilities. Let me also thank her
team for its support to the Commission’s work and
activities.
The President: I thank Mr. De Aguiar Patriota for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting to discuss the report
(S/2014/67) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
of its seventh session. I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, for his committed leadership
of the PBC, and indeed for a very lucid briefing
this morning. I also want to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative
of Croatia and former Chair of the PBC for his
statement on the seventh session of the Commission.
Nigeria commends the chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the Peacebuilding Support Office
for promoting the work of the Commission. We owe a
great debt to Rwanda for chairing the PBC work stream
to improve relations between the Security Council and
the Commission.
The annual debate on the report on the work
of the PBC, I believe, provides an opportunity not
only to review the work of the PBC and its various
configurations, but also to reflect on how best to
support the efforts of post-conflict countries to avoid
a relapse into conflict. In fact, it is instructive that a
recent World Bank report entitled “Conflict Relapse
and the Sustainability of Post-Conflict Peace” indicates
that 90 per cent of conflicts that have occurred in
the past decade took place in countries that had
previously experienced civil war. According to that
report, the problem with civil war is not the challenge
of preventing new conflicts from arising, but that of
permanently ending those that have already started.
For that reason, we must find sustainable and enduring

6/23

15/07/2014

solutions that address the roots of conflicts and not just
their symptoms.
Nigeria would like to comment on a few of the issues
highlighted in the 2014 report of the PBC, including
the working methods of the PBC, relations between the
PBC and the principal organs of the United Nations,
resource mobilization, the importance of forging
coherence to coordinate the activities of stakeholders,
and the role of the membership.
We welcome the PBC’s efforts in pursuing
improvements to facilitate engagement with and
ownership of the Commission’s objectives by Member
States, the United Nations system and international
partners. We take note of the outcomes of the various
working-level informal consultations held between
February and November 2013. In particular, we
applaud the compilation of a compendium covering
aspects related to PBC’s country-specific engagement
and serves as a useful reference for chairs of country
configurations and external partners.
Equally significant was the decision of the
Organizational Committee to convene an annual
session of the PBC in order to facilitate closer
interaction and engagement among stakeholders in
New York and capitals of member States. We are
pleased to note that this decision has already been put
into effect with the first annual PBC session, which
took place on 23 June. That session, which we consider
to have been a great success, addressed the challenges
to post-conflict peacebuilding and took note of lessons
learned so far in enhancing the work of the PBC. The
convening of the annual session, in our view, represents
a significant improvement in the working methods of
the PBC, insofar as it allows for extensive discussions
of important issues pertaining to the development of
policy guidelines for the PBC.
Despite those achievements, stakeholders broadly
agree that the working methods of the Commission can
be further improved. In that regard, we believe that,
where appropriate, some of the rules of procedure of
the PBC that have been in operation since its inception
should be re-examined and reviewed for improvement
vis-à-vis the objectives of the Commission. Indeed, that
should be a key priority at the 2015 review.
Improved performance by the PBC will, in part,
depend on its relations with the principal organs of the
United Nations, in particular the Council. We recall
in that regard that the Council, in its resolution 2086

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

(2013), expressed its desire to utilize the advisory,
advocacy and resource mobilization roles of the
Commission in peacebuilding activities and to harness
those roles to advance a more coherent approach with
respect to multidimensional peacekeeping mandates
in countries on its agenda. To attain those objectives,
the advisory role of the Commission to the Security
Council should be enhanced, its expertise should be
utilized on all issues within the competence of the PBC,
and the Commission should be central to the support
for post-conflict countries.
In our times, the PBC seems to be operating in
a crowded setting. That calls for improvement in
coordination and coherence and for the clear delineation
of responsibilities between key stakeholders in the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture to prevent
duplication of efforts and maximize outcomes. In more
specific terms, predictable and sustainable financing
are essential for recovery activities in the countries on
the agenda of the PBC. That requires a larger financial
contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund and support for
the efforts of the chairs of the country configurations
for countries on the PBC agenda.
We have learned over the years that national
ownership and inclusivity are core principles of postconflict peacebuilding. All stakeholders, national
and international development partners alike, that
are actively engaged in peacebuilding should be
guided by those principles as they help post-conflict
countries in their recovery efforts. More important,
expressions of support must move beyond rhetoric
and mere proclamations to specific action, which
must be results-oriented. In that connection, through
its Technical Aid Corps, Nigeria offers to place its
expertise in a framework for South-South cooperation
to support the countries on the PBC agenda in their
civilian capacity-building requirements. We call on
Member States capable of offering assistance to forge
similar partnerships with the countries concerned as a
way of complementing their efforts to build national
capacities.
Nigeria is firmly committed to the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations. We have stood on the
frontline of global peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and have been a member of the PBC Organizational
Committee since its inception. Indeed, Nigeria is a
member of all the country-specific configurations
of the PBC. We shall remain fully engaged in the
discussions related to the scope and content of the 2015

S/PV.7217

review of the peacebuilding architecture. We welcome
the ongoing process of deliberations and consultations
on this matter and look forward to the second review
of the PBC, which can effectively put that fledgling
intergovernmental entity on a firmer footing to propel
it to its full potential.
Ms. King (Australia): We express our appreciation
to Rwanda for its leadership on peacebuilding, including
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I thank Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak and Ambassador Antonio Patriota
for their briefings this morning.
Today’s meeting is a key opportunity for us to
reflect on the United Nations peacebuilding efforts in
the lead-up to the 10-year review next year. In doing
so, we should recall the genesis of the Peacebuilding
Commission and what drove its establishment. Kofi
Annan referred to a gaping hole in the United Nations
institutional machinery. The United Nations had no
formal mechanism to support post-conflict countries’
transition to stability and to sustain international
attention beyond the headline-grabbing conflict
period. The PBC and Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) have
made essential progress in filling that gap, with critical
support from the Peacebuilding Support Office. Since
the PBC was established, in 2005, peacebuilding
efforts have evolved considerably. The PBC report
(S/2014/67) we are discussing today includes success
stories in which country-specific configurations have
demonstrated their value. We have seen the transition
out of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone in Sierra Leone, in which the
PBC and PBF have played a bridging role in sustaining
international attention and ameliorating the so-called
financing cliff.
Liberia is similarly making progress in its
transition, supported by the PBC configuration. But we
have also seen a relapse in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, which has caused extreme suffering,
erased development gains and threatened regional
stability. We encourage the PBC to continue to work
with the Security Council during the stand-up of the
United Nations Integrated Peacekeeping Mission in the
Central African Republic.
We have seen the emergence of the G7+ and the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, which champion
national ownership and leadership of the country’s own
path towards the sustainable development agenda in

14-467207/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

a very practical way. We commend the leadership of
Timor-Leste and its partners on that important agenda.
We have also just held the first annual session
of the PBC, at which the Deputy Secretary-General
highlighted that the best way to assist post-conflict
countries was to help them to build their own futures.
We share his view that countries’ capacity to raise
their own revenues, including through taxation, and to
fight illegal flows by supporting action on corruption,
bribery and transparency of tax information, for
example, is critical to peacebuilding efforts. Such
transformative assistance should be a core element of
the peacebuilding function, and we very much welcome
the focus on that aspect at the first annual PBC session.
The Peacebuilding Fund has developed into an
effective mechanism to deliver fast, flexible funding,
while taking risks and filling vital gaps. We welcome
the increased involvement of the Peacebuilding Fund
to support post-conflict peacebuilding — in Papua
New Guinea, for example. With the referendum om
Bougainville’s future political status to take place
between 2015 and 2020, the next few years there will
be critical to consolidating the peacebuilding process.
We are pleased that gender and women’s
empowerment is the focus of the Peacebuilding Fund
business plan for 2014-2016, although we are still a
long way from the target of 15 per cent of funding for
projects focused on gender equality. We need to do
better on that.

15/07/2014

of the United Nations. The review should provide
recommendations for the United Nations development
system that can be taken up in the next quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, in 2016, to allow the
system to fully deliver on the post-2015 development
agenda.
A fundamental question for the Security Council is
the nature of the relationship between the Council and
the peacebuilding architecture. The review provides
an opportunity for us to articulate clearly how the
PBC can most effectively complement the Council’s
work. Australia has been a consistent advocate for
deepening that relationship with more frequent,
formal and informal interaction. We must promote
effective engagement between the two. The PBC can
act as an early-warning mechanism and a key source
of advice. We agree with the Chair of the PBC that the
Council should draw on that advice in a considered and
meaningful way.
The Burundi configuration provides a good case
study of the value added that the PBC can bring to the
Council at a delicate time in Burundi’s peacebuilding
process. The configuration’s cooperation with the
Council has been important. We hope that will continue
and that Burundi will take the actions necessary to
maintain stability and hold free and fair elections in
2015.

The 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture,
which is mandated to be comprehensive, should
therefore take into account all of those developments.
It should take as its starting point the original purpose
of the peacebuilding architecture — namely, the gaping
hole — because clearly important gaps still exist.

In conclusion, we need to remember that
peacebuilding is a complex process and that, as others
have said this morning, is very context-specific. It is
about building citizens’ confidence in their Government
and renewing that trust. The PBC must ensure that the
United Nations has the most effective architecture
possible to help ensure that the 1.5 billion people living
in States affected by violence and conflict are spared
from the devastating impact of relapse, and have an
opportunity to live their lives in a stable and secure
environment. We look forward to the December report
from the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict and to an opportunity to debate
what more the Council can do to promote effective and
coherent United Nations peacebuilding.

We should also look at the full range of actors
involved in peacebuilding, including United Nations
funds and programmes, to ensure we are fostering
coherence and coordination across the United Nations
system. We must avoid artificial divides between
the peacebuilding and development architecture

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Rwandan presidency for organizing
this annual debate on the work of the seventh session
of Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also thank
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia and Mr. Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota of Brazil for their briefings.

We welcome the fact that there are now more players
in the peacebuilding field. The World Bank and other
international financial institutions are strongly focused
on post-conflict issues, as are regional and subregional
organizations. That brings to bear a valuable range of
experience and analysis.

8/23

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

First of all, I would like to welcome the
commemoration of Peacebuilding Day and the holding
of the first annual session of the Commission on
23 June. We welcome the informal debates launched
by the Organizational Committee as well as the new
partnership between the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Dag Hammarskjöld Foundation. We
also welcome the holding of the informal interactive
dialogue of 26 April 2013, which allowed members
of the Security Council, the Chairs Group and the
countries on the PBC’s agenda to identify prospects
for developing the partnership between the Council
and the Commission. In that regard, we welcome the
designation of Rwanda as coordinator of an informal
process of evaluation and review of the progress made
and the challenges encountered in the management of
relations between these two bodies.
We also reiterate the important role of the
Commission in taking stock of the potential risks and
the gaps in the efforts of the PBC undertaken in the
countries on its agenda, the follow up in the level of
attention given and engagement of national, regional
and international actors, the promotion of coherence
and alignment in national policies, the activities and
aims of the United Nations and of other entities,as well
as in a successful transition for the United Nations
missions in the countries on the agenda.
We welcome the support for the transition of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) as well as for the country’s
own transition. With the adoption of the prosperity
programme, the launch of the transition and the
withdrawal of UNIPSIL, the work and functions of the
Commission in Sierra Leone need to be refocused and
adapted to the specific needs and an evaluation of the
situation on the ground. In that regard, we welcome
the regular dialogue with the Government of Sierra
Leone and its partners. We call upon the international
community to continue to meet the needs of the country
in terms of peacebuilding.
We also welcome the support for Burundi in the
follow-up to the Geneva Partners Conference in 2012,
and welcome the follow-up activities to the conference
in question in awareness-raising and in regard to
preparations for the 2015 elections.
By the same token, we also welcome the support
to Liberia in designing and launching the national
reconciliation process, as well as the support to the
activities carried out by the United Nations and

S/PV.7217

the region in preparing for the legislative elections
in Guinea. We also welcome the launching by the
Government of Liberia of the Road Map for National
Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation and the
National Palava Hut Programme. We encourage
the Commission to make concerted efforts with the
Government and its partners for their implementation.
We also note the holding of a workshop on security
sector reform in order to strengthen the links between
justice and security actors and between them and the
legislature.
We note that $5 million was provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund’s Immediate Response Facility to
facilitate the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau to help the
country to continue the process of re-establishing
constitutional order.
We deplore the difficulties that the Commission has
encountered in Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic due to the unconstitutional changes that have
taken place.
We also note that the programme for marshalling
resources has made it possible to promote and to
advance the implementation of the programme of
political and economic reforms, and that, by October
2013, approximately 52 per cent of the $2.5 billion in
pledges made had been disbursed.
We welcome the partnership established among
the international financial institutions and regional
development banks within a multidimensional
framework, as well as support for the actions taken
by the States themselves to mobilize resources. In
that context, Burundi’s experience, in particular the
positive results of the finance division, has shown
that strengthening countries’ capacities to generate
domestic funds has enabled them to finance priority
reconstruction and peacebuilding actions themselves.
Such experience could be shared with other countries
on the PBC’s agenda.
We encourage efforts to find ways and means of
involving the private sector, with a focus on economic
growth and job creation in countries emerging
from conflict. We welcome the strengthening of the
consistency of peacebuilding actions in the countries
concerned and coordination between the Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund in that respect, and
encourage a strengthened partnership between the
Commission and high-level United Nations officials on

14-467209/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the ground. We also welcome the informal consultations
leading to the PBC’s new working methods involving
the countries on its agenda, the mutual learning among
the country configurations, and the convening of
annual sessions of the Commission to allow for deeper
interaction and closer cooperation among the actors in
New York and those on the ground and in the capitals
of Member States.
We note the Commission’s debates to consider the
four action areas — namely, work in the field, results
and impacts, forms of cooperation, and transition and
results — as the essential core of its future programme of
work. My country encourages the PBC to convene other
such debates, as necessary. We note the conclusions of
the programme of work, in particular relating to future
matters concerning the roles of the Commission’s
members, as well as the role of the main United
Nations bodies concerning the strategic dimension of
the Commission’s essential functions and the working
methods and preparations for the 2015 review.
Chad welcomes the taking into account of gender
equality issues in the work of the Commission
and welcomes the partnership with UN-Women in
examining the role of women in reform efforts in
post-conflict countries. In that context, it is essential
to raise awareness and draw lessons. The economic
emancipation of women can indeed contribute to
effective economic growth in countries emerging
from conflict, as well as to improving the quality
of life and the social impact of economic recovery
policies and efforts. We encourage the emancipation
and participation of women in recovery efforts in postconflict countries, and urge the lifting of all obstacles
to women’s access to justice, resources, financial
means and economic participation. Furthermore, it
is important to consider the gender dimension in the
process of national reconciliation. The Commission
could assist countries in establishing reconciliation
processes that take due account of women’s role.
To conclude, Chad welcomes the role of the PBC in
the countries on its agenda and calls for strengthening
its role in advocacy, the mobilization of resources
and the formulation of integrated strategies aimed
at peacebuilding and post-conflict reconciliation.
However, Chad is concerned about the many remaining
challenges, particularly in the Central African Republic,
the Sudan, South Sudan and elsewhere. We anticipate
the 10-year peacebuilding review that will take place
in 2015 to evaluate progress made in implementing the

10/23

15/07/2014

main recommendations formulated following the 2010
review and to take stock of the challenges that remain.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.
Lithuania highly values the contribution of the
PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in support of durable peace and
development in a number of countries emerging
from conflict. The advisory, advocacy and resource
mobilization capacities of the Commission need to be
better harnessed. Complex peacebuilding processes
are receiving more attention, as evidenced by the
increasing number of United Nations, African Union
and European Union political missions. The integration
and coherence of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities remain crucial.
Over the past year, the PBC has achieved
encouraging results. In Burundi, the Commission
has engaged in high-level advocacy initiatives and
supported the political dialogue and preparatory process
for the 2015 elections. In Liberia, PBC support to the
implementation of the National Palava Hut Programme
has been crucial for the coherent national reconciliation
process to take place. Impressive progress has been
registered in Sierra Leone as the drawdown of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone calls for the refocusing of the Commission’s
activities. In light of the upcoming 2015 elections in
many countries on the PBC’s agenda, the PBC should
remain actively engaged in support of political dialogue
and other preparatory processes.
We would like to highlight three key elements
for sustainable peacebuilding. First, national
institution-building remains key to preventing relapse
into conflict. In the process of building, the focus
on how those institutions are put to use is of no less
importance.
Secondly, another crucial aspect is national
ownership. Peacebuilding cannot be outsourced. It
must be locally owned. It is important to include
local communities in the process and to prevent
peacebuilding from remaining a purely foreign
intervention. Strengthening societies and increasing
their resilience and capacity to withstand crises are key
factors in assessing peacebuilding success.

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Thirdly, women can and should play a very
active role, not only in conflict resolution but also in
peacebuilding activities. Women, with rare exceptions,
are still marginalized as players in efforts to rebuild
war-torn communities and States. They are the ones
who take the brunt of the conflict. Women should be
in a position to envisage the path to empowerment
with their full-scale participation in post-war social,
economic, political and security structures.
We support the advisory role of the PBC and
further encourage strengthening the links between the
Commission and the Security Council. The interaction
between the two organs should remain mutually
proactive. We see the periodic and situation-specific
stocktaking briefings as a useful and informative tool
for the work of both bodies. The PBC should draw the
Council’s attention to emerging crises in the countries
on its agenda. What is more, we agree that the PBC can
and should play a role when the Council is considering
mandate renewals and the transitions of United Nations
missions.
We would welcome a more proactive dialogue
between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations. Partnerships between the PBC and the
international financial institutions, the private sector
and philanthropic organizations are also important.
We believe that work in that direction should be
further pursued in order to mobilize resources, identify
financing gaps and avoid any possible duplication.
We also support and encourage South-South
exchanges in the peacebuilding efforts. There have been
a number of examples of such successful cooperation.
In Côte d’Ivoire, expertise from Burundi, Liberia and
Senegal supported the reform of security sector. In
Liberia, Rwanda provided specialized capacities in
the areas of police management and administration.
In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan benefited from expertise from Sierra Leone in
legislative work.

S/PV.7217

important subject of post-conflict peacebuilding.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak and Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota for their contributions and
leadership.
The first annual session of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) held last month was a meaningful
step forward with a view to achieving a qualitative
upgrade through a comprehensive review of the
achievements and challenges of peacebuilding
activities.
Catering to the particularities of each post-conflict
situation is a very complicated task. Empirical evidence
illustrates the fact that the same input does not guarantee
the same output. The key variables may include the
degree of clarity of the national vision and the strength
of the national leadership’s commitment to its people.
However, international support and the consolidation
of national ownership are not mutually exclusive. We
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and the Security Council can contribute positively
to fostering the unity of post-conflict societies and
assisting national stakeholders in the process of
nation-building.
It is necessary for the Security Council to
vigilantly monitor the nature of cooperation among
key partners for post-conflict peacebuilding, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. Today I would like to
stress three points related to the partnership between
the PBC and the Security Council.

To conclude, peacebuilding is a long and delicate
process, involving many actors and stakeholders with
different interests and visions. We value this discussion
and look forward to the interactive dialogue this
afternoon. We have much to learn and draw lessons
from in preparation for the comprehensive review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in 2015.

First, enhanced cooperation between the two
bodies can contribute to detecting any potential
relapse into conflict and thereby preventing it. While
peacekeeping missions and special political missions
do not always succeed in issuing early warnings, the
various components of the PBC have the potential to
effectively and closely examine the situation on the
ground and bring it to the attention of the international
community. The Council and the PBC must therefore
further solidify their joint efforts for periodic
situation-specific stock-taking reviews. In that vein,
we express our appreciation to Rwanda for its role as
the coordinator for interaction between the two bodies.
The Chairs of the country-specific configurations also
play critical roles in enhancing the exchange of views
with the Council.

Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized today’s meeting on the

Secondly, maintaining coherence is crucial for
effective peacebuilding, as also emphasized in the two

14-4672011/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

presentations by the PBC Chairs this morning. Even
though the Peacebuilding Commission itself does not
coordinate field operations, it can inform and remind
the key stakeholders of where the strategic gaps lie and
suggest which specific areas need to be prioritized. In
order to do so, the PBC should broaden the scope of its
work and deepen its expertise using lessons learned and
strategic reviews.
The PBC and the Security Council can also pursue
a division of labour so as to maximize their respective
comparative advantages. The PBC deals with a
politically less sensitive agenda and can take advantage
of its capability for resource mobilization. We believe
that the Security Council can efficiently empower the
country-specific configurations by supporting the
activities of the PBC in the Council’s resolutions.
Thirdly, the PBC should be able to play a
value-added advisory role. Regular meetings and
informal interaction between PBC leaders and the senior
leadership of the United Nations are encouraged in
order to sharpen the perspective of the PBC. The PBC’s
wide scope can be a tool to enhance a comprehensive
understanding of post-conflict situations.
The root causes of conflict often lie in
underdevelopment, inequality or a winner-takes-all
political culture. All of these problems require longterm remedies beyond peacekeeping and political
presence. With its advocacy role, the PBC should work
to keep the world’s attention on its work, with a longterm vision, in cooperation with key partners, including
international financial institutions.
In conclusion, creating a synergy between the PBC
and the Security Council is a long-term task. During the
decade since the launch of the Commission, the Security
Council and the PBC have worked hard to develop a solid
partnership based on their complementary relationship.
The Republic of Korea hopes that the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture will be
another significant step forward in that direction.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Permanent Representatives of
Croatia and Brazil for their comprehensive briefings
this morning.
The end of a given conflict and the cessation of
hostilities will not lead to peace so long as the root
causes of the conflict remain, as these could lead to a
spiral of violence. We must therefore address the root
causes of conflict and try to resolve them.
12/23

15/07/2014

Let us recall the words of the Secretary-General,
who said, in paragraph 63 of his report (S/1998/318):
“By post-conflict peace-building, I mean
actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to
consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence of
armed confrontation.”
The concept of peacebuilding entails a vision for the
post-conflict era and addresses the very sensitive period
that follows armed conflicts. However, this period
might appear even more sensitive in non-international
conflicts, given their nature, as they have a higher
potential for problems that could make the recurrence
of conflict more likely.
It is therefore extremely important to ensure
integration and coherence between peacebuilding on
the one hand and peacemaking on the other, so as to
realize permanent peace and security and prevent a
recurrence of armed conflict.
The activities of peacekeeping operations are
different from those of peacebuilding ones; however,
the developments witnessed by peacekeeping
operations make such forces capable of playing a part
in the peacebuilding process, particularly in the context
of multidimensional peacekeeping operations. Those
forces are capable of undertaking certain aspects of a
peacebuilding operation requiring particular security
and military skills.
The process of enabling a State to regain its
ability to undertake its tasks and shoulder the burden
of governance must include many aspects relating
to assisting the more vulnerable segments of the
population, that is, women and children, as well as
laying the foundations of a development process in the
post-conflict era. That would be achieved by working
with United Nations partners at that stage.
Peacebuilding therefore requires more than
diplomacy and military action. We must stress here
the role of women in the post-conflict peacebuilding
agenda. A follow-up to the measures aimed at enhancing
the participation of women in the implementation of
the vision set out in Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) is vital in this context.
Returning to the report of the Commission on its
seventh session, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Commission has maintained the format for reporting
on the progress in taking forward the recommendations
of the 2010 review, which it introduced for the first time

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

in the report on its sixth session (S/2013/63). We also
stress our support for the Organizational Committee
and commend in particular its efforts with regard to
the series of informal discussions aimed at generating
shared understanding within the membership on areas
requiring immediate action, outreach and practical
implementation.
We also stress the role of the emerging partnership
between the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Dag Hammarskjöld Foundation, which aims
at supporting the Commission’s consideration of a
number of policy-related work streams. We believe
that the Commission’s giving greater priority to the
role of its membership, especially in view of its unique
compositional structure, is vital to maximizing the
results and impacts of the Commission. We must note
the importance of the role of the Commission with
respect to addressing issues, including identifying risks
and loopholes that peacebuilding operations could face
in countries on its agenda, to identifying the level of
interest and commitment on the part of active parties
at the national, regional and international levels, to
promoting coherence among United Nations policies,
activities and objectives and those that are outside the
United Nations, and to garnering support for United
Nations missions’ processes in the countries on the
Commission’s agenda.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the consultative role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in peacebuilding activities and its current role in the
fields of advocacy and mobilization of resources. I
would also request that the international community
remain engaged and active with regard to responding
to the peacebuilding needs of countries in which such
activities have been undertaken.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s debate. I would also like to thank
Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for their briefings.
This meeting is a timely opportunity to reflect
on the experience of the United Nations in helping
countries recover from conflict with a particular focus
on the importance of preventing relapse into conflict.
There have been successes. The United Nations should
be proud of the central role it played in helping Sierra
Leone recover from its devastating civil war. That
is an example of how effective, tailored and wellplanned United Nations peacebuilding interventions
can improve people’s lives. Similarly, in Côte d’Ivoire

S/PV.7217

and Liberia, the United Nations has helped put those
countries on paths towards more stable and peaceful
futures.
But, as Ambassador Patriota highlighted, alongside
those examples of success, we have also seen the tragic
recent relapses into conflict in both the Central African
Republic and South Sudan. That demonstrates that
we must continue to hone our approach to preventing
countries from slipping back into devastating spirals of
conflict. In both of those cases, the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) cannot say
that there was no information on the potential for an
outbreak of violence. The early warning indicators
were there in both countries, but we collectively failed
by not taking early action.
We live in an age in which we have immediate
access to information about potential risks of instability
in countries around the world. We can no longer say
that we did not know about possible indicators of
future conflict, such as human rights abuses, political
repression or a rise in ethnic or religious tensions.
The challenge for the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the whole United Nations system is
to find the appropriate response when we receive those
early warnings.
We all know that tackling potential risks to
stability early is the most effective approach. Early
action can prevent enormous human suffering, fear and
displacement. It also makes economic sense. It is far
more cost-effective to invest in conflict prevention and
de-escalation upstream than to pay the high human and
financial costs to responding to a relapse into conflict.
Effective early action requires political will and
commitment from the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and key regional actors, inter alia. We must
all be proactive in considering the most appropriate way
to mobilize the various tools at our disposal in order to
prevent relapse in each specific case. That could, for
example, include the use of good offices, sanctions
against potential spoilers or reconfiguring development
activities to ensure that they are conflict-sensitive and
contribute to stability. To take one country on the PBC’s
agenda, the United Kingdom believes that the situation
in Burundi is a current example of where we should take
such an approach. We must work together to monitor
the situation and ensure that we do not allow worrying
political developments to reignite conflict, especially
in the run-up to Burundi’s elections next year.

14-4672013/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The issue of how we can work together to prevent
relapse into conflict will undoubtedly be a major theme
in the 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.
That important review will allow us to reflect on
progress and consider ways in which we can improve
our approach to peacebuilding. The United Kingdom
welcomes the ongoing informal consultations on
the scope of the review, in particular the emerging
consensus that the review needs to revisit the original
vision behind the creation of the architecture in 2005
and take stock of the developments in United Nations
peacebuilding over the last 10 years.
In that time, peacebuilding in the international
system has moved on. The key elements of peacebuilding
are now mainstreamed within operational entities in
the Secretariat and agencies, funds and programmes.
The gap or gaping hole in the international community
that was perceived to exist in 2005 has been filled by
an array of multilateral and regional entities, both from
the development and the political and security spheres.
The United Kingdom believes that the review must
therefore avoid a narrow focus on the Peacebuilding
Commission, Peacebuilding Fund and Peacebuilding
Support Office. It should not just tinker at the margins
of the architecture and there should be no sacred cows.
The United Kingdom believes it is important to have
a thorough and ambitious review that reconsiders the
architecture in the light of our common ambition to
improve the ability of the United Nations to support
countries recovering from conflict on their road to
peace.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would light to commend the leadership
of Rwanda on the subject that brings us together today,
which has been expressed through other initiatives
and contributions that it has made during its two
presidencies of the Security Council, in April 2013 and
this month, in convening informative meetings of this
body to discuss the annual reports of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), as well as in coordinating the
process aimed at promoting the joint participation of
the Council and the Commission in informal follow-up
and stock-taking of the progress and difficulties in the
interactions between the two bodies.
I would also like to specifically thank the President
of the Commission, Ambassador Antonio Patriota of
Brazil — and take this opportunity to congratulate
him on the success of the PBC’s annual session last

14/23

15/07/2014

June — and his predecessor, Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia, for their statements.
As the co-facilitators pointed out in their report
of July 2010 (S/2010/393, annex) on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, an effective response on
the part of the Organization requires developing a
broad-based and coordinated strategy for peacebuilding
that is based on identifying priorities on the part of
local authorities and that sets goals and concrete and
achievable time frames. The report also points out
that such work requires stepping up humanitarian
assistance efforts, re-establishing the rule of law,
drafting and implementing security and justice
policies, and promoting sustainable development and a
rigorous, democratic policy for protecting, promoting
and ensuring human rights. No doubt, that remains an
ongoing challenge.
We believe it necessary to support a strategy
for post-conflict peacebuilding based on three
elements: first, the principle of national responsibility;
secondly, United Nations coordination; and thirdly,
the complementarity of regional organizations. With
regard to the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
at its seventh session, we underscore the process led by
Rwanda aimed at strengthening the interaction between
the Council and the Commission so as to take advantage
of the Commission’s important role in order to, inter
alia, identify risks and gaps in the peacebuilding
process; oversee a level of attention and commitment
by regional, national and international stakeholders;
promote coherence and harmonization among the
policies, activities and objectives of the United Nations
and other partners; and support the successful transition
of United Nations missions in countries included in the
programme, which is then reflected in the Council’s
resolutions.
There can be no doubt that the integration and
coherence of peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
remain essential to achieving lasting peace and
security and to preventing relapses into conflict. In
that framework, the need to increase complementarity
has been established, as has the need to rationalize and
focus more attention on the socioeconomic dimension
of peacebuilding, in particular the development and
promotion of social well-being and not only poverty
reduction, while bearing in mind the promotion and
protection of human rights and the strengthening of the
rule of law in countries included on the agenda of the

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Peacebuilding Commission that are also on the agenda
of the Security Council.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
area of promotion and support is closely related to
its function in mobilizing resources and cooperative
alliances. The United Nations occupies a privileged
position in mobilizing and making more efficient use of
financial, technical and political resources earmarked
for peacebuilding activities, and in establishing
agreements and strategic partnerships with regional and
other international stakeholders, while ensuring that all
efforts contribute to strengthening the institutions and
are in line with the country’s priorities. The cooperation
of international financial institutions in particular with
countries that request their support and need it cannot
be carried out with a one-size-fits-all model or imposed
formulas, especially when those models and formulas
continue to be imposed when it is clear that they have
been a complete failure in other countries and regions
in terms of economic growth and social inclusion.
As the final element, with regard to the topic of
partnerships and the promotion of coherence, I will say
that the role of subregional and regional organizations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations requires the strengthening of the capacity
of regional organizations with a view to supporting
countries that need to recover and rebuild themselves
after a conflict. In that connection, I think it is useful
to incorporate South-South cooperation model, which
is governed by the principles of complementarity and
solidarity. The focus on South-South cooperation could
also be used to understand and guide the role of regional
and subregional cooperation, with the understanding
that the principles of complementarity and solidarity
should guide the situation because more than once we
have seen that the loss of security and destabilization of
a country has an impact on the security of neighbouring
countries and destabilizes their security. If a region is
unstable, we cannot expect the countries in the region
to develop and maintain security.
Lastly, the effectiveness of post-conflict
economic activities and economic growth, as well
as the improvement of the quality and the social
impact of economic recovery policies, depend on
the empowerment of women and their participation
on an equal footing with men and their access to
security and justice, as is recognized in the report
of the Commission (S/2014/67). In that context, it is
important for the Commission to continue to develop

S/PV.7217

its cooperation with UN-Women, which allows the
Commission to draw lessons and raise awareness with
regard to the transformative role of women in postconflict societies, including in the process of national
reconciliation with regard to planning, establishing
priorities and formulating and implementing policies.
Furthermore, we should take into account that while
there are common lessons to be drawn in all situations,
the focus in each case should be different and specific
to each situation.
In conclusion, as a member of the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, Argentina remains
hopeful for and will actively participate in the process
of the 2015 review of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
the conviction that it will be an opportunity to review,
inter alia, the progress achieved in the relations between
the two bodies and with the various agencies who have
operational responsibilities within the system, as well
as the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in resource
mobilization, in order to strengthen our response in
peacebuilding.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Rwanda for organizing, under its presidency,
this informative meeting on the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I commend the
Permanent Representative of Croatia, Ambassador
Drobnjak, and his predecessor, Ambassador Vilovic,
for their commitment at the helm of the Commission
in 2013. I commend the Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Patriota, for his leadership of
the Peacebuilding Commission in general and for
his leadership of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
in particular. I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to Assistant Secretary-General Judy ChengHopkins for the work she has undertaken with the team
of the Office of Peacebuilding Support.
Luxembourg has worked actively during the
past year to strengthen the interaction between the
PBC and the Security Council. While there has been
no progress on the participation of the Chairs of the
country configurations in Council consultations,
practical arrangements have been established with a
view to going beyond the stage of formal interactions.
At this time, it would be appropriate to deepen those
exchanges, engage in substance and discuss topics
such as the root causes of conflict, including their
socioeconomic causes and the possible risk of relapse
into conflict.

14-4672015/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The countries that are on the agenda of the
Commission, especially those in West Africa, are faced
with complex and entangled crises. The risks of conflict
are often exacerbated by the political dimension or
by the weakness or absence of State institutions. We
cannot ignore the realities of the political economy
of a country, the root causes of conflict, the risks
of corruption, governance that is not conducive to
development; political, economic or social exclusion;
human rights violations; transnational organized crime
or even political cultures in which the winner takes all.
To overlook those root causes is to risk a resurgence of
conflict and violence. We saw that painfully in GuineaBissau in 2012 and in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan in 2013 and 2014.
In order to learn from past mistakes, the Secretariat
has undertaken significant initiatives, such as the “Rights
up Front” action plan. We must also learn to question
some of our approaches with regard to peacebuilding
and State-building. I am thinking, for example, of
the approach to the principle of national ownership.
Sustainable peacebuilding requires the establishment of
processes, inclusive political settlements and competent
and accountable national institutions to negotiate and
implement a new social contract. That undertaking can
take more than a generation. The long-term support and
partnership of the international community are needed.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by
​​ the
fragile States meeting in the context of the Group of
Seven Plus and the conclusion of national agreements
under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
States and Governments have fundamental
responsibilities towards their populations. By carrying
out its regulatory functions, the State preserves its
legitimacy. The State must assume its responsibilities in
the promotion and protection of human rights, the rule
of law and the delivery of public services to citizens.
In post-conflict situations, peacebuilding processes
must be inclusive. We should aspire to reflect a true
national consensus. By supporting the establishment
of inclusive partnerships at the national level, the
Peacebuilding Commission can make a real difference,
in particular in strengthening the full participation of
women, young people and other groups that are too
often excluded.
In 2013, the Guinea configuation of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which I have the honour to
chair, began its third year of activities. The efforts of the

16/23

15/07/2014

Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea were focused on
supporting the organization of the legislative elections
that took place on 28 September, following an inclusive
political dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations. It
is now important to consolidate those gains in order
to enable the Guinean people to fully benefit from the
dividends of peace and democracy.
Allow me to conclude by turning to next year. In 2015,
the peacebuilding architecture established in 2005 will
be reviewed in depth. That review should acknowledge
the true value of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
potential as an advisory body and a support to countries
emerging from conflict. The review should be based on
lessons learned not only by the Commission but also
by the Secretariat and the entire United Nations system
in order to make our support in restoring States and
societies in the aftermath of a conflict more strategic
and sustainable.
Luxembourg is ready to contribute to that sensitive
but necessary exercise so as to strengthen the work of
the United Nations in support of peacebuilding.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Rwanda for having convened
this briefing. We also convey our gratitude to the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil,
and would like to thank his predecessor, Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, for his thorough report today. We also
appreciate the January report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2014/67). This meeting, as well as the
interactive dialogue that we will have this afternoon, are
important stages in preparing for the upcoming review
of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2015, pursuant
to resolution 1645 (2005). We take this opportunity to
underscore the convening of the Commission’s first
annual meeting, which took place on 23 June.
The report of the Peacebuilding Commission on
its seventh session describes the progress made and
pending challenges, as well as the Commisssion’s value
added in various areas of peacebuilding. The reversals
in the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau
during the reporting period demonstrate the need for
the Commission’s ongoing support and the international
community’s continuing attention in post-conflict
situations. On the other hand, the developments in
Sierra Leone and Burundi and the support provided by
the Commission have had a positive impact and reflect

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

its capacity to adapt to changing needs and scenarios. Its
role will continue to be important in future processes.
Peacebuilding is a complex and difficult process
that needs ongoing attention until stability is achieved,
as demonstrated by the cases that I have mentioned
above. That effort also requires the commitment of
the national authorities and the continuous support
of the international community. That has led us to
understand that the entire peacebuilding process is a
multidimensional, specific and individual activity, in
which, inter alia, the rule of law and the existence of
inclusive processes aimed at national reconciliation
should be fundamental aspects.
In order to achieve the required consistency in
such efforts, we underscore the importance of the
Commission maintaining sustained and ongoing
communication and dialogue with senior United
Nations staff and the organizations on the ground,
as well as among the configurations themselves. The
exchange of information and goals, sharing experience,
lessons learned and learning from mistakes should help
to provide a better understanding of and connection
with the policies that we seek to implement. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of the Chairs of
the various configurations holding meetings with the
relevant actors ahead of their visits.
With regard to mobilizing resources, we
acknowledge the Commission’s capacity to broaden the
donor base and to ensure donor participation and the
provision of forums for resource mobilization in order
to foster and support the various reform processes with
respect to peacebuilding.
We welcome the cooperation efforts with the
international financial institutions and regional
development banks. We call for the ongoing
consideration of the current mechanism for including
the private sector in those undertakings. As the report
notes, any peacebuilding effort should include the
gender dimension across all areas. The systematic
inclusion of women supports political processes, social
cohesion and long-term economic recovery. Given the
importance of their full and effective participation
in political and post-conflict planning processes, we
recognize and understand their specific needs. We
underscore the importance of maintaining ongoing
contact with the national mechanisms and the groups
and/or non-governmental organizations that are present
in the country. We also call for the effective use of the

S/PV.7217

15 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund earmarked for
projects geared to meeting the needs of women and
their empowerment.
With regard to the Council, we see the work of the
Commission and the Council as intrinsically linked.
In that regard, the mandates that the Council adopts
should include from the outset peacebuilding tasks that
take into account local interests and the principle of
national ownership.
We therefore call for continuing the practice of
inviting the Chairs of the configurations to participate
in discussions when the Council’s agenda includes their
countries. That would improve the mechanisms for
understanding their points of view when the respective
mandates of their countries are under consideration.
The underlying goal would be for the Council to make
more efficient use of the Commission’s knowledge and
experience as an intergovernmental advisory body.
Peacebuilding is part and parcel of maintaining peace
and international security. We therefore urge recognition
of that complementarity and greater opportunities for
communication between those two bodies.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s sessions. I also
thank Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for their
briefings. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Croatia for its work in chairing the seventh
session of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
Organizational Committee.
Peacebuilding is a critical task, but it is not an
easy one. As Ambassador Patriota reminded us, recent
events in South Sudan and the Central African Republic
are stark examples of how quickly countries can slide
back into conflict. But in other places, some with the
PBC’s engagement, we have seen progress.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that the
PBC should focus on its three core functions: advocacy
and sustained attention, resource mobilization and
forging coherence. The PBC can play a vital role in
identifying risks and gaps in peacebuilding in countries
on its agenda, marshalling resources and coordinating
among donors, actively integrating civil society and
women as equal partners and ensuring that countries
at risk of sliding back into conflict remain on the
international community’s agenda. I would like to raise
a few specific points that highlight the impact of the
PBC over the past year.

14-4672017/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

First, we are very glad to see a strengthened
relationship between the PBC and the Security Council.
Briefings from the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, including on Liberia, Burundi, GuineaBissau and Sierra Leone, provided valuable insight and
served to sustain international attention to the ongoing
political and socioeconomic challenges facing each of
those countries. We know that keeping a careful focus
on countries recovering from conflict but no longer
in the headlines is essential for peace to take hold
and bear fruit. That remains a critical function of the
Commission.
Secondly, we see a clear link between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council
affirmed the need for coherence among peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts with resolution 2086 (2013),
which recognized peacekeepers as early peacebuilders.
In the past year, we put that concept into operation with
the creation of two multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, in Mali and the Central African Republic.
Both are mandated to support peacebuilding tasks,
including strengthening the security sector and the
rule of law. Similarly, other missions have major
peacebuilding roles, such as those in Haiti, Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire. Their efforts will gain increased
attention as they continue to draw down their role and
make sure that the transition to host-country ownership
is effective and successful.
Thirdly, of course, is the role of the PBC as a platform
to help international efforts for sustained peace. In
Burundi, the PBC has promoted mutual accountability
between donors and the Government of Burundi. It has
maintained a strong focus on the political environment
in the lead-up to national elections — for example, by
convening regular meetings to discuss a united strategy
on the way forward. The United States counts on the
PBC to continue its engagement in Burundi as the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi winds
down. We welcome the PBC’s close cooperation with
the Council-mandated election observation mission.
In the Central African Republic, the PBC’s
reengagement can help identify gaps in the international
community’s response to the situation, helping to
provide critical support for the beleaguered national
Government.
Of course, none of that works without a national
commitment to peacebuilding. The PBC can be most
effective in supporting the implementation of nationally
owned peacebuilding and development plans. The post18/23

15/07/2014

election transition plan for Guinea-Bissau is a case in
point.
That emphasis on national buy-in and control
over peacebuilding initiatives must bring with it the
good-faith efforts of national Governments. Last
month’s first annual session of the PBC focused on
resource mobilization. As the international community
works to identify innovative ways to broaden the tax
base and build the post-conflict capacity of national
Governments, it is critical that those Governments be
transparent in how they spend funds and that such funds
be directed towards national peace and State-building
priorities.
We are also glad to see that the PBC continues
reform efforts such as building stronger partnerships
within financial institutions and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which has proved to be a flexible and catalytic
instrument to address the immediate needs of countries
in crisis.
Finally, the United States shares the view that we
should make the most of the upcoming 2015 review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We should
be clear and candid about how to make it as effective
as possible. The United States is enthusiastically
participating in that review process and looks forward
to the views of those most involved in its efforts to
date, including this morning’s briefers and some of the
members of the Council.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Ambassador of Brazil, as well
as his predecessor, the Ambassador of Croatia, for their
briefings.
At the heart of the activities of the United Nations,
peacebuilding remains a challenge that deserves the
full attention of the international community. The
recent crises in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan remind us of the importance of a continued
shared commitment to support States in post-conflict
situations. We therefore welcome your initiative,
Mr. President, in convening this debate, which provides
the Council with an opportunity to consider the issue
and, in particular, to review the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The United Nations provides both an opportunity
and a framework to work in a coordinated way to
promote peacebuilding. Coordination among all the

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

actors that contribute to peacebuilding is indeed vital.
The Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund can
play a very useful role in support of efforts on the
ground — for example, by acting synergistically with
international stakeholders that are physically present.
In that regard, we welcome the establishment of justice
and police poles in Liberia, which were financed by
the Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, which is just one example of
cooperation between actors within the United Nations.
In Guinea, the PBC has also made possible effective
coordination among international actors, in particular
with respect to financial organizations.
In addition, in order to avoid duplication and
in preparation of exit strategies, there needs to be a
successful handover among the different actors. There
was an effective transition in Sierra Leone, where the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office was
recently closed, which bears witness to the progress
achieved since the civil war. Moreover, with respect to
complex peacebuilding efforts, it is important to ensure
strengthened links between the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who relies on measures
provided by the operations of the PBC, and the country
teams of United Nations agencies, which are led by the
Resident Coordinators.
Finally, it is critical to proceed in stages in order
to allow the stakeholders concerned to participate
at the moment when they can play the most suitable
role. In order to respond to the numerous challenges
posed by regions or States whose national structures
have virtually disappeared, peacekeeping operations
often play a decisive role in laying the foundation for
peacebuilding. However, the implementation of such
operations must correspond to a sequential logic,
without attempting to accomplish multiple tasks in
a single year. It was in that spirit that the Security
Council developed the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
Peacebuilding processes can succeed only if the
following priorities are respected.
Peacebuilding presupposes the implementation of
inclusive processes, especially national dialogue. It is
essential that all stakeholders accept this process and
participate fully in it. In Burundi, it is important for the
international community to continue to work with the
Government in order to encourage open dialogue and

S/PV.7217

the development of an environment conducive to fair
and credible elections in 2015.
The work to build peace after a conflict must include
all segments of society. We have consistently supported
the implementation of the Council’s resolutions on
women, peace and security and the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General’s report to ensure
the full participation of women in all peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, the presence of Ms. SambaPanza as Head of the Transitional Government of the
Central African Republic is a strong symbol.
To ensure lasting stabilization, it is important to
work on justice and the fight against impunity, both of
which are essential vectors of all reconciliation. National
Governments clearly have the primary responsibility to
prosecute and punish those responsible for atrocities.
However, if they fail to do so or are unable to fulfil
their responsibilities, the International Criminal Court
must play its full role. The Court is already seized of
cases relating to the Central African Republic, Mali
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Moreover, it is essential to engage in long-term
work to rebuild institutions and enable sustainable
resource mobilization. This theme was addressed
in a meaningful way at the annual session of the
Peacebuilding Commission in June. Resource
mobilization is indeed crucial. In the Central African
Republic, in parallel with security work, it is important
to act now to restart the Central African State and to
restore its attributes as a State of laws. Resources are
necessary to undertake such projects. The international
community must continue to mobilize to this end.
The review of the architecture of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2015 will provide an opportunity to go
further in terms of coordination. The Commission must
continue to play its role as a catalyst of goodwill and
to enhance its impact on the ground. We must pursue
that effort, launched in 2010, so as to improve the
transparency of its actions, for instance by continuing
work to link the actions of the PBC to those of the
Peacebuilding Fund. It is also necessary to pursue
the contacts made with the international financial
institutions. We must seize the opportunity of the
review to further improve the functioning of the PBC,
including by making it more flexible and responsive.
In that regard, the development of close relations with
the Security Council has proved useful, as evidenced

14-4672019/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

by the Council’s interaction with the chairs of the PBC
country configurations.
In conclusion, I welcome the mobilization of the
many actors working daily for peace and encourage
them to further improve their cooperation. That is how
we can improve the coherence of international action
for peace.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I thank the delegation of Rwanda for organizing
today’s meeting on peacebuilding. I am grateful to
the former and current Chairmen of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota, for
their informative briefings and skilful leadership of the
Commission.
It is clear to all that the prevention or timely ending
of armed conflict is the most effective way to establish
conditions to restore lasting peace and security. A
decisive role in consolidating the outcome of that
process is played by peacebuilding support, which
should be delivered in a timely manner and in sufficient
quantity and focus on tasks that are directly related to
the underlying causes of the conflict. That conclusion,
which has been reiterated today, has become especially
relevant in the light of recent events in various regions
of the world, in particular the new waves of instability
in several countries of Africa.
The United Nations has been assigned a central
role in the area of peacebuilding. In that context,
we commend the work of peacekeeping missions,
peacebuilding offices, the country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations
programmes and funds, and regional organizations.
We note, moreover, that international cooperation in
that field remains fragmented. It is important to ensure
a clear division of labour among all the structures
involved so that they can work strictly within the scope
of their mandates and on the basis of established norms.
The Russian Federation supports the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission in enhancing the
effectiveness and strengthening the coordination of
international efforts in assistance to post-conflict States
on the part of the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. This should be done in strict
respect for the prerogatives of the principal entities of
the Organization, the Security Council above all, and
in line with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principle of State sovereignty.

20/23

15/07/2014

From the moment of its establishment, the
Peacebuilding Commission has gained considerable
experience, in close cooperation with national
Governments, in achieving success. We are convinced
that the Commission’s current mandate and unique
intergovernmental composition and structure are fully
aligned with its role as a key body in the coordination
of peacebuilding support. The many positive examples
of this include the stabilization of the situations in
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. We need to build
on those successes, inter alia, by focusing our efforts
on such areas as ongoing security sector reform,
progressive socioeconomic development, and the fight
against poverty and unemployment. United Nations
programmes and funds have a particularly important
role to play in that regard.
At the same time, negative experiences — such as in
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic — require
a thorough analysis of bottlenecks in peacebuilding
efforts. The development of a balanced strategy
dictates the need to set the right priorities, with a focus
on assistance in addressing the most critical problems
and taking into account the particular features of
post-conflict situations, without squandering scarce
resources on what may at first to be very noble goals.
That having been said, the mechanisms and
methods of the Commission’s work require further
adaptation, development and streamlining. Much needs
to be done to optimize and enhance the practical impact
of its work, including through closer coordination with
the Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard, we welcome the
first session of the Peacebuilding Commission devoted
to the issue of resource mobilization, held in June. We
hope that the event will have significant added value in
strengthening cooperation among all the participants in
the peacebuilding process and facilitate a future open
dialogue and exchange of views on the broad range of
issues related to post-conflict recovery. We expect that
such forums will be held on a regular basis.
The 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture
will seek to improve the Commission’s functioning,
enhance its practical impact and consolidate its role as
the central peacebuilding structure. Priority attention
should be focused first and foremost on the work of
its various components: the Commission, the Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. It will also
be important to consider the functional capacities of
those relatively new components and their interaction
within the United Nations system, above all with

14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. It will be important to
analyse the lessons learned, including its successes and
disappointments, including in specific countries. Such
a focused approach will allow us to develop concrete
and feasible recommendations to improve the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.
We are convinced that any peacebuilding support
of the international community must be undertaken
with the consent of national Governments and taking
into account the particular characteristics of their
respective countries. Any successful post-conflict
peacebuilding must be based on national responsibility
and efforts to enhance the institutional capacities of
countries involved in the peacebuilding process and
in developing peacebuilding strategies, all undertaken
at the earliest stages of post-conflict reconstruction.
Russia plays an active role in international efforts
towards peacebuilding and the recovery of countries
and regions that have undergone armed conflict. We
intend to continue increasing our national contribution
in line with international efforts and with active
participation of our partners.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for
their briefings.
In the past year, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) has actively implemented the mandate set out by
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and has done a lot of work in helping postconflict countries to consolidate peace and proceed
with reconstruction and development programmes. Last
March, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone smoothly completed its mandate,
thereby becoming an example of peacebuilding success.
Peacebuilding is a long, complex and arduous
task. Through years of practice, the PBC has built up a
great deal of valuable experience. But it has also faced
multiple challenges, including inadequate responses to
the root causes of conflict and the need to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among all the relevant
parties. China believes that, in order to strengthen postconflict peacebuilding efforts, the various parties must
make additional efforts in the following four areas.
First, there must be respect for ownership by the
countries concerned. Post-conflict countries bear
the primary responsibility for peacebuilding. The
PBC and the international community should fully

S/PV.7217

respect the will of the Governments and the peoples
concerned and provide assistance in accordance with
national conditions and key priorities determined by
the countries themselves.
Secondly, we must pay attention to resolving the root
causes of conflict, which include underdevelopment.
The international community should focus on helping
post-conflict countries to achieve economic recovery
and reconstruction as soon as possible so that the people
can quickly enjoy a peace dividend, thus contributing
to political reconciliation and the stabilization of the
security situation, providing a solid political foundation
for the peace process and avoiding a recurrence of
conflict.
Thirdly, there is a need to focus on capacitybuilding in the countries concerned, because giving
one a fish is not as good as teaching someone how to
fish. In its engagement in the peacebuilding process of
the countries concerned, the international community
must always proceed from capacity-building and
human resources training and prioritize developing and
utilizing the existing human resources of the countries
concerned.
Fourthly, we must strengthen cooperation and
coordination among agencies in order to generate
synergy. The PBC should strengthen its cooperation
with major United Nations bodies, such as the Security
Council, as well as other specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and regional
organizations in order to develop a comprehensive
strategy for peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the
promotion of economic and social development. It
should also fully exploit the comparative advantages
of the various agencies and organizations, in order to
better provide assistance to the peacebuilding efforts of
those countries.
China attaches great importance to United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and has always supported the
efforts of the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund. We
actively support the PBC in playing a greater role in
the peacebuilding efforts of post-conflict countries.
Along with the rest of the international community, we
will continue to make a positive contribution to helping
post-conflict countries to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

14-4672021/23

S/PV.7217

Post-conflict peacebuilding

I would like to thank Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia and
former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
presenting the report (S/2014/67) of the Commission
on its seventh session. We join others in noting with
appreciation the quality of the report, which provides
a comprehensive analysis of the progress made thus far
in implementation of the recommendations of the 2010
review as well as the challenges that the Commission
continues to face ahead of the 2015 review. I also thank
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil and current Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his statement and
for his demonstrated leadership at the helm of the
Commission. I also take this opportunity, through him,
to commend the Chairs of the five configurations for
their dynamism and advocacy on behalf of the countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I cannot forget to pay tribute to our friend and dear
colleague Judy Cheng Hopkins, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support, for her outstanding
achievements over the past five years, as well as for
her passion for our continent of Africa, along with her
valuable team.
During our previous briefing on post-conflict
peacebuilding, held in March under the presidency
of Luxembourg (see S/PV.7143), Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson recalled that the PBC was a
subsidiary organ of the Security Council and could be
of optimal use only if the Council empowered it and
utilized its potential. In that regard, Rwanda believes
that the Security Council can benefit more from the
advisory function of the PBC, not only because of its
unique membership structure but also because of its
broader post-conflict perspective. The Council may
recall that, during our first presidency of the Security
Council, in April 2013, Rwanda organized a briefing
on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6954), which
was followed by an informal interactive dialogue with
the Chairs of the PBC configuration and countries
on the Commission’s agenda. The objective of the
dialogue was to exchange views on how to strengthen
the PBC’s advisory role, engagement from the Council
and the modality of interaction between the two
bodies. As mentioned in the report of the PBC on its
seventh session, Rwanda was designated by the PBC
Organizational Committee as coordinator of a process
aimed at engaging the joint membership of the Council
and the Commission in informally monitoring and
taking stock of the progress and challenges in managing

22/23

15/07/2014

the interactions between the both bodies. We have
held quarterly stock-taking meetings since June 2013.
This afternoon, we will organize the second informal
interactive dialogue to reflect on the progress in our
interaction and to address one of the critical issues
in peacebuilding, as we have been reminded by the
situations in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, namely, the relapse into conflict.
Rwanda fully endorses the three elements
presented by the Chair of the PBC aimed at reinforcing
our collective efforts to prevent a relapse into conflict.
We are particularly convinced that the three ingredients
for durable peace, as the PBC Chair named them, are
intertwined. Without a national political commitment,
there can be no national leadership; and without national
leadership there can be no national ownership. In that
respect, therefore, we believe that relapse into conflict
on the African continent is mainly a direct consequence
of a lack of leadership, institution-building, inclusive
dialogue and genuine reconciliation and good
governance.
Furthermore, Rwanda is of the view that the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes is
indispensable in every post-conflict society willing
to consolidate peace and avoid a relapse into conflict.
Impunity trivializes violence and lays the ground for
mass atrocities.
Nonetheless, to be effective, the fight against
impunity must be adapted to the historical and cultural
reality of the country concerned. Indeed, in many postconflict societies, traditional justice may in some cases
not be appropriate, as it sets aside the reconciliation
component of justice. That is why Rwanda believes that
in countries emerging from conflict, transitional justice
and truth and reconciliation mechanisms would be
better tools to render individual justice while ensuring
collective reconciliation.
Rwanda welcomes the holding of the first annual
session of the PBC on Peacebuilding Day, on 23 June
2014, which considered, inter alia, the mobilization
of domestic resources and revenue generation. This
is indeed a critical issue for countries emerging from
conflict, as we have always believed that Africa and
other developing countries need to take control of
their own destiny by graduating from international
aid. However, as we own our destiny, we need to earn
it and work for it. In this regard, we hope that action
will be taken on the recommendations proposed during
the first annual session of the PBC, particularly those
14-46720

15/07/2014

Post-conflict peacebuilding

related to transparency and accountability as well as
to illicit financial flows. Furthermore, we believe that
the PBC, in supporting the countries on its agenda,
also has a role to play in fostering regional engagement
and commitment. In that respect, the PBC’s advisory
function should also aim at forging greater regional
coherence through links with the countries of the
region, regional economic communities and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. Here I particularly
thank the Chairs of the country-specific configurations,
who have integrated the regional dimension into their
efforts.
To conclude, I wish to remind my colleagues
once again that this afternoon I will be convening an
informal interactive dialogue between the members of
the Council, the members of the PBC Chairs Group and

S/PV.7217

the countries on the Commission’s agenda to reflect
on the developments that have taken place since the
dialogue held on 26 April 2013, in order to draw on
the full potential of the PBC’s advisory role to the
Council in a variety of country contexts as well as in
policy-related areas. I count on the participation of all
members.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

14-4672023/23
