98

General Aasembly-Twenty-fint Session

N oting the comments submitted by Member States
pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1967 (XVIII)
and paragraph 2 of resolution 2104 (XX) and the
views expressed during its twentieth and twenty-first
sessions,
N oting chapter VII of the report of the Special
Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 11
established under General Assembly resolution 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Reaffirming its belief that an important contribution
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the prevention of such disputes could be made by providing for
impartial fact-finding within the framework of international organizations and in bilateral and multilateral
conventions,
N oting that, with regard to methods of fact-finding
in international relations, considerable documentation
has now been made available by the Secretary-General
in his reports on practice in relation to the settlement of
disputes and the execution of international agreements,
and by the views expressed and the proposals made by
Member States,
Recalling its belief that a study of the question
might include the feasibility and desirability of establishing a special international body for fact-finding or
of entrusting to an existing organization fact-finding
responsibilities complementary to existing arrangements
and without prejudice to the right of parties to any dispute to seek other peaceful means of settlement, of
their own choice,
Having been unable, owing to lack of time, to consider the substance of the question of methods of factfinding,
l. Inmtes Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, befare 1 August 1967, any
views, or further views, they may have on this subject,
taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General,
the views expressed and the proposals made ;
2. Decides to include an item entitled ''Question of
methods of fact-finding" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session, with a view to considering
what further action may be appropriate.
1489th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.
2203 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1839 (XVII) of 19 December 1962 and 2100 (XX) of 20 December 1965 relating
to the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum,
l. Takes note of the report of the Sixth Committee,6
to which is annexed a draft Declaration on Territorial
Asylum, together with the amendments and proposals
considered in connexion with its elaboration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States, for their further consideration, the text
of the above-mentioned draft Declaration, together with
the report of the Sixth Committee thereon ;
3. Decides to place an item entitled "Draft Declaration on Territorial Asylum" on the provisional agenda
li /bid., Twentieth Session, Annex-es, agenda items· 90 and 94,
document A/5746.
6 !bid., Twenty-first Session, Anne.-res, agenda ítem 85, document A/6570.

of its twenty-second session, with a view to the final
adoption of a declaration on this subject.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2204 (XXI). Technical assistance to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December
1965 establishing a programme of ::.:~:.;;tance and exchange in the field of international law,
N oting -with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneraF on the implementation of resolution 2099
(XX) and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Internationaí Law,
which are contained in that report,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1967 the activities specified in his report, including the
following items of direct assistance:
(a) The holding of a regional training and refresher
course, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
( b) The award of ten fellowships at the request of
Governments of developing countries ;
( c) The provision of a set of United N ations legal
publications to up to fifteen institutions in developing
countries;
( d) The provision of advisory services of experts,
if requested by developing countries, within the framework of existing technical assistance programmes;
2. Accepts -with satisfaction the offer of the United
Republic of Tanzania to provide facilities for the regional training and refresher course to be held in Africa
in 1967;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made voluntary contributions towards the financing of the programme and reiterates
its invitation to Member States, interested bodies and
individuals to make voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the programme;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its activities in
the field of international law and expresses the hope
that it will continue and, i f possible, expand these activities;
6. Decides that the programme established under
General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX) shall henceforth be known as the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, and that
accordingly the Advisory Committee set up under that
resolution shall be known as the Advisorv Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session on the
7 /bid.,

agenda hem 86, documents A/6492 and Add.1.

Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Sixth Committee

99

preparation and execution of the items of the Programme for performance in 1%7 and 1968 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee, to
submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in subsequent years ;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation oí International Law".
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

Having in mind the responsibilities of the United
N ations Conference on Trade and Development in the
field of intemational trade,
Recalling that the Conference, in accordance with
its General Principie Six,9 has a particular interest in
promoting the establishment of rules furthering international trade as one of the most important factors in
economic development,
Recognizing that there is no existing United Nations
organ which is both familiar with this technical legal
subject and able to devote sufficient time to work in this
field,

2205 (XXI), Establishment of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

Decides to establish a United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as
the Commission), which shall have for its object the
promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade, in accordance
with the provisions set forth in section II below;

I

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2102 (XX) oí 20 December
1965, by which it requested the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session a comprehensive report on the progressive development oí the Iaw of international trade,
Having considered with appreciation the report oí
the Secretary-General on that subject, 8
Considering that international trade co-operation
among States is an important factor in the promotion
of friendly relations and, consequently, in the maintenance of peace and security,
Recalling its belief that the interests of ali peoples,
and particularly those of developing countries, demand
the betterment of conditions favouring the extensive
development of international trade,
Reaffirming its conviction that divergencies arising
from the Iaws of different States in matters relating
to international trade constitute one of the obstacles to
the development of world trade.
Having noted with appreciation the efforts made by
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
towards the progressive harmonization and unification
oí the law oí international trade by promoting the adoption of international conventions, uniform laws, standard contract provisions, general conditions of sale,
standard trade terms and other measures,
N oting at the same time that progress in this area
has not been commensurate with the importance and
urgency of the problem, owing to a number oí factors, in particular insufficient co-ordination and cooperation between the organizations concerned, their
limited membership or authority and the small degree
of participation in this field on the part of many developing countries,
Considering it desirable that the process of harmonization and unification oí the law of international trade
should be substantially co-ordinated, systematized and
accelerated and that a broader participation should be
secured in furthering progress in this area,
Convinced that it would therefore be desirable for
the United Nations to play a more active role towards
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
N oting that such action would be properly within the
scope and competence of the Organization under the
terms of Article 1, paragraph 3, and Article 13, and
of Chapters IX and X of the Charter of the United
Nations,
8 Jbid., agenda

ítem 88, documents A/6396 and Add.l and 2.

II
ÜRGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON lNTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

l. The Commission shall consist of twenty-nine
States, elected by the General Assembly for a term of
six years, except as provided in paragraph 2 of the
present resolution. In electing the members of the
Commission, the Assembly shall observe the following
distribution of seats :
(a) Seven from African States ;
( b) Five from Asian States ;
( c) Four from Eastern European States;
( d) Five from Latin American States;
(e) Eight from Western European and other States.
The General Assembly shall also have due regard to
the adequate representation of the principal economic
and legal systems of the world, and of developed and
developing countries.
2. Oí the members elected at the first election, to
be held at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, the terms of fourteen members shall expire
at the end of three years. The President of the General
Assembly shall select these members within each of the
five groups oí States referred to in paragraph 1 above,
by drawing lots.
3. The members elected at the first election shall
take office on 1 January 1%8. Subsequently, the members shall take office on 1 J anuary of the year following
each election.
4. The representatives of members on the Commission shall be appointed by Member States in so far as
possible from among persons of eminence in the field of
the law of international trade.
S. Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election.
6. The Commission shall normally hold one regular
session a year. It shall, if there are no technical difficulties, meet alternately at United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
7. The Secretary-General shall make available to the
Commission the appropriate staff and facilities required
by the Commission to fulfil its task.
9 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Devrlopment, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), annex A.I.l, p. 18.
