S/PRST/2001/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 August 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4356th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 August 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the signing of the Framework
Agreement in The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by President
Trajkovski and the leaders of four political parties on 13 August 2001. The
Council calls for the full and immediate implementation of the Agreement,
which promotes the peaceful and harmonious development of civil society
while respecting the ethnic identity and the interests of all Macedonian
citizens.
“The Council calls for the full implementation of its resolution 1345
(2001) and reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
“The Council calls again on all those concerned, including on leaders of
ethnic Albanian communities in the region, publicly to condemn violence and
ethnic intolerance and to use their influence to secure peace. It reiterates its
call to all who have contact with extremist groups to make clear to them that
they have no support from any quarter in the international community. The
Council condemns the ongoing violence by extremists and calls on all parties
to respect the ceasefire. The Council rejects any attempt to use violence
including the use of landmines to undermine the Framework Agreement, which
has been negotiated by the democratically elected political leadership of The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
“The Security Council supports the actions of the President and
Government of The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia aimed at
resolving the crisis, and assuring a stable and democratic future for all of the
citizens of The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, including through
continued dialogue with the full representation of all legitimate political
parties to strengthen democracy and preserve the multi-ethnic character of
Macedonian society and the stability of the country.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization in support of the Framework Agreement. It also calls on

01-50907 (E) 130801

*0150907*

S/PRST/2001/20

the international community to consider how best to assist the Government of
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in facilitating its full
implementation.
“The Security Council will continue to follow closely developments on
the ground.”

2
