United Nations

313th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 1 December 1950, at 10.45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records

CONTENTS
Pagt

Statement by the President. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . 499
Reallocation of two items to the First Committee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 499
Consideration of the various items on the agenda of the meeting: proposal by
the President ................................
499
Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece : reports
of the First Committee (A/1536) and the Fifth Committee (A/1572) 500
,l

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran) ...
Starement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) : In
the last few days I have received many messages and
communications from institutions or persons whose
hearts are filled with anguish as the result of the world
situation and who ask me to approach thr. Powers directly concerned in order that the danger which threatens mankind may be averted. Since I am unable to
answer each of these messages, I wish, now that we are
taking up our work again in plenary meeting, to make a
short statement.
2. I should be lacking in frankness if I tried to conceal
the gravity of the oresent time. The situation is, indeed,
very &et'ious, though we may hope that it is not
desperate.
3. The Security Council, which has the primary responsihility for the maintenance of peace, dealt with the
question. Since the governments directly concerned are
represented at the ~eetings of the Security Counc!l, the
world hoped that they would use the opportunity to
make a renewed effort to understand one another. Owing to circumstances known to you, the Security Council was unable to reach a decision. The question will
necessarily be referred to the General Assembly. This
is a point which I may note without in any way committing the General Asst~mbly or prejudging any decisions which it may take.
4. I address myself not only to those who haYe told
me of their anguish but also, to the peoples of the world.
They must not allow themselves to be blinded by hate
or by fear. Peact. can be maintained if the peoples and
their rulers are not guided by obscure feelings but
bring a lucid mind to the study of the situation. The
present meetings of the United Nations provide them
with an opportunity to carry out that study, which

should lead to the maintenance of peace and security,
which mankind desires.
Reallocation of two items to the Fll'St Committee
5. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) :
Before taking up the various items on the agenda of today's meeting, I have to info :m you that the General
Committee has decided to recommend that two items
wh;ch were referred to the Ad H oc Political Committee
should be reallocated to the First Committee. They are
item 20-"Palestine", and item 75-"Complaint by the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics regarding the violation of Chin.ese air space by the Air Force of the United
States of America and the machine-gimning ~d bombing of Chinese territory by that Air Force, and against
the bombardment and illegal inspection of a merchant
ship of the People's Republic of China by a military
vessel of the United States". This recommendation was
approved unanimously by the General Committee..
6. I was going to ask the General Assembl:y: to endorse
the General Committee's recommendation. But I suggest that it should not take any decision for the time
being on· the reallocation of item 20 but should approve
only the General Committee's recommendation regarding the transfer of item 75 from the Atl Hoe Political
Committee to the •First Committee.
·
7. As no objections have been raised, I take it that the
General Assembly accepts my suggestion.
It was so decided.
Consideration of the various items on the agenda
of tTiue meeting: proposal by the .President

8. The PRESIDENT (t1·anslated from French): In
order to save time, I shall make the following suggestion : before taking up the various items, the Assembly

499

500

General Assembly-Fifth Seseion-Plenary Meetings

should decide whether it wishes to discuss those items
or not. By so doin~ it would .render a great service to
delegations which, 1£ the decision is in the negative, will
not have to prepare speeches, and to the heads of delegations, who will not have to take part in the discussion.
9. May I as~ the Assembly to indicate whether it
wishes to discuss the various items 011 the agenda of
today's meeting.
It was unanimously decided not to discuss the two
first items (items 22 and 23 of the agenda).
10. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
With regard to the third item, namely, "Admission of
new Members to the United Nations, including the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice",
it will be necessary to discuss it in plenary meeting
because it has not been considered in committee.

It was unanimously decided not to discuss any of the
ten other items (iten-..s 12, 29, 57, 21 (d) and (e), 39
(c), 13, 21 (c), 64, 31, and 63 of the agenda).
11. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) : I
call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
12. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The President has
put a question to the members of the General Assembly
and they have replied; it would seem from their reply
that they were unanimous in desiring not to proceed to
a discussion of the items on the agenda of today's meeting of the General Assembly.
13. Nevertheless, I think I am not mistaken in believing that a number of delegations may wish to make
brief statements in explanation of their votes. As none
of the questions on the agenda of this meeting of the
Assembly fa to be debated-whid vill save a great deal
of time-the USSR delegation Cvdsiders that it would
be reasonable to allow delegations which desire to make
brief statements in explanation of their votes, to do so
before the vote, and not after.
14. The delegation of the Soviet Union suggests this
procedure. I repeat: it would be reasonable to allow
c;lelegations which desire to explain their votes on a particular item on the agenda of this meeting to do so
before the vote, a1nd not after.
·
15. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) : As
the Assembly kno1ws, whenever it has been decided not
to discuss an iten1 on the agenda; delegations have had
an oppcrtunity to explain their votes. That practice has
always been followed and will continue to be observed.
16. Personally, I should prefer it if representatives
explained their votes afterwards. It is for the President
to decide whether the explanation should precede or
follow the vote. I do not wish to take advantage of my
po'!er and ~erefore, if any delegations wi.sh to explain
theu- votes 1t1 advamce, I shall gladly give them the
floor. ·
0

Threats to the political independence and terri•
to.rial Integrity of Grooce: reports of the First
Committee (A/1536) and the Fifth Committee

(A/1512)

[Agenda item 22]

11. The P~IDENT (translated from French) : I
shall put the draft resolutions contained in the report

of the First Comr1ttee [A/1536] to the vote s~tely
and in $Uccession. If delegations wish to explain their
votes, I am prepared to allow them the usual seven
minutes each to do so. If they wish to explain their votes
on the three draft resolutions in one speech I see no
objection to their doing so.
18. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) ( translated from Russian) : It was the representative of Greece who submitted to the First Committee the draft resolution concerning the repatriation
of members of the Greek armed forces which was approved by a majority in the Committee and is before the
Assembly as draft resolution A. He based that draft on
the report of the United Nations Special Committee on
the Balkans.1
19. It would seem that, before approving the draft
resolution submitted by the representative of Greece, the
First Committee should have examined, in a more
objective manner, documentary evidence to show that
Albania and Bulgaria were really detaining Greek soldiers captured by the partisans. However, neither the
Special Committee, to whose conclusions the draft resolution refers, nor the Government of Greece has submitted any such evidence, apparently in the belief that
we are bound to take them at their word. The Special
Committee refers in its report solely to the unilateral
assertions of the Greek Government. Here again the
Special Committee's bias and lack of objectivity are
obvious.
20. Fully aware of the unfounded nature of its allegations, the Government of Greece deliberately formulates
them in vague phrases, using such expressions as
"highly probable' 1 or "in all probability." In its letters
of 13 and 24 April 1950, for example, the Greek Govermnent stated that it considered it highly prribable that
1,713 members of the Greek army captured in 1946
were in the territory of Greece's northern neighbours,
an<l again, that they were in all probability in the territory of tilt! three countries to the north of Greece.
21. In April of thl" year the Greek Govemmert considered it probable that 1,713 mcrnbers of the Greek
armed forces were being detained in the countries north
of Greece, but it subsr!quently moderated its tone and
the Greek representative declared in the First Committee that he had in his possession 250 letters received
from Greek prisoners of war in Albania. Here again,
however, the representative of Greece confined himself
to a bare statement, and failed to submit any letters or
any list of Greek prisoners of war in Albania or Bulgaria. By way of evidence, the Greek representative
referred to Radio Tirana which, he alleged, announced
in 1947 that 200 Greek soldiers had been interned. Having no genuine evidence of any weight, the representative of Greece r~fers to the ether, to the radio. This is all
the evidence that the Greek Government has been able
to adduce in support of its new complaints against Albania and Bulgaria.
22. It is hardly necessary to prove here that if we wish
to approach the matter in a serious and conscientious
way, complaints or demands car.not be based on probabilities or suppositions. It woul<l be even more inadmissible for the General Assembly to take a responsible
1 See Official Records of lhe General As.rtmbly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 11.

313th Meeting-I December 1950
decision on the basis of the irresponsible, unsubstan..
tiated, unilateral and gratuitious statements of certain
tlelegations, particularly the Greek delegation which, as
experience has shown, has set itself the task of spreading unfounded and dishonest accusations against Albania and Bulgaria-in which it is actively assisted by
the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans.
23. In this connexion, the delegation of the Soviet
Union cannot but draw the General Assembly's attention to the credulity-to put it mildly-displayed by the
majority in the First Committee during the consideration of thi:: question. 2 In fact, no thorough examination
took place in the Committee, since there was nothing to
examine. The representative of Greece, who raised this
question, placed no evidence before the Committee other
than his o,vn uncorroborated statements. Having receiv~d the Gl'eek representative's draft resolution on this
question, the First Com-.ittee did not bother to ask the
repr~sentaf!ve of the Greek Government to produce
evjdence in support of his complaints. It did nothing of
the kind, although it was its duty to require such evi.:.
dt•nce before approving the draft resolution.
24 The Committee was content merely to vote on the
Gi•eek draft resolution, without any discussion. No one,
for instance, asked the Greek representative for any of
the following data: who the persons were whose repatriation the Greek Government desired, their surnames, the circumstances in which they were sent to
the countries north of Greece, and to which countries
specifically. Assuming that such cases had in fact taken
place, it was necessary also to produce evidence to show
that a particular former Greek soldier did in fad desire
to return to Greece, where a savage campa;in of terror
is raging, and that he was being detained abroad against
his will.

25. No such evidence has been provided. We do not
even know who are the prisoners in question. At first
the Government of Greece quoted the figure of 1,713
Greek soldiers. In the First Committee, the representative o~ Greece reduced that figure to 250 former members of the Greek armed forces alleged to have been
detained in the cou~~riPs to the north of Greece, from
whom the Greek Government claims to have received
letters. But what sort of letters these are and how they
came into the hands of the Greek authorities-that
again is something we do not kn.ow. That is the Greek
representative's secret. By whom and to whom these
letters were sent is equally unknown. How did the
Greek Government know that these letters were written
by former Greek soldiers and not by partisans or persons who joined the partisans? It may well be that no
such letters exist.
26. The Greek delegation, which submitted its .draft
resolution on this question, should have checked aii this
and proved its statements by documents, facts and
figv.r es. But no documents and no reliable facts or
figures have been placed before the General Assembly.
It is precisely for this reason that the Greek Goven1ment1, aeing unable to offer documentary evidence in
support of its new complaints against its northern neighbours, deliberately uses, in its letters on this matter,
such vague and indefinite expressions as "in all proba2 lbid., Firll Committee, 346th, 392nd to 398th meetin&"s inclusive.

501

bility" and so forth, endeavouring to conceal behind
these vague phrases the absence of any evidence and
of any reliable documentary data.
27. But this highly important circumstance in no way·
embarrassed the United Nations Special Committee on
the Balkans, which rashly declared in its report-categorically but without the slightest evidence-that the
northern neighbours of Greece were in fact detaining
members of the Greek armed forces. By this action the.
Special Committee again showed itself in its true light
and demonstrated its bias and lack of objectivity. .
28. It must therefore be conceded that the draft resolution submitted by the First Committee on the repatriation of members of the Greek armed forces from the
countries north of Greece is based on the unilateral
statement of the Greek representative, who has placed
before the General Assembly no document, no reliable
evidence on the matter.
29. It must also be admitted that the First Committee
failed to examine this question thoroughly and that the
representatives who wished to go into the substance of
the question raised by the representative of the Greek
Government were unable to do so because the Greek
Government, which had brought up the question, had
produced no reliabie official evidence to support· its
complaints.
30. The Greek draft resolution was unfounded and
unwarranted, and the First Committees by approving it
without discussion and without demanding or consider-·
i.ng any corroborative evidence, showed a lack of seriousness in dealing with the question. The delegation of
the USSR therefore opposes the adoption of this draft
resolution by the General Assembly and will vote
against it.
31. If the President permits, I should like to explain
my delegation's vote on draft resolution B.
32. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French):
You may do so if you propose to make a short
explanation.
33. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I shall now ex..
plain my delegation's vote on draft resolutio~ B.
34. The report submitted by the United Nations Specia1 Committee on the Balkans was subjected by the
delegation of the USSR and by several other delegations to detailed criticism, in the course of which it was
shown that the Committee's conchtsions were contrived and tendentious, its methods of work unsound
and its recommendations inappropriate a11d contrary to·
the true state of affairs. The Special Committee's activities have not only failed to promote a settlement of
relations between Greece and the countries concerned,
but have on the contrary impeded in every way the
restoration of normal relations between Greece and
tho~e countries-~s was . ~onclusively proved, on the
basis of the facts, m the First Committee.
35. In the discussion on the Greek question in the
First Committee it was also pointed out that the Special
Committee was openly pursuing a policy of hostility to
B~1lgaria and Albania, and had engaged in the fabrica- .
tion of slanderous charges against them. At the same
time, the Special Committee, which is the instrument of
the policy of the ruling circles in the United States and

502
-----

313th Meeting-I December 1950

the United Kingdom with regard to Greece, has in all
cases taken the Greek Government under its protection, and has justified and glossed over the many acts of
provocation committed by the Greek authorities against
Albania and Bulgaria. Thus in all its activities, the
Commission has taken an unobjective and biased position in favour of the Greek authorities.

36. In these circumstances, to approve the activities of
the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans
and maintain it in operation for a further year, would be
a harmful step calculated to prejudice very seriously
any attempt to restore relations between Greece on the
one hand, and Albania and Bulgaria on the other, to
normal.

37. For the foregoing reasons, the USSR delegation
will vote against the Ar;.glo-American resolution, now
placed before us as a draft resolution approved by the
majority in the First Committee, and will continue to
press for the dissolution of the United Nations Special
Committee on the Balkans.

38. The experience of recent years has shown that
there is no possibility of a settlement of the Greek question. on the basis of the Anglo-American proposals.
Those proposals are based on the false and unfounded
assertion, belied by the facts, that Albania and Bulgaria
threaten the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece ; furthermore, they seek to conceal the
true cause of the present abnormal situation in Greece.
39. The delegation of the Soviet Union therefore proposes that the Anglo-American draft resolution submitted by the First Committee should be rej1!cted, since
it is based on assumptions which are not borne out by
the true state of affairs in Greece, and is not calculated
to solve the Greek problem. The USSR delegation
.proposes that this draft resolution should be rejected
because its adoption would merely complicate the solution of the Greek problem and would represent a new
act of flagrant injustice to Albania and Bulgaria; it
would constitute a new ohstacle to the settlement of
relations between those CL- untries and Greece, to the
restora·don of a normal situation in Greece and to the
maint,:nance of international peace and security.

40.

The General Assembly must make every endeav-

our to secure the restoration of a normal situation in
Greece. The way to achieve such a settlement, in the
view of the Soviet Union, is to adopt the measures provided in the draft resolution [A/1560] submitted by
the USSR delegation for the consideration of the General Assembly.

41. The delegation of the Soviet Union wishes to add
a brief observation with regard to the letter from the
representative of Greece, circulated as document
A/1558. In this letter, the Greek delegation has seen fit
to make slanderous attacks on the USSR, while saying not a. word about the brutal reign of terror now
raging in Greece. By so doing, it has confirmed the facts
stated in the letters received from relatives of the imprisoned and exiled Greek patriots and in the letter
from mothers, sisters and daughters of 2,600 women
detained in Greek prisons. The delegation of the Soviet
Union repudiates this slanderous statement by the
representative of Greece with indignation.

42. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) : I
call on the representative of the United States, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
43. Mr. COHEN (United States of America) : I ~ise
on a point of orde~ solely for the purP<?t,;e of su~ges~mg
that if we are gomg to follow the wise practice Just
introduced of voting to dispense with discussio~, I th~nk
it very important that we should not renew d1scuss10n
in our explanations of votes. I do not want to be critical
of anything that has been done, but I would respectfully
suggest that if we could have it understood that an
explanation of a vote is a brief statemen~ of the ireasons
for the vote, avoiding any discussion of detail, V'<! should
not only save time but also avoid the nullification of our
rule to dispense with discussion unless it is desired
by one-third of those voting.
44. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
More than once I have urged delegations to explain
their votes as briefly as possible. I can hardly do more
because a speaker can always say that in order to
explain his delegation's position he has to mention
certain facts. I agree with the United States representative that the reason for the General Assembly's decision
not to have a discussion was to avoid wasting time with
the repetition of statements previously made in Committee. I therefore appeal again to delegations and hope
the members of the General Assembly will heed my
appeal.
45. I call on the representative of the Ukrainian SSR
who wishes to explain his vote.
46. Mr. UDOVICHENKO (Ukrainian Sovjet Socialist Republic) ( translated from Russian) : I shall
speak on all three draft resolutions together and explain
the vote of the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR on
these drafts.
47. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR voted in the
First Committee against the draft resolutions which
are now before the Assembly as draft resolutions A and
B of the First Committee and abstained from voting on
the draft resolution which is now before us as draft
resolution C.
48. None of these draft resolutions can serve to promote a real settlement of the situation in Greece, because
they all deliberately ignore the reasons for the present
internal situation in Greece and that country's abnormal
relations with its neighbours, Albania and Bulgaria.
They ignore the fact that the real threat to the political independence of Greece lies in the open interference
in the internal affairs of that country by the ruling
circles and monopolies of the United States, whose
support made it possible for the present anti-popular
regime to establish itself in Greece and to pursue a
policy of terrorism and oppression of all democratic
elements.
49. The Soviet delegations and the delegations of the
peoples' democracies demonstrated in their statements
that the Special Committee had been guilty of including
falsehoods and deliberate distortions of fact in its report
with the object of vindicating the Greek Government
and laying alf the blame on Bulgaria and Albania which,
so it alleged, were threatening the independence of
Greece. The First Committee nevertheless recommended, by a majority, that the Assembly should approve the report of the United Nations Special Com-

313th Meeting,,..-1 December 1950
mittee on the Balkans and should continue it in being
for a further year.
50. Thus, although the discussions in the First Committee showed how completely absurd and unfounded
were the allegations concerning the existence of any
threats to Greece from its northern neighbours, draft
resolutions were approved which retained these defamatory charges against Bulgaria and Albania and diverted attention from the real threat to Greece, namely,
the continued interference in the internal affairs of that
country by the United States, which determines and
directs its domestic and foreign policy.
51. Terrorism and brutal violence against democratic
elements continue to prevail in Greece, with the approval of the ruling circles of the United States. Contrary to the denials of the Greek delegation, new proofs
are reaching us from everx side that Greek courts are
still passing death sentences.
52. During the current session of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and many delegations have
received large numbers of documents and telegrams
from various organizations and persons in Greece and
other countries drawing attention to fresh crimes committed by the Greek Government.
53. The resolution which the General Assembly
adopted last year concerning the death sentences pass,,.d
agamst Greek patriots [resolution 288 C (IV)] saved
a number of lives. This year, the First Committee rejected a draft resolution submitted by the USSR delegation which merely proposed that the President of
the General Assembly should negotiate with the representatives of the Greek Government in order to secure
the reversal of the death sentences passed by military
courts in Athens against eleven Greek patriots, named
in a letter from their mothers, and against eight trade
union leaders. Such a humane decision would undoubtedly have stayed the hand of the executioner
which was already lifted over the heads of the unfortunate victims.
54. In this connexion, the delegation of the Soviet
Union has submitted to the General Assembly a draft
resolution [A/1569] for the reversal of the death sentencee passed by military courts in Greece against the
Greek patriots. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
warmly supports this draft resolution and appeals to the
General Assembly to discharge its duty ana to support
the draft resolution in the name of humanity.
55. The approval by a majority in the First Committee of draft resolutions on the Creek question conceived
and drafted at the orders of the ruling circles of the
United States, proves that the United States, supported
by the United Kingdom and certain other States, wish
to maintain the present abnormal position in the Balkans because it helps the United States and its partners
to conduct their shameless political and economic expansion in Greece and gradually to transform the country into a tool for the execution of their aggressive
designs on the Balkans.
56. That is why the United States is also hindering
the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between
Greece on the one hand, and Bulgaria and Albania on
the other, by encouraging and stimulating Greece's
greedy appetite for her neighbours' territory-the valleys of Rhodope Mountains in Bulgaria and Northern

503

Epirus in Albania. This also explains the United States
delegation's stubborn opposition at this session to the
adoption of the USSR draft resolution proposing practical and effective measures for the settlement of the
situation in Greece and of its relations with Bulgaria
and Albania.
57. There are no threats whatsoever to the political
independence and territorial integrity of Greece from
its neighbours or from any other peace-loving democratic country. The real threat to Greece lies in United
States interference, which has permeated all aspects of
life in the country and has subjugated the dome8tic and
foreign policy of Greece to its interests. The reign of
terror established by the present Greek Government
against the people is not the least of the dangers threatening the Greek people.
58. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR therefore
considers the draft resolutions on the Greek question
approved by the majority in the First Committee to be
unacceptable.
.
39. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR considers
that an indispensable condition for the settlement of
mutual relations between Greece and its neighboursAlbania and Bulgaria-is the cessation of military and
political interference by the United States in the affairs
of Greece.
60. In order to put an end to the tension between
Greece and its neighbours, diplomatic relations must
be established between Greece on the one hand, and
Bulgaria and Albania on the other, and the frontiers
between these countries must be determined once and
for all in accordance with the decisions of the Paris
Peace Conference.
61. The domestic policy of terrorism and of oppression
of democratic elements now prevailing in Greece must
end. It is essential to carry out democratic reforms in
that country and, first of. all, to declare a general amnesty and to abolish the concentration camps. Only a
representative goverilment, set up as a result of a general parliamentary election and enjoying the confidence
·and support of the people, can lead the country out of
the difficulties into which it has been plunged by the
policy of the present rulers in Athens, supported by the
American residents in Greece.
62. These measures should be taken .by the Greek
people themselves without any outside interference. It
is therefore inadmissible to retain the United Nations
Special Committee on the Balkans, which wa~ established illegally and which, by its hostile att~tude towards
Bulgaria and Albania, has merely served to aggravate
the friction between Greece and its neighbours.
63. All the necessary measures for the settlement of
the situation in Greece are contained in the draft resolution [A/1560] submitted by the delegation •of the
USSR; the delegation. of the Ukrainian SSR supports
this draft and will vote for it. The adoption of this text
and the speedy and effective execution of its provisions
would ensure a real dissipation of the threat to the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece
and would at last enable us to delete from the agenda
of the General Assembly a.. q.uestion which, through the
fault of the Anglo-American bloc, the Assembly baa
been obliged to consider for the fourth time.

504

General Assembly-Fifth SeHion-Plenary Meetings

64. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will vote
against draft resolutions A and B submitted by the
First Committee.
65. 1Ir. KISELEV ( Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) ( translated from Russian) : As the representatives of the USSR and of the Ukrainian SSR have
already explained their votes on the draft resolutions
under discussion, and since the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR is in full agreement with those explanations, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR will
refrain from making a statement on the question.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Thank ynu very much. I hope other delegations will
follow the example of brevity set by the representative
of the Byelorussian SSR.
67. Sir Carl BERENDSEN (New Zealand): I very
much wish that I could in this and any other respects
emulate the example of my old friend and colleague
from the Byelorussian SSR. I shall do my very be~;t to
be as much like him as possible, but I cannot be quite
as brief.
68. The appropriate draft resolutions were so fully
and properly assured of approval in Committee that the
New Zealand delegation took no part ac all in the debate.
But we fear that we cannot allow such an occasion to
pass without e.."<plaining very briefly the votes which we
are about to cast.
69. New Zealand has an interest in the fate of Greece
and the Greek people which is special and particular to
' us, because by the act of war it fell to New Zealanders
to live and to fight side by side with Greek comrades in
circumstances of the sternest adversity, which tested
all the highest qualities of both.
70. Those were to us and to the Greeks days of
deep and stark tragedy, but we of New Zealand shall
remember and shall never forget the noble spirit of
those gallant Greek people who had already suffered so
much and were to suffer so much more in the years to
come. It was not the warmth of their welcome and their
kindness to our sons on their arrival that we remember
-that, of course, could have been expected-but when,
at the end of the struggle, we were forced out of Greece
and then out of Crete, the· people of that suffering land
-left, as they knew and as we lmew, to the indescribable agonies and oppressions of a Nazi occupationbade our sons farewell with the same garlands, the
same songs and the same high fraternal spirit with
which they had welcomed them.
71. We of New Zealand do not forget. Many of our
New Zealanders were inevitably left behind in Greece
and in Crete, and I cannot find words to describe the
devoted fidelity and unbounded generosity which the
Greek people, great and small, rich and poor, of all
shades of political opinfon, extended to our wandering
and suffering sons, in circumstances in which to help
such an outcast was a matter of real and instant peril,
and to nourish him meant pei-sonal deprivation and
suffering. Eve~-where, those fugitive and desperate
New Zealanders were succoured and preserved, bidden
from the Nazi tyrant, and, in due course, in many, ~any
cases, assisted to escape. These tlwigs we of New Zealand do not forget.
Greece held its head high through the rigours of
the occupation and though subsequently, and most unhappily, Greece was rent with intema1 dissension, we of
1

1

n.

New Zealand know the real qualities of tJ~ Greeks and
we see them now struggling to surmount their troubles
and about to resume their proper place in the world of
culture and of order. The Greek people-all of them-have and will have our sympathy and our friendship,
and it is therefore a privilege for us to support the draft
resolutions before the General Assembly which are calculated to maintain and accelerate the recovery of this
great people and this great nation.
73. May I now be :permitted to devote two minutes to
another draft resolution. I £eel it imperative, in explaining my vote on draft resolution C, to express, as best
I may-because I cannot find words adequate to the
occasion-my detestation of the cruelty that has been
perpetrated on these Greek children, torn from their
mothers and their families and sent abi"oad into a foreign land.
74. There can be no escape from the essential facts. If
there is a human right which one would imagine to be
completely undeniable in any quarter of the world, it is
the obvious right of a little child to remain with its
mother and its family; and the equally obvious right of
parents to be with their children.
75. It is clear beyond any question that many, many
thousands of Greek children have been removed and
are still removed from their homes and their country.
Whatever the motive for their removal-and one can
scarcely imagine a motive that could in any degree be
described as good-it is most certainly impossibt'! adequately to condemn the holding of these children abroad
for years. What can one say of those governmental and
other authorities who have conclusively shown that they
do not wish to make the slightest attempt to rectify this
gross betrayal of all that is right and kind and good
in human nature ?
76. The tale is told, and it is a pitiful one, in sober
United Nations reports which every right-thinking man
and woman the world over should read. It is a saddening and a sickening story. I note, and I am sure the
General Assembly will note, with 1ieal appreciation that
in Yugoslavia an attempt is now being made to do
soructhing effective to reunite with their parents such
of these unfortunate children as may be in that country.
In ~ommon with every right-thinking person throughout the whole world, I give my warmest support to all
such activities. I think the Yugoslavs are very much
to be congratulated and thanked for their interest, and
I wish them well in this noble endeavour.
77. Finally, may I have the indulgence of the President in order to express the most fervent hope tbat
despite all that has passed, those in whose power it now
lies to do something effective for humanity may even
now join those who stand with their hands ·outstretched
desperately ready and anxious to help those innocent
little ones. Surely little children can be returned to
their homes without loss or damage to anyone or any
cause the world over. In so doing, who lmows, we might
perchance not only dispose of this crying injustice but,
at the same time, by this united and joint effort in human kindness, we might perhaps come closer together
and make some progress towards a better understanding and a solution of many wider and more practical
questions of international suspicion and dissension. Can
we not join together, all of us, in hope and in charity
and get these children home?

313th Meeting-1 D~cemher 1950
78. Mr. PISEK (Czechoslovakia) (transiated from
Russian) : From the very beginning of the discussion
011 the so-called Greek ,question, the Czechoslovak dele..
gation has objected to the formulation of the question
in a way which implies that the political independence
and territorial integrity of Greece are being threatened
by its northern neighbours. During the debate in the
First Committee, it was clearly demonstr.:::.ed by the
delegations of the USSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Byelorussian SSR, Poland and Czechoslovakia that the
threat came not from the northern neighbours of Greece
-Albania and Bulgaria-but from the United Kingdom
and the United States which, by their support of the
anti-popular government and their interference, have
created in Greece, a dangerous situation which threatens
peace and security in the Balkans.
79. Terrorism is rampant in Greece and the democratic movement is being cruelly persecuted. The antipopular Athens regime is carrying out provocative acts
against its neighbours-Albania and Bulgaria. The
representative of the Athens Government failed to
answer the question whether that government recognized the present Albanian-Greek frontier. He and his
patrons were also unable to refute the facts adduced
concerning the unceasing reign of terror in Greece.
80. The biased attitude of the United Nations Special
Committee on the Balkans, which had been established
as a smoke-screen for a policy of adventure in Greecea policy directed against the Greek people and against
peace and security in the Balkans-was demonstrated
during the debates in the First Committee. N otwithstandin._~ this, a draft resolution was approved under
which the so-called United Nations Spcdai Committee
on the Balkans was to be continued. in bE:ing, although
even the sponsors c, € the draft n:solution were obliged t'l
make reservations, that is, to stipulate that t!:~ Special
Committee should be continued until the sixth session
of the General Assembly "unless meanwhile the Special
Committee recommends to the Interim Committee its
own dissolution".
81. The Czechoslovak delegation is in favour of the
immediate dissolution of the illegal United Nations
Special Committee on the Balkans, whose retention is
not only superfluous but actually harmful.
82. Let me also draw your attention to the twentythird report [A/1555] of the Acvisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions which states
that the appropriations for the United Nations Special
Committee on the Balkans for the current year amount
to $780,200, and that the estimates for 195.1 come to
$573,600. This is an irresponsible squandering of
money to no purpose, harmful in its consequences. The
Czechoslovak delegation is firmly opposed to such a way
of managing the affairs the United Nations.
83. For these reasons the Czechoslovak delegation will
vote against draft resolutions A and B.
84. I should like now to deal with draft resoltttion C.
The Czechoslovak delegation cannot vote in favour of
this draft resolution which, in a spirit of partiality,
reproaches the countries which have given refuge to
Greek children-with the single exception of Yugoslavia
-for not having taken definite action to comply with
the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its
third and fourth sessions. We have shown that action

505

has been taken but that the chief obstacle is the attitude
of the Athens Government. At previous sessions we
agreed that the children should be returned to their
parents on certain conditions ; at this session of the
General Assembly we have also asked for guarantees
that the children would be returned directly to their
families and their parents and that the returned children
and their parents would not be victimized.
85. These guarantees have not been forthcoming. We
quoted the testimony of a former observer of the United
Nations Special Committee on the Balkans, Mr. Kenneth Spencer, who declared that the camps which were
being prepared on Greek islands provided evidence that
the Greek Government had no intention of permitting
the Greek children to return directly to their families.
The representative of the Athens Government dM not
refute this testimony.
86. That is the cause of our disagreement. You say
that the children must be returned to Greece and that
the matter then no longer concerns us. Our prime concern, however, is to know to whom they will be returned, under what conditions, and to what kind of
life. We are concerned with the fate and happiness of
the Greek childre1-1. Do you suppose that millions of
people and millions of mothers throughout the world
would agree to the Greek children being left to the
vagaries of fate, sent off to death camps or handed over
to be educated by gendarmes, agents of the secret police
or other "educators" of that kind? No, they would never
agree to that and would consider us guilty of a crime if
we were to act so thoughtlessly.
87. The Czechoslovak delegation cannot, thereforej
support a draft resolution which provides no definite
guarantee that the children will be returned directly to
their parents and to normal living conditions.
88. All our efforts should be d;.tected towards bringing
the situation in Greece back to normal. My deleg-ation
therefore firmly supports the draft resolution of the
Soviet Union [A/1560], which sets out the basic conditions for achieving ~hat aim.
89. There is one last question with which I should like
to deal. During this fifth session we have received a
number of important documents testifying to the fact
that terrorism in Greece is not abating. This testimony
refutes an the Greek Government's assertions that it has
adopted a more lenient attitude towards political prisoners. These documents are disturbing world public
opinion and call upon us to take steps to save the lives
of Greek patriots under sentence of death, of whom
there are now almost 3,000.
90. The Czechoslovak delegation .considers that the
General Assembly will be acting with justice and humanity if it adopts the USSR draft resolution
[ A/1569], which requests the President of the Ge·a.eral
Assembly to enter into negotiations with repl'•eser:catives
of the Greek Government concerning the repeal of the
d~ath sentences passed by the military courts on Greek
patriots. The Czechoslovak delegation whole•heartedly
supports this draft resolution of the Soviet Union.
91. Mr. KANELLOPOULOUS (Greece) (trats.tlated from French) : As regards draft resolution A, the
text of which was submitted in the First Committee by
Greece, I would request the President•s permission to
reply briefly to the representatives of the Soviet bloc.

506

General Ae1e1nbly-.._Fifth Se11ion-P~enary Meetlnp

92. Those representatives have denied the presence of.
Greek officers and men in their countries. The mere fact

suclil persons were in Yugoslavia and are beiing returt?-ed
to us now-which is an important st~p towards settling
the position in the '3alkans-sh~ws tha~ there are no
grounds whatsoever for the cynical demal of the facts
which the representatives of the Soviet bloc endeavoured
to make in the First Committee and have endeavoured
to make even here. How could Greek officers a11d men
have been detained in Yugoslavia and none in Albania
or Bulgaria?

93. Apart from these _fa~s, people who _ha-..:e trans-

gressed international pnnaples and h111;Uan1tanan rules
have no right to ask for proof. and witnesses. In any
case the names and even tb.e present addresses of a
latg~ number of these Gre,.!k soldiers have be~n communicated to the Secretary-General of the United Na-

ti.ons through the United Nations Special Com1?-1ittee on
the Balkans. That is all I had to say concerning draft
resolution A.
94.. The Greek delegation will, of course, vote. in
favour of draft resolution B, concerning the United
Nations Special Committee on the Balkan~.
95.. That Committee has d~ne good work, worthy
of recognition by all the free and peace-loving peoples
of the world. It 'has been and still is the guardian and
defender of truth. It is true that it had neither the
material strength nor even the authority to ward off the
evils from which Greece has suffered for so long. Yet
the Greek people are grateful to the ~pecial C:o~ttee
for the courage it has shown, not only -.n establishing the
ttu.tb but also,. and above all, in insisting on the truth
witb the impartialty which has aiways been its greatest

virtue

96.. The evils which befell us thanks to the aggres-

sion etmmitted by the ho,:des of red totalitarianism,
which we r~sfot~ with sacrificial ardour, are lmown to
the Special Com..1Uission, which has recorded them and
revealed their true causes. It has recorded the fact that
the trials to which the entire Greek people have be~n
subjected during the last few years, the. crucial phase
of which came to an end as a result of the victories of
our armed forces towards the end AJf the summer of
1949,. were the ,result of the international character
of that war which the representatives of the Soviet bloc
persist in calling a civil war. Only t½e complicity and
the pamcipa~ion in that war of the northern neighbours
of Gr~>ece rendered that war possible. That now applies,
as far as our Jmmediate neighbours are concerned, only
to Albania and .Bulgari~ For since Yugoslavia has
effectively closed its frontiers, it has been easy to see
that armed communism cannot survive in areas adjacent
to a closed frontier.
97. Since the victory of Greek arms last year, the
position in Gr,~e has considerably improved. There is
no longer any militarily organized banditry in the
country.. But Greece still has long frontiers which,
o ~ to the reduction of the national armed forces, are
practically open and cannot be patrolled from end to end.
Beyond those frontiers lie the neighbouring countries
which maintain, organize and arm the bandits who took
refuge there after .the defeat inflicted by the Greek
army on their fighting units. The report of the ·united
Nations Special ·Committee on the Balkans contains

concrete information clearlylroving that the threat to
Greece has not been dispelle •
98. In the First Committee, the represe11tatives of the
Soviet bloc hurled insults at the members of the Special
Committee set up by tpe General Assembly. T~ese
representatives should either make use of their right
to take part in the work of the Special Committee or
else keep silent, thus tacitly and modestl;y admitting
their guilt for what bas happened in Greece. Their noisy
demonstrations not only reveal their responsibilicy for
past events, but are indications of their future intentions. Thus they are themselves adding another arIDtment in favour of continuing the United Nations Special
Committee on tht.- Balkans.
99. The First Committee, which approved the two
draft resolutions concerning the retention of the Special
Committee and the repatriation of members of the
Greek armed forces by an overwhelming majority,
rejected the USSR draft resolutions, which were based
upon lies and slander and were intended only to under..
mine and destroy the democratfo and liberal r~gime of
Greece. Both the form and the substance of those drafts
w,are unacceptable.

100. As regards form, they are designed to bring
about the intervention of the United Nations in the
domestic affairs of Greece, which is an independent
country. Greece is prepared to agree to a.11.y reduction of
sovereignty to which other Members of our Organiza..
tion would agree for their part, if it can thereby help to
strengthen peace and to set the affairs of the world on
a new and firmer basis. We know. quite well-and I
shall take this opportunity to say so-that the world
cannot survive without the co..operation of all. Such
co-operation can be achieved only if all peoples, Jreat
and small, are prepared to sacrifice their national
egotisms ; that sacrifice may be made by stages, but it
must ultimately be complete. We could not accept
interfererice in our domestic affairs unless exactly the
same interference on the part of this international
Organization took place in the domestic affairs of all
the other Members.
101. The USSR draft resolutions which were rejected
in the First Committee were unacceptable not only on
accoant of their form, but also on account of their
substance. Their motivation was only too obvious. The
Soviet Union cannot yet admit the fact that in Greece
democracy has triumphed over red totalitarianism and
barbarism. It cannot yet resign itself to the fact that the
Balkan peninsula. which dominates the eastern Mediterranean has not fallen into the hands of international
communism. It cannot resign itself to the fact that the
Greek people, as in 1940 and 1941, have once more
paved the way to victory over t~e powers of darkness.
When communism was defeated in Gr~ece, the USSR
tried-and it is still trying-to change the victorious
democracy of Greece into a passive, atrophied and lifeless democracy which would be robbed ot its victory by
the :esumption of the subversive activitfos of commumsm.
Greek democracy is fully conscious of its mission,
a mission of world-wide importance at one of the world's
nerve-centres, and it is not prepared to hand over its
moral weapons to those who, after slaughtering millions
of Greeks over many years and laying waste hundreds of villages, have finally been forced to hand over
102.

313th Meetln,-1 Deeember 1950
the weapons used for their crimes to the victorious

Greek democracy.
103. Greece is generous and tolerant by nature, as any
visitor to my country not blinded by doctrinaire prin-

ciple~ ean find ou~. It is the country of true lJght, where
nothing can be hidden. But, though Greece '1& generous
and tolerant. that does not mean that it is ready to
throw open its doors to red fascism or red naiism and
have its foundations undermined once again. Greece is
not prepared to bet~a.y its democratic mission, that is,
its duty towards the United Nations, a duty which is all
t.he more ir.portant since the geographical situation of
the couittry places the Greek people in the proud position of fighcl».g in the vanguara of democracy. The
Gleek people were fully conscious of their duty at a
time wnen they were entirely isolated and when public
opinion in the great democracies, disinclined to face
hard facts, was passively acce~t~ng all the slanders put
out by the enemies of Greece. If we did not yield then,
it is very certain that we· shall not yield today. The
Greek attny, which is strong in morale and consiclerable
in numbers, is ready to make any sacrifice in the defence
of freedom. That army, in spite of the desperate efforts
of Moscow to weaken Greek democracy, is and will
remain at the service of the United Nations.
104. The President will allow me also to explain my
vote on draft resolution C, concerning the repatriation
of Greek children.

105. The. Greek delegation expresses its profound
regret that no solution has been found for a problem of
of such great moral i~ortance, Greece is grateful to
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to the
League of Red Cross Societies and to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for their untiring efforts
to solve the problem in the name of humanitarian
principles. It notes, however, with serious apprehension
as regards th~ future _of thre world,. ~t the_re is a gro19>
of States which perctst not only m 1gnonng the basic
principles of the moral dignity of human beings, the
family and society, but in tr&--:7.:pling them underfoot in
the most cynical· fashion.
106. Unlike those countries, Yugoslavia has just made
a first gesture in the direction of restoring kidnapped
Greek children. We hope that, despite the grave fears
expressed by some, a difference in social systems and
politics need not involve differences in the fundatnental
moral conceptions regarding human beings and families.
107. Everything. said here by the representatives of
tbe Soviet bloc to hide the fact that, even while they were
voting in previous years for resolutions recommending
the retum of the Greek children, they had no intention
of letting th{"m go, ha.s been no more than a smoke- ·
Sct"eett for their devilish purposes. I feel myself called
upon to denounce those purposes· and to draw the
attention of the United Nations to the consequences
which would inevitably ensue if they were finally

achieved.

·

108. The countries of the Soviet bloc will certainly
release those unfortunate children some day. But when?
Only when, after a long training dispensed by ruthless
methods, they have ceased not only to be men with free
consciences but have also lost even the possibility of
ac;quiring a free conscience as a result of moral re-

education.

S07

109. The right of chasing one's own w.,y
. of life is
surely the most precious gift given by God t\i m~,- /4.:n.
adolescence deprived of the right to question-to intel..
lectual questioning, to moral questioning-an adolescence deprived of all right to doubt, of the· right to
choose ideas freely, will lead to the creation-I was
going to say to the manufacture-of men who are not
human bei!lgs; !t wiµ lead tf! the mass eroduction of.
morally bbnd biological specunens. The mhuman and
monolithic form of education instituted by the Soviet
regime robs the soul of .all its human qualities. The
purpose of the States of the Soviet bloc which are. still
detaining Greek children is to return those children to
Greece only wheri the human element in their soul has
bee.."l entirely destroyed.·
110. The representatives of the Soviet bloc have not
failt?d to assure us that the education which these
children ·are recei.ving includes systematic instruction in
their n1other tongue, that is to say, Gre,-.k. But who
has ever denied that? The Cominform has no intention
of using those children in the territories now under its
control. Its purpose, of course, is to send them to Greece
later, and therefore they must have a perfect knowlewte
cf Greek~ They will certainly 1~.am their mother tongue,
but they will none the less have ceased to be Greeks in
the true sense of the word, because they will have ceased
to be men with free consciences.
111. While it is still not too late for the sake of tho~
at least for whom there is yet time-the countries 1;i
the Soviet bloc _must be forced under the piusure .of
world opinion to give up their devilish plans.
.
112. The problem of the Greek children who.have been
taken from their homes is one of the most tragic of our
century. Greece demands today that these Greek children should be set at liberty and delivered as soon as
possible from this morally· inhuman treatment, so that
they may return to their families and to the society of
free men.
·
· ·
•
113. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) :
We have never had a discussion like this before. The
~peech~ could n~t have been· longer if the Assembly
nad decided to ho1d a debate on the question., :nor could
matters which baye no direct' braring · on the subject
have been dealt with more t};!.Jrough..iy~
.
·
114. I appeal to you once more. As there. were three
draft resolutions on the Greek .question, and I said· that
I would allow representatives to explain tbett votes on
each of them, I have allowed speakers to go on beyond
the stiJ?ula!ed time. But i give notice to t~e Assembly .
that, with its approval, I shall be more stnct when we
come to deal with other questions, and I shall limit the
time for exµ~ations of votes to seven minutes.
115. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Po1and): After the re-·
quest of the President, I shall not reply to all that
nonsense which we have just heard from the representative of Greece. We all know what he spoke about and
how matters look, apart from his high-sounding phrases.
I shall pmit myself to an exphmation of ~'ie vot~ of rny
delegation on the several .draft resolutioni, which we
ha:ve before us concerning the Greek problem.
.
116. The first-draft resolution A-concerns the re- .
par.nation 0£. 9reek armed forces allegedly captured by
Greek . guemllas and transported to the countries
neighbouring on Greece.
,

r

____ _________________________~------..---

500

.......,,.

General Assembly-Fifth Seaaion-:Ple:nary Meeting•

' 117. Despite several requests by the Polish delegation,
as well as by other delegations, the authors of this draft
resolution were unable in the First Committee to support
it with any kind of facts which would justify the
introduction or the adoption of such a text. That continues to be so. We found it impossible. to discuss the
charges brought forward by the Greek delegation since
no &-pecific data referring to the care had been supplied
and since the relevant part of the Special Committee's
report was based entirely on the Greek statements,
which were not supported by any evidence, any facts or
data. My delegation, therefore, intends to vote against
. this draft resolution'" which is merely another attempt
to launch slandr.:rous attacks against some of Greece's
northf;!rtl neigr;oours~
118. The report of the United Nations Spedal Committee on the Balkau.s and the draft resolution subsequently submitted en the basis of that report were
• extensively discusst':d during several sessions of the
: First Committee. My delegat\on, during the debate,
l made clear its views on the rc.~port as well as on the
: internal situation existing in Greece, on the relations
between Greece, on the one hand, and Bulgaria and
~\lbania, on the other,. and on the charges contained in
: the report. \Ve expressed the view-and we now con; tinue to maintain it-that the fiye-Power draft resolul tiont which is now before us :i~: Jraft resolution B, is
: not intended to enable us to find a solution to the Greek
: problem. Its purpose is to maintain the present condi: tiuns in Greece and the e..xisting state of tension and so
l to justify continued foreign intervention in Greece's
!. internal affairs . an.·d
the subordination of Greece to
I foreign military,. strategic: and economic interests.
! 119. l\fy delegation opposed the inclusion of this item
: in the agen~ for it was fully aware that it was not
• intended to proteci:: the independence of Greece; we
knew that it would be used for the continuation of that
i .foreign intervention in Greece which we have been
~discussing since the very inception of this Organization.
t Foreign intervention., war preparatiol'!s and designs,.
i territorial claims against the northern neighbours of
t G~, no:mdgic dreams and mega.lomanic desires for
a. greater Greece at the expense of a small and peaceful
~·· country like Albania-these are some of the internal tional- aspects of the Greek affair. This is what threatens
i the peace in the Balkans.
120. \Ve have demanded at thts session of the General
·- Assembly~ as at·previous.sessions,. a simpleand. straight~ forward dC<:l~tion by tbfk Grt-ek delegation tha~ Greece
~· hat; oo territorial design on the Balkans. At thist as at
l:t,revioas sessions, no sucll declaration was made"' At the
rsa,me- t~,,_ the incre3~g number of frontier provoea[ tions si~ws that the ..\thens regime is prepared to

I

f Wlow updts claims by the use of force.

J!21. Drait resolution B approves the report of the

r Special Committee and continues the existence of that

~ Committee until the.next session of the General Assem-

! Yy. This point in the draft resolution is the crux of the
rmatter. 'I'be· ·whole ~ of the disaission and of the

J draft. resotutioo ~. to have the Special Committee con-( tinned and so constitute a phony United Nations stamp
: . , the a.ctivi~ of United States interventionists.
f
My delegation considers that to continue the
Spedat Committee in being is certainly not t~ ~--ay to
, iaa,pn:,ve the situation in the 13alkatts. On the contrary,

ttt

we contend-and we have given atriP,le evid~rnce to
support our contention----thnt the Special Comr.1ittee's
sole contribtttio11 is to nd<l to the e:x:i!ting tet151on,
During the debate we proved that the r~port prfpared
hy the Special C'>mmittec wns b~~ed on rttmourst on
hearsay, and on statetnents oi cri~inat~ and provoc,..
teurs. Seldom has a. report so clm:ns1ly concocted as th111
one-a tfiport whose ctmdm:iions w~re drawn up beforehand for the benefit of cettah1 State~ with strategic
interests in Greece-be~n submitted to the United Na..
tions. None of our cha1·ges concerning the Special
Committee has been answertd ; the samt! is true 0£ the
contradictions whirh we hEive point~{i out in the report.
123. Every demand of logic shC>ws thtit thtllre is some~
totally wrong m the proposed solution, and
hone:>ty and dccen~y should r~q1.tire a change or meth-ods and the seeking cf b~tter ones. That has not been
done in the draft res<'>lt1tic>t'l, My delegation will ,:ote
against draft resolution H, and will ~tlso <>pp◊se atty
financial appropriation to implement it.
124. As regards the Soviet Union drait r~softttfon
[ A/1560], my defogation considers that only through
internal conciliation in Greece on the Ofle hand, and
through conciliation with the Governments or Albania
and Bulgaria on the other, ca.n the normalization of
the situation in Greece be achieved. For~ign it!terven..
tion must cease so that the Greek people may be free
to decide their own fate. They should have: the tight
to express their opinions and desires in free parJfa..
mentary elections based on proportional representation.
The economic and social burden which rests so heavily
on the back:, of the Greek people should be lessened,
and the terror and oppression in pris(nts and concentra..
tion camps should be removed by the declaration of a
general amnesty and the abolition of concentration
camps. Conciliation between Greece and Albanfa :md
betwer:n Greece and Bulgaria should lead to the est, \b..
Iishment of normal diplomatic relations with tho~
thing

countries.

125. . These are some basic reqnirements for any action
which sincerely aims at solving the Greek problem.
This is the path of action that the General Assembly
should recommend, and this is what the Soviet Union
draft resolution proposes. We strongly support this
draft resolution, which gives a ray of hope to the
oppressed people of Greece
126. The oppressed people of Greece, who live in fear,
hunger and starvation, who are suffering, starving and
<lying, look· towards this Assembly with the hope that
their strivings for a free and democratic country will
finally be taken up by the United Nations. We have
failed them many times. If this Orgtmization wants to
fuifiI its role as a centre for harmonizing the activities
of nations and for developing international co11a.boration, it cannot afford to fail them again. We cannot
shun the basic issues brought forth in this debate ~nd
fonnulated in a plan of action by the USSR draft
resolution. This plan of action is the only real solution.
It alone puts the problems in their n..'al perspectfre~ artd
proposes concrete measures. My delegation will vote
in favour of this draft resolution.
1?7. My delegation abstained in the First. Committee
on the vote on the draft resolution conc.eming the

repatriation of Greek children,. which is before us now

as draft resolution C. We emphasized, and we do so

311th Meednl-1_~____•_hel'_l_9_50
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _509
,_

~in, that thia is• problem which soould be ~chtd
only il"on"l the humtrtitarian po1nt of \>iew~ W,e consider
it aOOlfiinable 'to u~ the itte ()t these thildren as a
\ \ ~ ot political prop1gtnda, as it has ~n used in
tl\e past •nd a-s we l~rd it used this n'l<.n:ning, The
Polish delegation ~t,;ortgly maintains its position that

the tbildren should join tb~ir flttlilies whenever there
is an c.,-p~ss will fur it and whenever it is ~cd out
in «».tfon't'lity with th~ prindptes of the resolutions on
this ~ubject adol)'ttd in 1948 ~nd ~in in 1949
(Wshlttlit'»t$ 19..t C (Ill) tittd 288 B (lV) ],
128. It is most unfurtun&.1:e that tM diseussion of this
ptl'>blen, '\\'a'5 used a-s at\ op~rtunity to attack those
oountries whkh gave pmt~tton to the d1ild~n at a
tinie wh<11 their li~s wett in d~nger and when they
were in direst need oi tare. ?\Iy delegation fully
~ii~s th~t t~re \vere msons fur, the evacuation
()£ ('J~k ehtldffl't from tht wa.rwstttclren areas of
G~. In V'i~w of the hea:vy hombardnitnt of the
guerriUa.~hcld ~reas ~nd in yiew of the_ ~nomic
blocbde-, the l1~s of the~ thtldrcn. would h~~ beetl
in d~l'fget h~d they 'fen.~a.ined t~re. Their evacuation
was oofi<l.uct«l so as t◊ include only the children whose
parents had ~xpressed the wish that they should be
tlkro to saf~r :plaoes. The voluntary charactf'r of this
e\latnation <-annot be denied by ~nyon.e, despite the
tfflt~fidous p~da. dti'1'e laun.thed by the Athens
Gl~mment.
129. I wish to ~phasize tl1at aii the ~untrles which
ha\~ tiven ~hel~r to Greek children, ha:ve fu1fi!ted a
gtctt hurrutn1ta.mn duty. 'they have g.i~n the th1ldren
~~I~t <:are and protection. They have ~:uanteed
their upbringing in a spirit ot healthy patriotism and
lo,-c <,f the history and traditions of G~. The gratitude of the Greek tnothers of t~e thildren, ~pressed
in oo many lettel'S, should be ~plernentcd by the high
praise ot thi$ (}rpnizt.tion for !lie countries that have
BI\~ t t ~ :tal'e uld protecti~~ to the ~ and
mn.~t Vkttms of the '\l\--ar., Victims of the Truman
· doct:rint\ 'Vid:ims -of ~ Athens 'ttgime,
130. At tbt same time, those countries, having under~ the task of protecting these children, are responsibl~ for their tale and hence must have a real guarantee
t~t requests for their retum are genuine and voluntaty;
for., as we ha~ ~ ) many requests were false and
rnanuiaeb:m!d. The General Assembly must itself, therefore, demand gaamitees that the children will not
betorne 'Victims ,of reform aunps, will not be punished
for tht 'J)()litical mnvid:ions of their parents or for their

..
' ,.
-.!I..-- ---=-'II ~""" ..
__,_.;1
stay m
«nm1:IJ:t:S
:w.uu~ ~ system iS 'fWUKcu
upon
with disfa.wur by the Greek ~ t .
13l. i'ms Assembly has been presented, however,
with a dad't resolution wliich, unfortunately, uses the
problem of Greek cb.ildren as a ~litical tool. Wtthont
any justification~, the draft resolution accuses
the <Dtmtries harbouring the Greek dmdren of creating
diffiailties and, in spite of the action of the Red Cross.,
proposes the :Im nation of tL committee whose ,only
-effect ~ be to :make the return tnaddney more
difficult. '\\i"hilc in ~ n t with certain parts of the
draft resolution, ~ cannot acct.Pt it in its present form
and we 2jed: the mtjmtmed accusations it CODWm.
132. Jly ildrgatioo ~ d:le Soriet Union amendmC'llis IA/.15dBJ to draft resolution C.. If the.,- were
a ~ we Bhoo1d 1Je prepared to accept ~ draft

tt00fation. \Ve can.not, however, accept the draft reaotuti0t1 as it is now worded.
133. Finally, I come to the draft resolution [A/1569]
submitt«I by the Soviet Union delegation «.nceming
th~ death sentences imposed upon Greek democrats. We
:all heard :and read the moving appeal which the e.leven
mot~rs of those unfortunatt young men submitted to
Gencra1issimo Stalin. During the debate in the First
committee we heard hair-raising stories of tettor,
persecution and torture in P.risons and concentration
camps of men, -women and children. We know the heavy
toll the Greek nation has· had to pay in death sentences.
Three thousand more prisoners are in their cells awaiting their tum to be taken out t- 1le shot. This Assembly
cannot remain deaf to ti -~ appeals for mercy and
leniency towards men whose only crimes were their
democratic beliefs.
134. \Ve all remember how united we were at the
third session, in Paris, in our desire to save the lives of
se"t~ trade union leaders. \Ve saved their lives only
tempotarily, ior they are still under sentence of death
and may be e.~ted any moment. If we ask whether
tl1e General Assembly has done anything at all to help
solve the Greek problem, no doubt this is the only
positive achievanent to ,rlnich we can point.
135. Today we have ~~n opportunity to save a few
human lives and thus 1oring WJPC to thousands more
who live in constant fear of death. No responsible
person can <¼-,aree to the continuation of the persecution.
No responsible person can take upon his conscience the
rejection of a draft resolution ..w~ch involves_ human
lives. My d e l ~ will vote 1n iavo~r o! this draft,
in the firm belief that we are thus 111611mg a great
humanitarian duty and taking a step wbk-h could mark
the beginning of leniency and conciliation, a lightening
of the heavy bard~ which bas befallen -m-e Greek
people, whose histoty and gallantry we all admire.
136. Mr.. VAN GLABBEKE (Belgium) (ll'Mulatltl'
frc•_ Frexcli) : The Belgian._. delegation wishes to give
a brief explanation of its 'VOte; its p~on here will be
the same as in the Fttst Commiitf:e.
137.. In the ·first place, it will vote ~ the draft
resolutions submitted by the USSR f.A./15f11J a,ul A./
15691:, because they provide for series of measures
which are exactlv
.; ilic kind or measures which should
not be adopted.
138. It will wte against the amendments [A._/51681
submitted by the Soviet Union 1n draft resolution C,
because their only pm.pose md their only effiect 1vould
be to make the draft taOlutioo say endfy_the contrary
of what it sbould.
-139. It will vote in :ta.YOU!' of the three th"afts approved
by the First Committee, beouule they ;ay exadly what
should be said. no more and no less.
140. It will vote in this way because it wishes to
remain faithful to
Gcoaal. ~ Y resolutiows of 1948 and 1949, urgiag· all States Metnbers of the
United Nations, and the other States which -are
harbouring Greek children; to take all possible meumes~ in ~ and co1laboration with the_
mtionat Rm Cross ()l't'JU!izatbis, to facilitate tbe
spttdy tdtttn of the childrm to their ho-nea.
141.. Belgium will~ in d1is ~,, as it voted before,
becaU$C it disappror,a of fbe ~~ of IOIUe countriea
the_

in•-

510

Gen~ral Aseemhly-Fifth Seseion-Plenal"y Meetings

in voting for two consecutive years for resolutions such
as those which I have just mentioned and then doing
nothing to implement them. Those countries have not
only done nothing t1) implement the General Assemb~y
resolution!:. but, on the contrary, have hindered their
implementation.
142, The Belgi.-n delegation will vote in this way because to its great regret, it sees, from the report of the
United Nations S~ial Committee on the Balkans that
the countries harbouring Greek children-except Yugoslavia, of course-have completely failed to take any
action ; because the report states that a continuation of
the present situation is absoluteiy unjustified; and
because, finally, the report ex.presses the Special Committee's grave concern about the fact that, notwithstanding the two resolutions unanimously adopted by .the
General Assembly and the unremitting efforts ::>f the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and international Red Cross organizations, not a single Greek child
has yet been returned to his native land, with the
exception of those who have been repatriated from
Yugoslavia.
143. The Belgian delegation will vote in this way
because it cannot accept evasions on a question such as
that of thf' repatriation of Greek children.
144. The representative of Poland told us iust now
that the problem should not be considercl frou a politi.:al ooint of view. Nevertheless, it was said in the First
Committee that, if the form of government in Athens
changed-in other words, if there were a communist
government in Athens-the Greek children would be
returned to their families. My delegation cannot accept
an argument which amounts to saying: ,sThese children
are better off where they are now ; let us not send them
back to Greece."
145. My delegation will Y'lte in this way because it
cannot agree that to-day, :1:tter so many years, the
argument should be used that there are errors in one or
other of the lists of children. As the lists contain the
names of thousands of children, su.c.h er-rors are
inevitable.
146. My delegation con.::iders that, when a country
does not even reply to letters inviting it to give proof oi
its goodwill and to participate in the very human work
of repatriating the Greek children, that is a proof tMt
obligations ~Jere being shirked and even, perhaps, a proof
of bad- faith.
147. Furtbennort, my delegation does not consider
that it ea~ accept the argument that because some
children lost: their parents in Greece during the civil
war, they should not be returned to their homes. There
may be other members· of the family-grandparents,
undes or aunts-who are entitled to claim these chil. dren, and in anl? case we think that the Greek Government itself has~ the ri0 a1t to assume responsibility for
orphans who h~ 1'!.'l family at all.
· 148. My deleg:: ..Jn would like to see the same prin••
ciples applied in the case of these Greek children as
Ef.:lgium applied in the tase of the Spanish children
i-epatriated after the Spa.11ish civil war. That repatriation caused deer, suffering among those who had
ac.lopted little Spanish children; but when the time came
to send them back, we did not say: "We do not like the
Printed in U.S.A.

Spanish Government ; we shall wait until there is
another government in Madrid". We applied the principles which, by our vote, we ask the General Assembly
to apply.
149. These are the reasons why my delegation will·
vote in the way I have inJics.ted.
150. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) :
We shall now proceed l.:> vote. I shall first put to the
vote draft resolution A submitted by the First Committee [A/1536]. No amendment has heen submitted
to this draft resolution.
Draft resolution A was adopted by 53 fJotes to 5, with

1 abstention.
_
151. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put draft resolution B, to which no amendments have
been submitted, to the vote.
Draft resolution B was adopted by 53 'Votes to 6.
152. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I have before me three amendments proposed by the
Soviet Union [A/1568] to draft resolution C submitted
by the First Committee I shall put these amendments.
to the vote separateiy.
153. I now put to the vote the first amendment, calling
fo:r the deletion of the first paragraph of the preamble.
The amendment was rejected by 49 f.lotes to 5 with
1 abstention .
154. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The second amendment of the USSR calls for th~
substitution, in paragraph 2 of the operative part ci the
lraft resolution,, of the words "in conformity wfch the
resolutions referred to above" for the words "and,
whenever necessarv, to allow the internatio 11al Red
Cross organization~ free access to their terri 1.nries for
this purpose". I put this amendment to the vote.

The amendment was rejected, by 48 votes to 5, with
2 abstentions.
155. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) :
I now put the third amendment to the vote; it calls for
t..'1e deletion of paragraphs 3 and 4 of the operative part
or draft resolution C.
The amendment was rejected, by 51 votfJs to 5, with

1 abstention.
156. The PRESIDENT ( translated from French) :
I shall now ask the Assembly to vote on draft resolution

C submitted by the First Committee [A/1536].
Draft resolution C was adopted 'by 50 votes to none,.

with 5 abstentions.
157. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

The Assembly now has to vote on two draft 1·esolutior:c.
submitted by the Soviet Union.
158. I put the first of these draft resolutions [ A/
.15601 to the vote.

The draft resolution was rejected by SO votes to 5~
with 3 abstentions.
159. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put the second USSR draft resolution [ A/1569] to
the vote.
The draft resolution was rejected by 38 'IJOtes to 6,.

with 11 abstentions.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

A-40464-January 1951-J,600
