S/PV.7837

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7837th meeting

Thursday, 15 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dastis Quecedo/Mr. González de Linares Palou. . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. McCully
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Wright
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Preventing catastrophe: A global agenda for stopping the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors
Letter dated 1 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/1013)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44143 (E)
*1644143*

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the outgoing Deputy Secretary-General
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
take advantage of the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, most likely
for the last time at a meeting of the Security Council
during his term of office, to say a few words on behalf
of the Security Council.
A lot has been said about Jan Eliasson, all positive.
It has been recalled that he always carries a copy of the
Charter of the United Nations, that Chapter VI is his
favourite, that he is undoubtedly a citizen of the world
and that he knows the field work and the Headquarters
of the Organization like few others.
The Council has benefited from his extensive
experience and has enjoyed his support, vision and
commitment over the past four years. He has been
an extraordinary professional — loyal, imaginative,
headstrong and tireless — and always open to listen to
world leaders as well as to ordinary citizens, thereby
giving the most human face to the United Nations.

15/12/2016

to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1013)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Andorra, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria,Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malta, Montenegro, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugalthe Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, the Thailand,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates to participate in
this meeting.

Preventing catastrophe: A global agenda for
stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr Kim Won-soo,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Brian
Finlay, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Stimson Center; Mr. T. James Min, Vice-President,
International Trade Law and Head, Global Trade Law
Practice Group of DHL Global Business Services;
Mr. Ahmet Üzümcü, Director General, Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; Mr. Raja Raja
Adnan, Director of the Division of Nuclear Security,
International Atomic Energy Agency; Ms. Alison
August Treppel, Acting Executive Secretary for the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States; Mr. Juan Manuel
Vega Serrano, President, Financial Action Task Force;
Mr. Ham Sang-wook, Chair, Missile Technology Control
Regime; Mr. Song Young-wan, Chair, Nuclear Suppliers
Group; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative,
International Criminal Police Organization; Mr. Paul
Bekkers, Director of the Secretary-General’s Office,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and Ms. Julia Blocher, Research Officer, New York
Office, United Nations University.

Letter dated 1 December 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Spain

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency

During the nearly 40 years he has been associated
with the Organization, and despite having seen the
worst kind of horror in conflicts all around the world,
he has never lost his idealism and conviction that a
better future is within our reach. With his enthusiasm
and perseverance, he has pushed for and encouraged
us to bridge the gap between the world as it is and the
world as it should be.
For all those reasons, on behalf of the Council, I
wish to convey our deepest gratitude and appreciation
for the dedication and courage with which he has served
“we the peoples”, and to extend to him our warmest
wishes for prosperity, health and success in the new
phase that he is about to start.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

2/83

16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Jacek Bylica, High Representative Special Envoy
for Non-proliferation and Disarmament, European
Union, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1052, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/1013, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 December 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Spain to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

S/PV.7837

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2325 (2016).
I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Security Council and the Spanish presidency for
arranging today’s debate, and I congratulate them on
adopting resolution 2325 (2016) by consensus.
I am indeed honoured to be here today in what is my
final appearance before the Security Council. I cannot
thank you enough, Mr. President, for your extremely
generous and warm words directed to me. From my
side, I can only thank all the members of the Council
for their friendship and cooperation over the almost
five years that I have exercised my functions as Deputy
Secretary-General, although I have occupied other
functions in earlier parts of my United Nations career
since 1980, when I started mediating between Iran and
Iraq, together with Prime Minister Olof Palme. I have
been very grateful for and highly treasure the dialogue
that we enjoy with practically every representative
here today, on both the personal and the professional
levels. I think that this element of personal trust
and relationships is highly important in this organ.
Sometimes when tensions are very high in the world
outside, we need to keep our cool here and try to do our
best under difficult circumstances.
I am a great friend of Chapter VI, but I also say
that sometimes we need Chapter VII to remind us of
what could happen if we do not do the right thing under
Chapter VI. In order to prove that, I have to pull out
the Charter from my briefcase. It is there, and it will
remain there even when I leave for my home country,
Sweden, next week. Again, I thank everyone so much,
and I will follow events very closely, not least in the

16-441433/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Security Council. To hear those words in this Chamber
is a great honour for me.
I also want to thank the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts, under the leadership of Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, for their work on the important
subject under consideration today.
Preventing non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction is among the
most important responsibilities of the international
community. The Nuclear Security Summits, the
International Convention on the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism and the close engagement of
the Council on allegations of chemical weapons use
have all played an important role in keeping us safe.
The Secretariat has also played its part. In 2012, the
Secretary-General convened a high-level meeting to
strengthen legal frameworks against nuclear terrorism.
After the accident in Fukushima, Japan, he chaired a
high-level event to emphasise the connection between
nuclear safety and security. In 2013, he launched the
investigation into the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Yet in our rapidly evolving global security
environment, gaps will continue to open. We have
seen the rise of vicious non-State groups with no
regard for human life. They actively seek weapons of
mass destruction, I am sure, and those weapons are
increasingly accessible. We have seen that in the use of
chemical weapons by Da’esh in Syria and Iraq. There are
legitimate concerns about the security of large stockpiles
of weapons-usable fissile material outside international
regulation. Scientific advances have lowered barriers
to the production of biological weapons, and emerging
technologies, such as three-dimensional printing and
unmanned aerial vehicles, are adding to threats of an
attack using weapons of mass destruction.
We must also be aware of the growing nexus
between weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and
cybersecurity. Malicious actions in cyberspace have
real-world consequences. Non-state actors already
have the capacity to abuse cybertechnologies to create
mass disruption. The nightmare scenario of a hack on a
nuclear power plant, causing the uncontrolled release of
ionizing radiation, is growing.
To stay ahead of this technological curve, the
international community needs robust defences that
are nimble and flexible. Preventing weapon of mass
4/83

15/12/2016

destruction attacks by a non-State actor will be a longterm challenge that requires long-term responses.
Tools such as resolution 1540 (2004) need to be fit for
purpose, and I am pleased to see the comprehensive
review calling for greater efforts to build the capacities
of all States. After all, this is a threat to our collective
security. We all need to boost our ability to respond. A
biological attack would be a public health disaster. Yet,
there is no multilateral institutional response capability.
The Council also has a role to play in holding those that
use chemical or other inhumane weapons accountable.
There can be no impunity.
This is a complex web of global threats and risks
that requires a sophisticated global response. We must
take advantage of every opportunity to strengthen
our collective defences. In that regard, the Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention was in many ways disappointing,
and I count on all States to work together to prevent
potential disasters. I also count on the Council to lead.
In closing, let me emphasise that it is not simply
a case of letting these weapons fall into the wrong
hands. There are no right hands for wrong weapons,
and weapons of mass destruction are simply wrong.
There is only one sure way to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, and that is
their complete elimination. We live in a world that is
overarmed and where peace is underfunded. On behalf
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, I urge all States to
fulfil their commitment to building a world free of all
weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kim Won-soo:
Mr. Kim Won-soo: At the outset, I too would like
to thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this open debate and allowing me to
brief the Council.
I congratulate the Security Council on its adoption
of resolution 2325 (2016), endorsing the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004). My deep appreciation
also goes to the Government of Spain, and in particular
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for their tireless work
in chairing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for the past two years. Under
Spain’s stewardship, resolution 1540 (2004) has been
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

enhanced as a bulwark against the possible proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
I also congratulate the Plurinational State of Bolivia
for taking up the chairmanship of the 1540 Committee
in anticipation. Bolivia has big shoes to fill, but we also
hope that it will take the work of the 1540 Committee
to a much higher level.
The Deputy Secretary-General has just given us a
sharp reminder that the threats and risks of a non-State
actor acquiring a weapon of mass destruction are not
receding. How to tackle these threats and risks is a
decision for Member States to make, but I would like to
highlight three priorities.
The first is biological weapons. The resolution
just adopted recognizes the growing threats and risks
associated with biological weapons. The need to
address these threats and risks is all the more important
given that the recent Review Conference of the Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention fell short
of expectations. There is much more work to be done
in implementing preventative measures for biological
weapons. One near-term step, as reflected in the new
resolution, could be to enhance the information sharing
mechanism on biological threats and risks between
States, international organizations and regional
organizations. For our part, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs will continue to strengthen
the Secretary-General’s Mechanism for Investigation
of Alleged Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons,
in line with the recommendation of the 2013 lessonslearned exercise. The Mechanism is the only
instrument at our disposal to investigate if a biological
instrument occurs.
The second is disruptive technology. I welcome
the resolution’s call for Member States to take into
account the rapid advances in science and technology
and to control intangible transfers of technology and
information. The international community cannot
afford to lag behind a technological curve. The 1540
Committee could build on the request made in resolution
2325 (2016) and hold an open meeting next year on
technological and scientific issues. Such a meeting
could address the following two issues. First, emerging
technologies and scientific development could have
potential weapons of mass destruction capabilities or
can be adapted as a means of delivery must be assessed;
and secondly, we must consider how to prevent their
misuse while safeguarding peaceful applications. The

S/PV.7837

1540 Committee could also utilize its interaction with
the industry through the Wiesbaden process, in order
to further elaborate how the private sector can selfregulate to prevent the misuse of technology. That might
include the development of industry codes of conduct
and ethical standards on dual-use technologies with
proliferation risks for weapons of mass destruction.
The third priority is capability. Since the last
comprehensive review, the 1540 Committee and its
Expert Group, in partnership with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, our Office, have
substantially expanded their outreach. In the last five
years, 188 States have participated in those outreach
activities. That is a significant achievement but it is
not enough, given the growing threats and risks, as
well the needs of Member States. Unfortunately, our
capacity to respond to requests for help from Member
States is declining. Donors have been generous, but
the gap between the needs and the available resources
is growing. We commend the call of resolution 2325
(2016) on all States to voluntarily contribute to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities. We want to reiterate our
readiness to better match donors with recipients. We
intend to raise the quality of assistance alongside
the quantity.
Last, but not least, are the institutional issues.
As recognized by the Council, the 1540 Committee
needs institutional support that is fit for purpose in our
fast-changing security environment. We must ensure
that the resources at the disposal of the Committee,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Expert
Group — through both a regular budget and voluntary
funding — are being used in the most efficient and
effective way possible. For that purpose, our Office will
do our best to support the Chair and the members of the
Committee in their assessment of how to make the best
use of the available resources, including streamlining
support structures.
Today’s debate is a welcome reaffirmation of the
gravity with which the Security Council treats the
threats and risks posed by weapons of mass destruction.
We count on Council members to continue to safeguard
international peace and security, not only by announcing
preventative measures through resolution 1540 (2004),
but also by looking ahead at response challenges in the
eventuality that prevention fails. The consequences of
an attack would be disastrous and we must be prepared.

16-441435/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

I would like to close by repeating the SecretaryGeneral’s many calls, and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral’s call made this morning before my statement,
that the ultimate guarantee against any use of a
weapon of mass destruction is through their total and
irreversible elimination.
The President: I thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Finlay.
Mr. Finlay: It is a great honour for me to address
this special meeting of the Security Council. Since
2004, my organization — the Stimson Center — has had
the distinction of supporting the work of six successive
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). In those 12 years, hastened
largely by the forces of globalization, it is astonishing
to reflect upon the breadth of advancement witnessed
around the globe.
For millions, these advances have made the world
a far more hospitable place. In the past 12 years,
Governments and non-governmental actors alike have
conspired to help cut the world’s extreme poverty rate
in half. More girls are in school, fewer children are
dying as a result of preventable illness, and the world
continues to make advances against the scourge of
global diseases like malaria and HIV/AIDS. Further,
despite the horrific and headline-grabbing conflicts
of today, the inexorable arc of conflict and violence is
bending, however gradually, toward peace.
Those accomplishments trace their lineage to our
growing global interconnectedness and the successful
efforts of this organ and others to steer the forces of
globalization towards universal benefit. Sadly, positive
advances in science and technology, along with the
democratization of modernity around the globe, have
also hastened non-State actors with ill intent, at worst
facilitating access to the world’s most dangerous
weapons and technologies of mass destruction.
In that regard, resolution 1540 (2004) has provided
a near unprecedented rallying point for global efforts to
prevent terrorist acquisition of these heinous weapons.
In a global security environment experiencing a poverty
of optimism, the resolution and the 1540 Committee
have demonstrated an enviable return on our joint
political and financial investment. I believe that when
the history of our time is written, the Committee’s
efforts on our behalf will be recognized as a glowing
6/83

15/12/2016

example of what is best about the human spirit — a
willingness to accept our common and interconnected
interest in peace, security and mutual prosperity.
Regrettably, even as globalization has extended
the benefits of prosperity, so too has it fundamentally
altered the drivers of proliferation and insecurity.
Today, the value of global trade has doubled, driving
access to nefarious technologies to distant corners of
the globe. In the past 12 years, private capital flows
have doubled, opening new opportunities for malicious
actors to conceal illicit financial flows. Today,
47 per cent of the world’s inhabitants have access to the
internet and, prospectively, illicit intangible technology
transfers — up from just 12 per cent in 2004, and we
have witnessed a steady increase in nuclear, biological,
and chemical incidents around the globe — including
notably, by non-State actors.
Accordingly, it is clear that despite the progress
Committee 1540 has engendered, our central challenge
remains unmet. However, it is not a moment for
despondency. Rather, it is a clarion call to celebrate our
successes in the face of overwhelming challenges, and
to redouble our efforts with the clear-eyed knowledge
that a weapon of mass destruction incident anywhere
in the world will have both sweeping security and
economic ramifications for every State represented in
the Chamber.
The Government of Spain should be deeply proud.
Under your leadership, Mr. President, the Council
has widened interest in and access to the resolution
by constituencies beyond national Governments once
thought tangential to the objectives of the resolution.
That is an extraordinary accomplishment. Yet, even as
we celebrate these advances, there are two key priorities
that remain unaddressed.
First, it is clear that the institution of the United
Nations, in the face of this impossible mandate, is
wildly overburdened. With a global mandate, the 1540
Committee and nine experts cannot hope to keep pace
with the evolving proliferation landscape, nor the
activities and demands of 193 Member States.
In the course of that review, the Government
of Canada presented a proposal calling for targeted
implementation support of the 1540 Committee.
Assistance can come not only from official
entities — law enforcement, customs and border
control agencies — but also from legal specialists, civil
society analysts, industry leaders and, as we have seen,
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7837

even student scholars who represent the next generation
of global leadership. I believe that civil society could
present a no-cost additive support mechanism that
would work with national authorities to identify critical
risks and capacity gaps, develop actionable requests
for assistance from Member States, and work with the
Committee to match those requests with donors or even
provide that assistance directly.

As many of those present know, Deutsche PostDHL Group is a global leader in mail and logistics, and
its various business divisions provide services ranging
from express delivery services, warehousing, mail, air
and freight forwarding, customs brokerage, aviation,
and so on. DHL operates in practically all countries
and territories throughout the world, servicing every
imaginable sector of the world economy.

Secondly, it has become trite to note that the
proliferation threat has grown, but we have yet to
concede that no Government — not even a confederation
of like-minded Governments — can hope to address
the inexorable march towards proliferation. Only by
inculcating civil society, industry and the general public
with shared values and a recognition of mutual benefit
can we hope to meet the tide of proliferation concern.

Such international presence and reach pose
challenges in an environment where there is conflict,
political tensions and non-State actors who seek to
harm global peace and security. While businesses are
in some sense agnostic when it comes to international
political objectives, global businesses benefit from
international stability, trade and economic integration.
While a business’s goal is to maximize profit for its
shareholders, the reality in the twenty-first century is
that a multinational company cannot be profitable or
increase its brand value in the long run if it ignores
international norms, legal requirements and potential
risks to global security.

Here, too, there is progress. The Government of
Finland paved the way with an innovative whole-ofsociety approach to implementing the resolution,
particularly in countries of the Global South. Their
dual-benefit approach allows for a better pairing of
assistance offered in the name of resolution 1540 (2004)
with other higher-priority security and development
objectives of Member States. The Government of
Finland’s approach should be scaled and replicated,
and Helsinki should be commended for its innovation.
In closing, we know that the world can change in the
blink of an eye. I commend this organ for doing what
it can, where it can to keep the world’s most dangerous
weapons out of the world’s most dangerous hands.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Finlay for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Min.
Mr. Min: I thank you, Sir, for the kind invitation
to address Security Council members and other
representatives on the important topic of furthering
the mandates of resolution 1540 (2004), focused on
non-State actors. I want to especially thank the Mission
of the Kingdom of Spain to the United Nations for
its kind facilitation of my participation today. It is an
honour for me to be here to share some of my thoughts
on the role of the private sector in this endeavour to
further the work of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. My views
today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those
of my employer.

To achieve the aspirations laid out in resolution
1540 (2004), cooperation just between national
Governments is not enough. With the advancement
of technology driven by the private sector and the
quickly evolving supply chain and its modalities, such
as the growth of non-asset-based service providers, the
private sector is a key component of the fight for global
peace and security. The private sector and the public
sector must work together in combating illicit activities
by non-State actors.
In that regard, the Government of Germany’s
efforts with the Wiesbaden process, which we have
participated in, is a model for facilitating dialogue
between the public and private sectors. Given the limited
time, I would mention only that various documents
that contain detailed information have already been
transmitted by the German Government regarding
best practices for public-private dialogue, as well as
measures, such as internal compliance programmes,
that businesses should adopt. What the Wiesbaden
process has taught us is that it is only dialogue and
the sharing of information and best practices that
can reduce misunderstanding between the public and
private sectors and highlight the crucial role that the
private sector plays in that arena. There needs to be
more dialogue similar to the Wiesbaden process, with
more private sector participation and in more regions
of the world.

16-441437/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Businesses such as DHL have a unique vantage
point and opportunity to cooperate with the public
sector to ensure that logistics services are not used for
illicit activities by non-State actors or if they are, to
mitigate the risks to the global order. While it should
never be the role of private businesses to be a proxy of
law enforcement, businesses are on the front lines of
economic activity and thus can and should have strong
internal compliance programmes to prevent their
products and services from being used by malicious
non-State actors. For example, DHL has instituted a
global transactional screening system whereby lists
of restricted individuals and entities designated by
the United Nations or national Governments are used
to reduce the chance of providing DHL services to
those who seek to harm global security. Such a process
is expensive, requiring vast information technology
systems, software and specialized personnel. But in the
end, it is important for companies like DHL to reduce
such risks because ultimately such measures can avert
business disruption and detrimental impact to the
world economy.
One of the challenges that faces private industry
in the context of resolution 1540 (2004) is that despite
the high level of participation among Member States,
there are differing requirements and standards, such as
in export-control laws. For a global business, divergent
and varying requirements among Member States
add cost, confusion and, often, complex conflicts of
laws. To maximize the effectiveness of the objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004), uniform or harmonized
regulatory requirements among key markets, to the
extent possible, make it easier for multinational
businesses to comply and to cooperate with the public
sector. Such efforts as the Waasenaar Arrangement,
while not universal, do set the global standards for
the classification of dual-use goods for licensing and
export-control purposes. That type of uniformity is
highly welcomed by multinational businesses that must
contend with multijurisdictional issues.
In conclusion, although it is a cliché, the
technological and economic advancements are getting
faster and faster. But with that is also a global supply
chain that is ever more complex, yet more integrated
and specialized. It is harder than ever before for national
Governments to combat the illicit activities of non-State
actors on their own. It requires more cooperation across
borders and, more importantly, between the public and
private sectors.
8/83

15/12/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Min
for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I should like to thank our briefers for their
useful and informative reports.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain.
It is an honour for me to preside over this high-level
open debate on halting the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. Furthermore, this
topic holds particular value for me because reminds
me of my time as Permanent Representative of Spain
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and Chairman of the Executive Council and
the Conference of the States Parties.
With the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016),
Spain has concluded the work entrusted to it by
the Security Council as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) during
2015 and 2016. We undertook the task with a sense of
responsibility and transparency, in the context of the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). The
work was intensive. We consulted with Member States,
international organizations and civil society. We had
the support of members of the Committee, the Group of
Experts and the Secretariat. The broad support for the
resolution, for which I thank all of its sponsors, is the
result of that collective work.
I extend my gratitude to the briefers at this meeting:
the Vice-President of DHL and the President of the
Stimson Center. Their briefings show the irreplacable
role that businesses and the academic world play in
fighting proliferation.
The United Nations was born with the purpose of
banishing the suffering caused by the scourge of war.
Unfortunately, we are still far from achieving that
goal. The Organization cannot relent in that endeavour.
We must prevent conflict and, failing that, ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
are alarmed by the proved use of weapons of mass
destruction in the twenty-first century. We are disturbed
that non-State actors and terrorist organizations are able
to access those types of weapons. If they have those
weapons, they will use them — as we have witnessed
in Syria and Iraq. Their barbarism knows no bounds.
That certain risk led to the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), 12 years ago, which was a great service
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

provided by the Security Council to the whole of the
international community. The two threats addressed
in resolution 1540 (2004) are continually evolving and
on the rise. Terrorist groups adapt their procedures in
order to acquire technology and sensitive materials.
Traffickers develop new techniques to avoid national
and international inspections, thereby exacerbating the
risk of proliferation. We could not remain impassive.
The resolution that we have just adopted is a substantive
and timely reaction. We are taking a great step towards
establishing a comprehensive agenda that can help to
prevent a catastrophe of global proportions.
Spain promoted the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) in order to bolster the
effectiveness of the prevention of proliferation
by non-State actors. The report presented by the
Committee puts forward a series of recommendations
to strengthen the 1540 system and lays the foundations
for a comprehensive agenda to achieve the effective and
full implementation of the objectives set out in 2004.
Resolution 2325 (2016) is the culmination of that work.
It substantially improves the effectiveness of resolution
1540 (2004) without modifying its preventive and
cooperative approach.
The resolution compels us to better coordinate
and strengthen the tools to deal with the threat we are
considering. It calls upon States and the Committee
to focus their efforts on the sectors that require the
most attention and to bear in mind new proliferation
risks. It highlights the value of national plans and the
visits of the Committee. It also addresses the need to
bear in mind the particular circumstances of States in
implementing measures against proliferation. Other
innovative aspects of the resolution include a firm
commitment to transparency in the work of the 1540
Committee through meetings open to all Member States
and the use of the communications media. It highlights
the recognition of the role of parliamentarians and civil
society in fighting proliferation.
The resolution will leave a significant legacy with
regard to support. It seeks to avoid duplication and
facilitates the channelling of offers of, and requests for,
assistance — for example, through regional conferences.
It strengthens the capacity of the 1540 Committee to
provide direct assistance. Furthermore, the resolution
calls for voluntary contributions, as without adequate
funding many of the new measures would not be viable.

S/PV.7837

With regard to coordination, the resolution requests
the 1540 Committee to report annually to the Council
on its work and to evaluate how the effectiveness of the
special political mission that supports the Committee
can be improved. That evaluation will allow the United
Nations to acquire a number of tools that are more in
line with current challenges. It also urges the relevant
committees of the Council to reinforce their cooperation
in order to face the threat of terrorism, and to report in
that regard.
Experience has taught us that it is not enough to
simply adopt good texts, which today’s resolution
undoubtedly is. As political agreement is important, so
is compliance with what has been agreed upon. This
resolution will remain a dead letter without firm and
active commitment from all of us. We cannot allow
inaction. We owe it to our citizens and to the coming
generations, which cannot be exposed to the plans of
organizations that seek only destruction. It is essential
that we maximize our vigilance so that we do not have
to relive the indescribable horrors that are caused by
the use of weapons of mass destruction.
Spain will spare no effort. Firm support for the
work of the 1540 Committee will continue to be a
constant element in the foreign policy of my country.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to organize this open
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which is a timely issue. The meeting
allows us to consider together the actions aimed at
preventing non-State actors from accessing weapons
of mass destruction. We also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Kim Won-soo, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and Mr. James
Min, Vice-President of DHL, whose excellent briefings
have enabled us to clarify our work and enrich
our discussions.
Resolution 2325 (2016), just adopted unanimously,
provides an ideal framework — if it is fully
implemented — to effectively combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and, above all, access
by non-State actors to those weapons. Paragraph 27

16-441439/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of resolution 2325 (2016) seems particularly relevant
in that regard, in that it requests the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
various sanctions and counter-terrorism committees
to reinforce their cooperation. This can be done
through information-sharing, coordinating State
visits pursuant to their specific mandates, technical
assistance activities and in all other cases with scope
for cooperation. In any case, it remains more crucial
today than ever to make a comprehensive inventory of
all sources of weapons of mass destruction throughout
the world in order to systematically secure or destroy
them. Important measures have certainly already been
taken, but we must recognize that there remains much
to be done in this domain.
The comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) undertaken
this year was therefore particularly timely in that
it allowed Member States, relevant international
and regional organizations, and also civil society to
refocus their actions and strategies on a more global,
coordinated and coherent approach so as to sustainably
address the various challenges faced by international
peace and security. Recommendations contained in the
report of the review have led to the proposal by Member
States of concrete, practical and appropriate measures
that, if properly applied, could greatly contribute to the
resolution’s implementation..
Senegal believes that, in an interdependent world
where our interests are closely linked, strengthening
cooperation in areas such as border control, monitoring
financial flows and online networks, and legal assistance
are more crucial than ever to the development of an
appropriate strategy to prevent and combat proliferation
if we wish to avoid weapons of mass destruction falling
into the wrong hands, as noted earlier. This requires a
synergy of efforts of all actors involved and the sharing
of experiences.
Analysis of data concerning the African continent
shows continued progress in the implementation
of measures established in resolution 1540 (2004),
particularly in relation to developing appropriation
legislation and the presentation of implementation
reports. In this context, it is important to recall the
political commitment of the African Union in support
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
African States. This commitment has led notably to
the organization of a review and assistance conference
on the resolution’s implementation, in partnership with
10/83

15/12/2016

the 1540 Committee, held in Addis Ababa in April. It
is important to continue such cooperation initiatives
between the Committee and African countries,
most of whom having benefitted from its support in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
Furthermore, with regard to this aspect of
international cooperation and assistance, we encourage
Member States with the ability to do so to help train
national focal points, and we take this opportunity to
thank Morocco for its willingness to organize training
for African national contact points. In this vein, my
delegation is pleased to highlight the regional approach
adopted by the Committee in its programme of work.
This was evident at the first interparliamentary meeting
held in Abidjan in February on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was attended by
more than 70 African legislators from 18 States and
where Senegal had the honour of representing the
1540 Committee.
The meeting provided an opportunity to consider
the main aspects related to the prevention of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in Africa
and to reflect on ways to strengthen national legal
frameworks established to implement the resolution.
This type of initiative should be replicated throughout
all regions of the world, given the vital role that
parliamentarians play in developing and adopting
relevant legal frameworks to prevent nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, especially terrorists.
We must also pursue efforts in areas such as the
improvement of assistance procedures; an inventory
and analysis of assistance requirements; and dialogue
on assistance with interested international, regional and
subregional organizations and even non-governmental
organizations and civil society. This requires the
strengthening of the capacities of the Committee
and its experts in order to allow them to adequately
carry out assistance activities in countries who have
expressed need. Similarly, the Security Council should
consider ways to strengthen the systems for early
warning and prevention of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors, including
by strengthening coordination between members,
monitoring the implentation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) and analysing proliferation risks.
We also reaffirm the need to create a sustainable
mechanism to improve interaction and coordation
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

among those who request and those who provide
assistance, as noted previously, in order to avoid
duplication and identify best practices in assistance
in order to maximize their benefits. The immediate
challenge therefore consists of better coordinating
existing tools in order to limit the possibility of
non-State actors engaging in proliferation activities.
I reiterate Senegal’s willingness and commitment
to spare no effort in the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. My country has taken
measures to meet its obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), including the establishment of a national
coordination mechanism to detect the activities of
non-State actors in order to promote cooperation
among relevant national actors and human and
technical capacity-building programmes of the national
commission for nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and the authority entrusted with radiological
protection and nuclear safety, which are tasked with
ensuring the implementation of national policy in
those fields and whose missions revolve around the
three essential axes of regulation, monitoring and
public information.
Senegal, having signed and ratified nine conventions
on nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, has
deemed it necessary to set up a national commission in
charge of monitoring these agreements and all issues
related to them. The national commission allows us
to stop treating these issues in a fragmented way and
to manage them in accordance with our international
commitments. It also authorizes the regular monitoring
of these agreements and relations with international
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization. The national commission brings
together all ministerial departments concerned with
these activities and assists the competent authorities
in formulating, monitoring and implementing national
policy on nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
In conclusion, Senegal will continue to fulfil
its obligations and observe its commitments on this
matter. We are convinced that through cooperation
and mutual efforts, shared experiences and expertise,
we will be able to better understand these threats and
thereby develop coherent, holistic and global strategies
to address them effectively.

S/PV.7837

Mr. McCully (New Zealand): We start by
congratulating Spain on its leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and on
our common effort to ensure that the non-proliferation
regime that the Committee oversees is able to respond
to today’s challenges.
My country has a long and proud record of activism
in relation to the threat and risks of nuclear weapons. We
have long understood what it would mean for the world,
even in our remote part of the Pacific, if the doctrine of
mutually assured destruction were carried to its illogical
conclusion. We have seen the effects — security,
health, environmental and social — of the testing of
nuclear weapons in the South Pacific. We knew that
those threats and risks would multiply if the numbers of
parties possessing nuclear weapons were to grow. Put
simply, our safety and security — and the safety and
security of most United Nations Members — depend on
the effectiveness of international efforts to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction (WMD).
These are the reasons why New Zealand was
and remains a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, even as we
lament the failure of nuclear-weapon States to live
up to their commitments to pursue negotiations on
nuclear disarmament. They are also the reasons why
New Zealand is a strong supporter of the 1540 regime,
which seeks to address the risks of terrorists and other
non-State actors acquiring nuclear weapons, chemical
weapons and other WMD. They are the reasons why we
have supported the efforts led by Spain to upgrade and
expand the 1540 regime to make it more efficient and
responsive to today’s realities.
We are disappointed that some Council
members — some permanent members — have limited
the full realization of what had been proposed. Today,
the materials, expertise and technology relating to
weapons of mass destruction are more accessible than
ever before. The Internet readily provides to anyone
information previously held in closed scientific and
military communities. Three-D printers mean that
specialized equipment can be developed anywhere,
and drones bought in a store or online can provide the
means of delivery for a WMD attack.
Terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, have acquired the materials and
know-how to manufacture chemical weapons and have

16-4414311/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

used them in combat. That was one of the very threats
that the 1540 regime was set up to prevent. We need
to consider how we can curb such developments, while
also being ready to deal with new proliferation risks
as they emerge — as they surely will. That requires
both early action and sustained commitment over the
long term.
One of the frustrations we have encountered
during our term on the Council — and one we met
again in the negotiations on today’s resolution — is
the extraordinary aversion of some Council members
to ideas that would seem like simple common sense in
any other context. We as a Council are worried about
the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into the
hands of terrorists or would-be terrorists. We know that
one of those risks arises when a State may not have
the systems or the capabilities to deal with that threat
and would benefit from more active cooperation. Yet
in the resolution we were unable to endorse the simple
proposition that this Council might take the initiative
to offer such cooperation through the 1540 Committee.
I understand that the objection is that such an
offer might be construed as inconsistent with State
sovereignty, or an unwarranted intrusion into the
internal affairs of the State concerned. That is very
frustrating. If the Council continues to constrain
itself with such overly sensitive notions of sovereignty
and non-interference, it risks becoming increasingly
ineffective and irrelevant. Such an attitude is seriously
at odds with the many strong calls, including by the
Secretary-General-elect, for a much greater emphasis
on prevention.
An issue of particular importance to New Zealand
in today’s resolution is the acknowledgement that a riskbased approach is appropriate when considering the
implementation of the 1540 regime. Our Pacific region
is nuclear-free and strongly committed to preventing
the spread of those weapons. But the small island
developing States (SIDS) of the region do not produce
or export sensitive materials, so the proliferation risk
in their cases is low. Pacific SIDS also have small
administrations with limited capacity to enact and
implement complex 1540 legislative requirements,
which are often not directly relevant to them.
We recognize that mandatory Council resolutions
must apply to all Member States and that, in the case of
the 1540 regime, our non-proliferation efforts are only
as good as the weakest link in the chain. But it is neither
12/83

15/12/2016

sensible nor realistic to impose the same administrative
and reporting burdens on a country like Tuvalu or
Nauru — countries with populations of 10,000 people,
with no shared borders or proliferation-sensitive
industries — as we do on much larger countries, such
as France or the United Kingdom, Ukraine or Egypt, or
even Uruguay or New Zealand. We are pleased today’s
resolution urges the Committee to prioritize efforts
towards specific risks and towards countries and
regions that are the most vulnerable to proliferation.
New Zealand restates its commitment to global
disarmament and nonproliferation efforts and our
support for the 1540 regime. We have been active in
helping our Pacific Island partners understand and
implement their obligations. We have been a strong
advocate of working through regional bodies, such
as the Pacific Islands Forum, and we stand ready to
continue to play our part over the long-term.
In concluding, we commend Spain for today’s debate
and its work to make the Council’s non-proliferation
regime more effective.
Mr. Wright (United Kingdom): At the outset, I want
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I pay tribute to Spain and to your ambassador here in
New York for their excellent leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) over the last two years. Preventing nuclear,
chemical and biological materials falling into the hands
of non-State actors, especially terrorists, has never been
more relevant for international peace and security and
for this Council. Therefore, I welcome wholeheartedly
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016)
signalling the strong support within this Chamber in
tackling that scourge.
Sadly, the nightmare scenario of terrorists using
these horrific weapons is no longer hypothetical. We
need only to look to the village of Marea in northern
Syria. As the sun set on 21 August last year, the
people of Marea thought they had survived a near
miss by artillery. By the morning, they were covered
in burns and blisters, bewildered and terrified. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism would
later determine that they had been shelled with sulphur
mustard gas.
As the people of Marea learned so tragically that
day, whether in Syria, Iraq or anywhere else, terrorists
like Da’esh will use such weapons to horrific effect,
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

given the opportunity. Sadly, their use is not restricted to
terrorists; the Al-Assad regime has also used chemical
weapons to horrific effect, in violation of so many
international norms and conventions, and must be held
accountable. So worldwide, it is vital that we prevent
non-State actors from ever acquiring such materials in
the first place. That is what resolution 2325 (2016) is all
about. The resolution we have adopted today completes
a comprehensive review of the tools we have at our
disposal to fulfil this important duty.
It is more than 12 years since the Security Council
acted unanimously under a Chapter VII mandate
to tackle these proliferation threats. That mandate
remains as strong and vital as ever, but by stepping
back and examining in detail global implementation
by States, we have been able to properly take stock of
progress. We can certainly celebrate the significant
advances that have been made. States have enacted
new laws, introduced stronger export controls and
improved the security of dangerous materials. More
States than ever have reported on the steps they have
taken under resolution 1540 (2004). However, we must
also recognize that there is still a long way to go to
secure the full implementation of that resolution. States
have taken less than half of all possible measures. The
gaps are much wider in some areas than others, and we
welcome the statement in the report that calls on States
to take urgent action to adopt measures to account for
and secure materials related to biological weapons.
It is imperative that the resolution be implemented
in full, but we should target our efforts where they
are most needed and will have greatest impact. The
resolution in front of us responds to that evidence and
offers a set of well-informed, strategic and targeted
new recommendations for States. This is the most
substantive review of 1540 undertaken by this Council
since 2004. It offers a guideline that will serve us well
until the next review in 2021. I would like to highlight
four key areas in particular.
First, the resolution calls upon States to take
into account the evolving nature of proliferation
risks and advances in science and technology. We
need to future-proof this resolution by staying aware
of the real-world developments that could create
vulnerabilities in a State. That means making sure that
advances such as cyber, 3-D printing and drones are not
exploited for malicious purposes.

S/PV.7837

Secondly, this text also offers meaningful guidance
on challenges to implementation. For the first time, it
highlights specific implementation areas in need of
work, such as enforcement, prohibitions, proliferation
finance and intangible technology transfers. We have
also broken new ground for the Council by calling
on States to adopt effective national control lists for
sensitive materials, which is a vital step in an effective
non-proliferation regime.
Thirdly, the resolution also strengthens cooperation
and information-sharing between the wide range of
international organizations that are working to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
would commend in particular the open-door offer
to civil society, including academia and industry to
share their insights with the United Nations experts
responsible for monitoring this regime.
Finally, the resolution requests the 1540 Committee
to review the efficiency and effectiveness of the special
political mission that supports its work. We should take
this opportunity to ensure that the support structures at
the United Nations have the expertise and capabilities
they need to support States in their implementation
efforts. We look forward to a report on that in 2017.
I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
strong support for the full and universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). We owe it to the people of
Marea and to so many other victims of such terrible
weapons that we succeed in our efforts. The review
process in 2016 and the resolution that we have just
adopted take us closer to achieving that vital goal.
The United Kingdom looks forward to working with
the whole United Nations membership, international
organizations, civil society and industry to make that
a reality.
Mr. Augusto (Angola): We commend Spain
for convening today’s meeting on a critical issue of
extreme concern for the international community
and welcome Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, who is
presiding over this important meeting. We also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan Eliasson, the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, the President
of the Stimson Center and the Vice-President of DHL
for their important contributions to the debate.
Resolution 2325 (2016) that the Security Council
has just unanimously adopted is yet another landmark
document to strengthen cooperation in addressing the

16-4414313/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

threat of terrorists and non-State actors acquiring,
developing, trafficking or using nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery, while
endorsing the 2016 comprehensive review on the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The theme selected by the Spanish presidency for
today’s debate — “Preventing catastrophe: a global
agenda for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors” — is very timely. Let
me also commend Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
his team on his leadership at the helm of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over
the past two years. In that respect, multilateral efforts,
cooperation partnerships and the sharing of best
practices in the pursuit of positive security acquis and
resolution 1540 (2004), which was ground-breaking
when adopted in 2004, translated a renewed awareness
and international community resolve to address that
threat. Since its adoption, significant progress has been
made in applying a collective response, as demonstrated
by most Member States through the submission of
reports and the implementation of legislative and
operational measures in compliance with the resolution.
Over the years, the 1540 Committee has made a
tangible contribution to progress on the resolution’s
implementation. The timely extension of the 1540
Committee mandate through resolution 1977 (2011)
further contributes to the institutionalization of
the Committee, which became an essential part of
the international non-proliferation effort. As the
comprehensive review highlights, there has been a
general increase in the number of measures undertaken
by States to prevent non-State actors and terrorists
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction.
The dialogue between the 1540 Committee and the
Member States has further promoted State ownership
of anti-proliferation strategies.
The challenge encountered by the Committee
has been the decrease in the number of assistance
requests by States — a situation that requires greater
attention and resources in order to enable the assistance
mechanism to deliver an effective response. With regard
to international cooperation, the Committee notes the
importance of the provision of technical assistance
through regional and subregional organizations — a
factor that would improve the assistance mechanism
being provided, with the aim of more sound
implementation of the resolution.
14/83

15/12/2016

While lagging behind in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), there is a
concerted effort by African countries to improve their
performance. In that regard, in April the African Union
(AU) held a conference on the implementation of the
resolution in Africa with support from the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the 1540
Committee. The conference also focused on addressing
the assistance requirements presented by AU members
and submitted its views and contributions for inclusion
in the 2016 comprehensive review.
The Republic of Angola is deeply concerned about
the issue of disarmament and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. It is a State party
to the main international conventions on weapons
and disarmament, in particular the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the Pelindaba
Treaty, which establishes Africa as a nuclearweapon-free zone; and more recently, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention. In that connection, a multisectoral
commission for the follow-up of international treaties
and conventions on weapons and disarmament has
recently been created, acting as a focal point for the
Angolan Government on the matter and operating under
the coordination of the Ministry of National Defence.
The commission has carried out various training
courses, with a view to exercising greater control on the
proper use of chemical and biological agents and their
precursors. It works with academia and communities to
raise awareness on the issue. The Angolan Government
has promoted training at home and abroad, in partnership
with other States and international organizations with
emphasis on the seminar on the prohibition of chemical
weapons held in September in Angola and Brazil as
part of the Angolan-Brazil mentorship programme. The
seminar for the legal drafters of the Chemical Weapons
Convention was held recently in Rwanda and aimed
especially at Portuguese-speaking African countries,
in partnership with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that Angola does
not own or produce weapons of mass destruction. It
advocates greater sharing of information and knowhow among States on the use of such technologies for
peaceful purposes and assistance to States in matters
of the national implementation of international legal
instruments and the dissemination of the values of
peace, stability and peaceful coexistence among people.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine welcomes the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) and appreciates the efforts of the Spanish
presidency on the comprehensive review on the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Ukraine fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make the following remarks on its own behalf.
The Ukrainian delegation would like to stress that
the statement to be made on behalf of the Community
of Independent States at today’s meeting does not apply
or refer to Ukraine in any way whatsoever.
We are very grateful to the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and his team for their active leadership
on that issue. We are also grateful to the Group of
Experts for their fundamental work in preparing the
report on the comprehensive review, a document that
describes the progress made in the implementation of
the resolution during the past five years and clearly
identifies areas for improvement. It also includes
recommendations for further action to be taken in order
to achieve full compliance with the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004).
I must note that the results thus far have been
achieved under extremely difficult conditions. On the
one hand, there is threat of access to and the use of
weapons of mass destruction and related materials by
non-State actors, which has today become a complex
reality. On the other hand, Member States have varying
interpretations of resolution 1540 (2004) and differing
approaches to strengthening the existing tools under
the resolution.
Since the beginning of its participation in the
Security Council, Ukraine has supported Spain’s
ambitious objective to enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of resolution 1540 (2004) and strengthen its
unique ability to adapt to new challenges and threats
in the field of non-proliferation. We congratulate our
Spanish colleagues on successfully completing that
historic process.
Ukraine is among the majority of States in both the
Security Council and the United Nations that recognize
the need to take urgent measures to strengthen the
existing system for halting the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key
role in that regard in preventing the use of chemical,

S/PV.7837

biological and nuclear materials by non-State groups,
in particular by terrorists.
Today the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction is the greatest threat facing humankind.
Nevertheless, many significant challenges remain that
must be addressed in order to avoid a situation in which
the world’s most dangerous materials might fall into
the wrong hands, either intentionally or as a result of
underestimating potential risks.
Resolution 1540 (2004) complements existing
international regimes for the non-proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery by providing a new dimension to the
issue in the context of combating illicit trafficking in the
relevant materials and by prohibiting their acquisition
by non-State actors. In that regard, we welcome and
commend the conclusions of the comprehensive review,
which clearly demonstrate various areas of progress
made in implementation, both with respect to the
various types of weapons of mass destruction and with
respect to the various obligations set out in resolution
1540 (2004). That approach will assist in defining the
specific areas for each stakeholder in which national or
regional efforts should be intensified.
Ukraine was once a nuclear-weapon State, while,
at the same time, a full State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as all export-control regimes. In
those capacities, Ukraine remains fully committed
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
exerts every effort to that end. We reaffirm our strong
support for resolution 1540 (2004), as we did at the
2016 Nuclear Security Summit, held in Washington,
D.C. There, we joined the initiative of the Republic of
Korea, Canada and Spain entitled “Promoting Full and
Universal Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1540 (2004)”.
At the same time, despite measures taken by
Member States to reduce proliferation risks, the world
is witnessing increasingly complex threats in that area.
Risks can arise not only as a result of inadequate national
legislation, but also owing to the rapid development of
science and technology and electronic commerce, along
with a lack of understanding of such threats among
those in academia, industry and civil society.
Moreover, international legal prohibitions have
little relevance to terrorists and criminals. Unlike

16-4414315/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

States, non-State actors pursue their hostile intentions
and are prepared to take unconventional and highly
unpredictable actions. In addition, the erosion of
the existing world order, continuing and unresolved
violations of international law and ongoing conflicts
in various parts of the world continue to weaken the
overall chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
security architecture.
Over the past decade we have heard that chemical
and biological components are potential weapons for
terrorists, other non-State actors and so-called rogue
States. Regrettably, that statement turns out to be true,
as in recent years there have been reports of cases of
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that
respect, Ukraine joins others in vigorously condemning
any use of weapons of mass destruction.
The deepening of effective interactions among States
and the building of synergies among all stakeholders,
including the relevant international, regional,
subregional and non-governmental organizations and
civil society, represent a crucial and urgent task on
the international agenda. In that context, we believe
that the Council’s 1540 Committee will redouble its
efforts in accordance with the recommendations of the
comprehensive review and with resolution 2325 (2016),
which we have just adopted, in order to improve the
mechanism for providing assistance to States and to
facilitate prioritizing the needs in that area.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our intention
to engage constructively with all concerned partners so
as to ensure fruitful results from the comprehensive
review and further strengthen the global architecture
regarding the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis
Quecedo, who is presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council, and we appreciate the convening of
this open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and on resolution 1540 (2004). We
also thank the Spanish chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for its effective and dynamic leadership of
that subsidiary body of the Council.
The country now holding the Council presidency
has been tasked with an important and complex mission,
namely, to lead the comprehensive review of the progress
16/83

15/12/2016

in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As we
see it, the Spanish diplomats have done an outstanding
job in fulfilling that task. A substantive final report
has been prepared, which notes the successful progress
made by countries in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) over a five-year period.
The Security Council has just unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which determines the road map
for the future work of States, the 1540 Committee and
other relevant actors for the period up to 2021.
The Russian Federation has actively and constructively
spoken out in all non-proliferation platforms. Combating
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
a priority of Russian foreign policy. We are interested
in finding common positions with our partners in
order to promote the non-proliferation agenda as soon
as possible. The global non-proliferation architecture
is based on three pillars, namely, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention.
Resolution 1540 (2004) also occupies a special
place in that architecture. It is aimed at establishing
a lasting legal and enforcement barrier in order to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, including terrorists.
The main outcome of the comprehensive review, as
we see it, shall be to confirm the relevance of all the
stipulations set forth in resolution 1540 (2004) and to
confirm the preventive nature of resolution 2325 (2016)
and its reasoning, which is based on cooperation.
Another important conclusion is the need to
maintain the positive momentum in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and the readiness of everyone to
work thoroughly over the long haul, given the long-term
nature of this process. We understand that the process
will require concentrating our attention and all the
internal resources of Member States and cooperating
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
In the context of the resolution that we have just
adopted today, the Russian Federation is ready to
consider ways to make additional efforts to identify
more active dynamic methods of work in order to
achieve the goals outlined by the 1540 Committee. An
innovative aspect of the new resolution is the appeal
to States and to the Committee to consider, where
applicable, the evolution of the risks related to the
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well
as the rapid development of science, technology and
international trade, which can be used by non-State
actors for proliferation. What is most important is that
those subjects should be closely linked to the tasks
surrounding implementation.
Also, the new resolution proposes to more actively
engage national and regional bodies in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), including the exchange of best
practices, holding training seminars for focal points
and regional forums and conferences on facilitating
those issues. The benefits of such events are obvious.
This past summer Russia held a seminar for focal points
in Kaliningrad under the auspices of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. We are
exploring the possibility of continuing that practice.
The resolution also focuses a great deal of attention
on assisting countries that require assistance. Russia
is providing assistance to member States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States by regularly
organizing seminars under the auspices of the Russian
Federal Service for Technical and Export Control, which
we intend to continue. We also welcome the resolution’s
focus on making greater use of the capabilities of
international and regional organizations and on getting
them to coordinate their work plans with the efforts
of the 1540 Committee and the needs of States. We
also support the involvement, where it is warranted,
of academia and the business community. Of course,
all of that should take place under the leadership and
oversight of Government offices.
In the light of the ongoing terrorist activity in
Syria and Iraq by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and other terrorist groups, that have learned how
to produce chemical weapons and are actively using
chemical weapons , the importance of resolution 1540
(2004) is only increasing. The 1540 Committee, in the
framework of its mandate, will continue cooperating
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee on those issues.
Violating resolution 1540 (2004) is unacceptable.
Reports of non-State actors acquiring access to
chemical weapons require thorough investigation and
rapid reaction by the Security Council. We have often
heard about the use of industrial chemicals or chemical
warfare agents by ISIS fighters and other terrorist
groups. There is evidence of terrorists having access
to technology and infrastructure that enables them to

S/PV.7837

produce chemical weapons. The threat of chemical
and biological terrorism is reaching a wider scale and
becoming transboundary in nature.
It is extremely urgent to combat acts of terrorism.
The tools provided by resolution 1540 (2004) fulfil
a very important function, yet those instruments
and the instruments of other resolutions, focused on
their specific subjects, are clearly inadequate. In that
regard, we need a global, comprehensive and holistic
approach. Guided precisely by such considerations,
Russia proposed an initiative, at the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva, to develop an international
convention to combat acts of chemical and biological
terrorism. We note with satisfaction that that initiative
is gaining more and more proponents. We call on our
partners that have not made up their minds yet to once
again consider the Russian proposal and respond to it in
a positive manner.
Russia is interested in strengthening the regime set
up to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and will do everything possible to achieve
that and will actively cooperate with its regional and
international partners.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, and the
Spanish presidency for organizing today’s important
open debate. We would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Jan
Eliasson; the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Kim Won-soo; and Mr. Brian Finlay and
Mr. James Min for their statements. We would also
like to congratulate the delegation of Spain and its
team, and specifically Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi, for the excellent work they have done at the
healm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Over the past two
years, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi has shown
incredible leadership in moving forward the work of
that Committee. We also want to congratulate Spain for
the successful and transparent negotiation proces that
led to the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) today, of
which we are a co-sponsor.
The threat of the use of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State actors is a source of deep concern to the
international community, in particular given the use
of chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria by Da’esh.

16-4414317/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Those risks are increasing, given the fact that over
the past 12 years there have been rapid developments
in new technologies. While such new technologies
may improve the quality of life of the world’s
population and generate prosperity and well-being, it
is worth noting the extent to which they can be used
by non-State actors, including terrorists, to maximize
their capacity to produce, acquire, transfer, transport
and use weapons of mass destruction. All those new
technologies share a series of characteristics that
make them particularly dangerous. They are dual-use
technologies and can be used for non-war purposes, but
also for perverse purposes.
It is also worth noting that, thanks to the growth
of international trade and digitalization, such new
technologies are becoming more widely disseminated.
The risk is greater when Governments, intelligence
services and large technology corporations allow
the flow or transfer of such technologies to violent
non-State actors. That is why the adoption of resolution
2325 (2016) is so important to reducing that risk.
Drones are among the technologies that have seen
significant development in recent years. The drone
industry has developed at such a rapid rate that the
old regulations restricting the proliferation of such
devices have become obsolete. Even in their military
applications, they have become an instrument making
it possible to violate the sovereignty of countries and to
secretly carry out military operations and select attacks.
In addition, the drones that are currently being used
for civilian purposes can also be used to disperse deadly
chemical and biological agents. With the development
of new drones that have the capacity to carry more
weight, we can imagine the increased use of drones
as improvised aerial explosive devices by non-State
actors. In fact, we know that the Islamic State already
has drones, and it is using them to carry out sporadic
attacks on the ground.
Among those technologies, there is also the socalled dark web, with hundreds of millions of web pages
that are beyond the reach of common citizens and are
being used by big corporations, intelligence services and
State actors, among others. The information available
in that network, which is used to host multiple markets
for illegal goods, including weapons and chemical
and biological substances, includes information that
violates countries’ security.
18/83

15/12/2016

Moreover, in taking into account that the deep
Web allows for a variety of non-State actors, including
terrorists, to communicate among themselves securely
and exchange goods and services, we realize that we
are facing a dangerous vehicle for the use of weapons
of mass destruction. Unfortunately, non-State actors,
as well as certain Powers and intelligence services,
continue to use information and communications
technologies to promote the destabilization and
overthrow of Governments through the Internet,
which is conducive to the proliferation and expansion
of terrorist groups, such as Da’esh and others. The
international community must therefore strengthen
measures to prevent information and communication
technologies from being used for purposes contrary to
international peace and security and development, in
the understanding that this effort would not impinge in
any way on right to freedom of expression and opinion
in a responsible manner and in accordance with relevant
international legal instruments.
We are convinced that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) can be
truly effective only to the extent that it contributes to
the development and strengthening of the capacities of
all States rather than only those of a privileged few,
and to the strengthening of mechanisms of interaction
and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. Technical and financial assistance
that has been requested by States is the main pillar of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we must work together to
ensure that it is truly in sync with the needs of countries,
particularly those of developing countries.
However, it is important to bear in mind that
resolution 1540 (2004) is only one element of the
architecture of the non-proliferation regime and the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction that
complements the legal framework in the area originating
from the relevant conventions such as the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction.
Despite such progress in that area, further
efforts are needed to strengthen the agenda of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
in order to prevent terrorist groups from using those
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

systems. The development, stockpiling, production
and use of chemical and biological weapons were
banned by the international community many years
ago. Nevertheless, to date we do not have a similar
convention in the nuclear domain. In that regard, it is
necessary to point out that the most effective measure
to prevent nuclear weapons from reaching the hands of
violent non-State actors, including terrorist groups, is
through the complete elimination of such nuclear arms.
Latin America and the Caribbean have championed
the cause of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament, as attested to by their status as the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone in a populated part of the
world, as stipulated in the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean,
known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, ratified in 1967, as
well as its declaration as a zone of peace made during
the second Summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States in Havana in 2014.
All of that underscores the firm commitment of Latin
American and Caribbean countries to disarmament
with the goal of contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore believe
that this debate is of particular importance in moving
forward the work in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation wherein multilateral diplomacy has
been affected by the lack of concrete progress. In
that regard, we hope that in the near future a nuclearweapon-fee zone can be established in the Middle East
given the political and military complexity of that
region in particular.
In conclusion, we point out that, as we have
been able to ban chemical and biological weapons,
and as we continue to work together to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction never fall into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, we must
not let up in our efforts to achieve the prohibition of
nuclear weapons. We — and, in particular, nuclearweapon States and those who have not acceded to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty — must all commit
to adopting a convention that prohibits, once and for
all, the development, stockpiling, production and use of
these weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I am
particularly pleased to hear so many members of the
Council speak in the Spanish language, including in the
statement by our Ukrainian colleague.

S/PV.7837

At the outset, I congratulate on Spain on its
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and on holding today’s debate.
Before I begin, I would also like to join the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain in his remarks
concerning the Deputy Secretary General and his
briefing. I would also like to thank Mr. Kim Won-soo,
Mr. Finlay and Mr. Min for their participation today.
The work of your delegation, Sir, that led to our
adoption of today’s resolution 2325 (2016) was an
outstanding example in terms of transparency and
inclusivity. The text was provided to Member States well
in advance so that they could easily reach consensus
during negotiations.
To speak in the Chamber on the use or the threat
of the use of weapons of mass destruction forces us
to recall the pre-eminence of international law and
the obligations and rights of States recognized in the
Charter of the United Nations. Cautious and collective
action through multilateral instruments is the best
assurance for every one and all of us. In adopting
measures to prevent the use or the threat of the use of
weapons of mass destruction, Member States have the
obligation to strictly live up to their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter.
Uruguay has implemented foreign policy that
focuses on the need to make progress in universal
and transparent negotiations with a view to achieving
general and comprehensive disarmament under a strict
international regime. The Deputy Secretary-General, I
believe, summarized that need very well when he said,
“There are no right hands for wrong weapons.”
Uruguay is deeply concerned by the growing
threat of terrorism and the risk of non-State actors
obtaining, developing or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons, or their delivery systems given
their unpredictable and devastating consequences.
This debate is therefore most timely, given the very
serious threat to international security. To counter
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, it is
essential to undertake the utmost efforts to achieve
the goal of disarmament and non-proliferation. It is
essential to adopt urgent measures to provide effective
protection against the use or the threat of the use of such
weapons by States and non-State actors, but always in
conformity with the Charter and international law.
In that regard, Uruguay urges all Member States
fulfil their obligations, regarding arms control,

16-4414319/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15/12/2016

disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We
commend and encourage the work and progress of
United Nations agencies, including the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency in that area.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Spain for
convening this very important meeting and join others
in thanking the briefers for their excellent briefings.
I welcome today’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016), which was co-sponsored by Japan. We
appreciate the strong leadership of Spain in this regard.

The best preventive tool we have now is resolution
1540 (2004). It is the primary legally binding instrument
that covers the three categories of weapons of mass
destruction. My delegation wants to emphasize that
international cooperation and assistance are essential
to effectively implementing measures contained in
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution that we have
adopted today unanimously is a clear demonstration of
the commitment to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and contains valuable references
to the need of assistance and cooperation that must be
implemented rapidly. Increased coordination of efforts
at the national, regional, subregional and international
levels, as appropriate, is also essential in order to
strengthen the response to this serious challenge. States
are responsible for taking all appropriate measures in
accordance with their national legislations and in line
with international law to strengthen export controls,
monitor access to intangible technology transfers and
information that could be used to develop weapons of
mass destruction.

Bearing in mind today’s agenda item,
“Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction”, I
would like first to touch upon the most serious issue in
this field — nuclear and ballistic missile development
by North Korea. This is a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions and represents a clear challenge
to the global non-proliferation regime. It is simply
not unacceptable. Japan strongly urges North Korea
to refrain from further provocations and to comply
fully and faithfully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270
(2016), as well as its other commitments. We must recall
that resolution 2321 (2016) notes the complementarity
of its obligations with those of resolution 1540 (2004).

Transparency in the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
another issue that we consider essential. We urge the
Committee to continue promoting forums for dialogue
and activities that involve the participation of all
Member States in order to strengthen and improve the
implementation of the resolution. Uruguay will begin
work on the development of the national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), with
the technical assistance of the 1540 Committee and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism, within
the framework of its programme for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) in the Americas.
On a personal note, my next statement in the
Security Council will be next year, when the terms of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
will have ended. I take this opportunity to thank them
on behalf of my delegation for their excellent work and
valuable contributions, which we hope to build on. We
will continue to work together in the coming year.
20/83

In discussing how to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), we must
consider what is happening in the real world. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons/
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism reached
the clear conclusion that chemical weapons were in
fact used in Syria, which we strongly condemn. The
proliferation of WMDs is not a hypothetical threat. As
has been mentioned often today, we should not overlook
the danger of malicious actors benefitting from rapid
advances in science, technology and international
commerce for proliferation purposes. Strengthening the
global non-proliferation regime is an urgent and ongoing
task. Japan appreciates the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which contains important provisions that will
help strengthen the global non-proliferation regime. I
would like to focus here on two points in particular.
The first point concerns the development of national
control lists. Resolution 1540 (2004) prescribes various
mandatory domestic control measures, but it is essential
to specify which items are to be controlled in order for
those measures to be effective. The resolution adopted
today addresses this point by calling upon States that
have not done so to start developing effective national
control lists. I would like to take this opportunity to
urge all States to undertake effective measures as soon
as possible to actually intercept proliferation activities
whenever they are committed.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

My second point involves a concrete description
in resolution 2325 (2016) of the role to be played by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in implementation assistance. Regrettably, the
Committee receives many assistance requests that fail
to specify actual needs, and the Committee’s matchmaking role is not functioning well. The new resolution
attempts to address that situation by directing the
Committee to help States formulate requests with
specific details of the necessary assistance. I would
like to invite States seeking assistance to utilize the
1540 Committee’s expertise to better formulate their
requests. At the same time, the Committee should
intensify its efforts to elicit concrete responses from
donors, for example by proactively sharing specific
assistance needs with other donor communities, such
the G-7 Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction.
To conclude, today’s security environment requires
the international community to reinforce measures to
tackle the threat posed by the proliferation of WMDs.
Today’s adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) is an
important step forward. Japan will continue to actively
support the strengthening of the global non-proliferation
regime, with resolution 1540 (2004) at its core.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this open debate on a key issue,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly by non-State actors.
I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his presence today, his statement and
his commitment to the overarching challenge of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. I also thank the other briefers,
and note that France associates itself with the statement
to delivered on behalf of the European Union.
France thanks Spain for introducing resolution
2325 (2016), which it co-sponsored, and welcomes its
unanimous adoption. It represents an important step
that we took today in our common fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I would
also like to pay tribute to Spain’s commitment and
outstanding work as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which successfully
conducted a comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004).

S/PV.7837

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery remains a major threat to
international peace and security and one of the primary
challenges of our times. Despite some progress, the
non-proliferation regime continues to face extremely
serious challenges. We are acutely concerned about the
relentless development of North Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic programmes. The two nuclear tests and the
numerous ballistic missiles this year have confirmed
Pyongyang’s determination to acquire a vectorized
nuclear weapon, which constitutes a violation of
Security Council resolutions. Such destabilizing
actions represent a grave and deliverate challenge to
the non-proliferation regime and international security.
France, like the Council, has strongly condemned them.
In Syria, we are now confident that the Syrian
Arab Army, like Da’esh, has not hesitated to use
chemical weapons against civilians on at least four
occasions. New and alarming allegations of the use of
chemical weapons continue to emerge. These, too, are
particularly serious and unacceptable violations of the
non-proliferation regime that cannot be tolerated. The
Security Council must draw the logical conclusions
and shoulder its responsibilities on the issue. The
uncertainties surrounding Syria’s declaration to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) serve only to increase our concern. The
possibility that stocks and capacities may remain on
Syrian territory increases the risk that toxic chemicals
may spread and be used by terrorist groups. In that
context, it is vital to ensure the continuation of the
work of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), which has been unanimously
endorsed by the Council. It sends a strong message to
those responsible for using chemical weapons in Syria.
The taboo on the use of these inhuman weapons must
be re-established.
In that context, strengthening the international
community’s efforts is more crucial than ever and
should be a priority for us. The Council’s adoption in
2004 of resolution 1540 (2004) was a decisive step.
Twelve years later, that resolution, and the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to ensure its implementation, are now essential
tools. As the rigorous review of the resolution that
was conducted this year showed, its implementation
is making progress. Many States have already adopted
measures to translate the resolution’s provisions into
national law. The international community is working

16-4414321/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to prevent proliferation-sensitive material from
falling into terrorists’ hands. In addition, the main
international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to implement and promote the
resolution’s provisions, and in that regard, the European
Union has established solid plans of action.
We must capitalize on those achievements and
continue to adapt to the evolving threats and new
challenges we face. To do that, we must begin by
strengthening the implementation of our existing tools
in order to better combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and especially to prevent sensitive
materials from ending up in malicious hands. We can do
that not only by pursuing the Committee’s awarenessraising and assistance activities and strengthening the
existing international instruments, but also by fully
implementing our commitments under resolution 1540
(2004). In that regard, in 2011 France passed a law
modernizing its national legal framework for combating
proliferation, criminalizing proliferation activities and
punishing their financing.
Next, we must adapt our response to the changing
nature of the threat. In that regard, resolution 2325
(2016), which we have adopted today, is a significant
step. It strengthens the resources at our disposal and, in
particular, covers the risks of the growing exploitation
of technological, scientific and commercial advances
for the purposes of proliferation. It identifies how
important it is that we focus more on the financing of
proliferation and the safeguarding of sensitive materials,
and on instituting rigorous controls on the export of
such materials. It expands the Committee’s crucial role
in assistance, improving the ways it interacts with the
United Nations committees that deal with terrorism and
affirming its interaction with the JIM. It improves the
basis for dialogue with States by establishing a better
balance between requests for and offers of assistance.
I recall that efforts to combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the risk of their
falling into terrorists’ hands are also going on in other
forums. This year, at the latest Nuclear Security Summit
in Washington, D.C., France made a determined
commitment to tackling the issue of security for
radioactive sources with its introduction of a joint
statement that is now open to all States wishing to be
associated with it. Together with Germany, we also
recently introduced a draft resolution in the General
Assembly on the subject, and the International Atomic
Energy Agency’s second International Conference
22/83

15/12/2016

on Nuclear Security, which has just ended, has also
enabled us to address this crucial issue. France also
supports the work of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.
Given the gravity of the challenges we face, we
must do all we can to prevent the normalization of the
proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction.
When those are the stakes, the entire non-proliferation
regime is thrown into question. The Council’s recent
adoption of resolution 2321 (2016) on North Korea
demonstrated that we will not tolerate that. Our
unanimous adoption of today’s resolution affirms our
mobilization on the issue. I am therefore hopeful that
the Council can continue to display its unity every time
the problem of the proliferation and use of weapons
of mass destruction is at issue. When it comes to this
subject, weakness and divisiveness are not an option. It
is a question of our responsibility.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Council members in welcoming Foreign Minister
Dastis Quecedo to the Council and thanking him for
presiding over this important debate, which testifies to
Spain’s strong commitment in championing the cause
of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). I would also like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and to thank him and all of today’s briefers for their
participation. We value the insights they give us into
their areas of expertise.
Today’s meeting is all the more significant because
it is the culmination of the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
is itself an important contribution to the global WMD
non-proliferation agenda. The importance of resolution
1540 (2004), particularly its role in preventing non-State
actors from acquiring, developing, trafficking in or
using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery, needs no further elaboration.
Nonetheless, it is widely recognized that
developments over the past few years, especially in
science and technology, have opened up new fronts and
challenges to the effective implementation of the 1540
regime. We should recall that during the open debate on
the same subject in August (see S/PV.7758), there were
urgent calls for the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) to review the scientific,
technological and international commercial advances
relating to relevant controls under the resolution.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

We are pleased that resolution 2325 (2016), adopted
today, has taken that into account, in addition to its
emphasis on cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations and on transparency
and outreach approaches to relevant actors from civil
society, industry and academia.
Against that background, Malaysia sponsored and
voted in favour of today’s resolution in a demonstration
of our resolve and support for reinforcing a preventive
system that seeks to ensure that WMDs — nuclear,
chemical or biological — do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors. We firmly believe that it makes an
important contribution to strengthening our collective
efforts to counter the grave threat to international
peace and security posed by non-State actors’ potential
acquisition of chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear materials.
In responding to the call in the concept note (see
S/2016/1013, annex) for sharing practical measures
and best practices, I would like to share some of
Malaysia’s experiences at the national level with
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). At that level,
our implementation comes within the framework of
our 2004 Strategic Trade Act, which institutionalizes
efforts to control the export, transshipment, transit and
brokering of strategic items and other activities that
could facilitate the design, development and production
of WMDs and their delivery systems. So far the law
has proved resilient and effective, as it has allowed
the Government to act preventively in dealing with
suspected proliferation activities within our jurisdiction
and territory that contravene resolution 1540 (2004).
In cooperation and coordination with relevant
partners and stakeholders, the Government of Malaysia
takes the lead in developing and strengthening measures,
including at the facility level, aimed at ensuring
the effective management of information related to
procedures and protocols for protecting radioactive and
nuclear materials and facilities. We share the view that
enhancing coordination and engagement, including with
parliamentarians, industry, academia and civil society,
is of crucial importance. In this regard, we believe that
the industry-focused Wiesbaden Conference is a good
model, which could be adopted to better engage and
involve other stakeholders.
The Government of Malaysia continues to build
mutually supportive relationships with our national
industry in an effort to strengthen strategic trade

S/PV.7837

management. This is done through various collaborations
that allow for exchange of good regulatory practices.
Mindful of the fast pace of developments in the various
relevant fields, a review of the Strategic Trade Act
is currently under way to revisit and update certain
provisions relating to brokering, penalties, and the
financing of weapons proliferation and terrorism, inter
alia. Industry feedback is also taken very seriously and
is a key element in the ongoing review.
Our debate today is a reflection of the realistic,
balanced and practical commitment to collectively
addressing the threat of WMD acquisition by non-State
actors. Where there is collective determination,
obstacles can be overcome. We remain encouraged
by the strong, positive and enduring interest by the
international community in the initiatives, approaches
and contributions of Member States that reflect
thinking outside the box with a view to formulating
possible non-traditional responses to new challenges in
non-proliferation.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
commitment to working together with Member States
and the international community in strengthening
global non-proliferation efforts and in contributing to
our collective obligation to bring forth enduring peace
and security.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, for
presiding over today’s open debate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Mr. Kim Won-soo,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs. and the
two other for their respective briefings.
Efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and impede the acquisition
and use by non-State actors and especially terrorists
of WMDs and related materials and technologies are
conducive to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security and are therefore consistent
with the common interests of the international
community. China wishes to put forward the
following proposals.
First, we should address both the symptoms and
the root causes to eradicate the proliferation problem.
Countries need to foster a new vision of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustained world
security, abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, build a fair and just

16-4414323/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

security architecture by all and for all, and thereby root
out the threat of proliferation.
Secondly, we should value multilateral mechanisms
and consolidate and develop the international
non-proliferation regime. Countries need to uphold
multilateralism and the principle of consensus. We
need to keep alive the pivotal role played by the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction. We should maintain
the authority and effectiveness of the international
non-proliferation regime and avoid double-standards.
Thirdly, we need to balance security and
development in pushing for solution to non-proliferation
problems. There is a need for the relationship between
non-proliferation and peaceful use to be properly
handled, while ensuring the right of all countries,
especially developing countries, to use and share
relevant science and technology in a peaceful manner.
Efforts also need to be made to prevent any country
from attempting to undertake proliferation activities on
the pretext of peaceful use.
Fourthly, we should strengthen international
cooperation to form synergy in addressing new
challenges. We need to find solutions to regional hotspot problems peacefully, by political and diplomatic
means. There is a need to establish sound international
norms on non-proliferation to prevent the WMDs and
related materials and technologies from falling into the
hands of non-State actors, especially terrorists.
Resolution 1540 (2004), which has epitomized the
consensus of countries on non-proliferation, facilitated
international non-proliferation cooperation and helped
to prevent non-State actors from acquiring WMDs
and related materials and technologies, is a significant
milestone. China attaches great importance to its
implementation and actively participates in the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts.
Since the beginning of this year, the 1540
Committee has conducted a comprehensive review
of the implementation of the resolution by States and
the work of the Committee over the past five years
and has analysed the progress and shortcomings
in the implementation of the resolution and made
recommendations on the way forward. China has
24/83

15/12/2016

responsibly and constructively participated in
consultations on the draft resolution voted on earlier
and the comprehensive review, joined the consensus on
the comprehensive review, and co-sponsored and voted
in favour of the draft resolution.
Resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted
unanimously today, and the comprehensive review will
help move forward the international non-proliferation
process. China wishes to make the following proposals
on strengthening the follow-up implementation of
the resolution and on improving the work of the
1540 Committee.
First, we must strictly abide by the mandate
of the resolution and based on the main thrust
to prevent non-state actors from engaging in
proliferation activities, ensure national ownership in
non-proliferation efforts and maintain the Committee’s
facilitating and coordinating role in the implementation
of the resolution.
Secondly, we must enhance the relevance and
effectiveness of assistance projects to focus on meeting
the assistance needs of developing countries. A
combination of multiple measures is needed to assist
developing countries with their consent in strengthening
their capacity-building for the implementation of
the resolution.
Thirdly, countries need to take effective and viable
measures tailored to their different national conditions
and political systems to effectively strengthen the
implementation of the resolution and carry out
exchanges and cooperation in this regard.
Fourthly, we need to identify the future development
direction of the 1540 Committee mechanism, further
improve the efficiency of its work, maintain its function
to promote the non-proliferation efforts of States
through cooperation, and avoid being reduced to a mere
a non-proliferation-related investigative mechanism or
an export-control mechanism.
We in China firmly reject the proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery and reject the
acquisition and use of WMDs and related materials
and technologies by non-State actors, especially
terrorists. We must strictly abide by our international
non-proliferation obligations, take an active part in
international and regional non-proliferation cooperation
and work hard to facilitate political solutions to hotspot proliferation problems.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7837

China supports the United Nations in playing its
due role in the area of non-proliferation. China will
continue to work with the international community
to make positive contributions to the promotion of
international non-proliferation efforts and to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Nations-Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism. As we have
stated before, the United States condemns in the
strongest terms any use of chemical weapons or other
weapons of mass destruction, and it is in all of our
interests to do so.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to express our appreciation to Spain for holding today’s
important debate on the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and non-State actors. We
welcome today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which we had the privilege to co-sponsor. We
extend our particular thanks to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team for their excellent work over the
past two years, especially in guiding the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) through
its second comprehensive review of the resolution 1540
(2004).

There are today robust and multifaceted tools
available to combat the threat of use of chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors. In addition
to its proposals in resolution 1540 (2004), the United
States recently presented several proposals under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention to strengthen those tools even
further. We urge Member States to support those
proposals so that we can collectively strengthen our
efforts to combat the threat of non-State actors’ use of
chemical and biological weapons now, not later.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their potential use remain the gravest of threats to
international peace and security. As we convene here
today in one of the world’s most populous metropolitan
areas, we must remain mindful of what our world could
look like if a successful WMD attack were perpetrated
on this population or one like it. We must remain vigilant
against those who have demonstrated their clear intent
to use these weapons on civilians. We must emphasize
that preventing such an attack is vital and necessary.
We must acknowledge that effective prevention cannot
be achieved without effective collaboration among
States and other relevant institutions. The role of the
Security Council is central to that effort, and resolution
1540 (2004) provides the international community with
one of the most valuable tools for pursuing it.
The second comprehensive review has reinforced
the importance, urgency and relevance of resolution
1540 (2004) and its implementation. The review was
inclusive. It gave voice to many dozens of States,
international and regional organizations and, in a major
improvement over the 2009 review, academia, civil
society and industry representatives — all of whom
play a role in implementing the resolution.
The comprehensive review has shown us in
vivid terms that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their use is a persistent and expanding
threat. We know that State and non-State actors have
used chemical weapons in Syria. It was documented
clearly for us in August and October by the United

The proposal for a convention on the suppression
of chemical and biological terrorism is founded on the
faulty premise that there are legal gaps in the existing
international framework to combat the use of chemical
and biological weapons by non-State actors. In fact, the
problem is inadequate implementation of the existing
framework. Through diplomatic efforts, the United
States bolsters efforts to prevent non-State actors’ use
of chemical and biological weapons — by sponsoring
bilateral programmes that enhance the security of
weapons of mass destruction applicable expertise,
material and infrastructure worldwide. Together, the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings, the Chemical and Biological Weapons
Conventions and resolution 1540 (2004) provide the
foundation for combating the use of weapons of mass
destruction by State and non-State actors. What the
threat calls for is not a new legal mechanism, but more
effective and dedicated implementation of the existing
instrument that form this comprehensive foundation.
The comprehensive review has illustrated for us
that the pathways of these weapons and materials can
be permeable and go in more than one direction. We
have seen that non-State, actors such as private-sector
companies, can contribute to illicit State programmes
for weapons of mass destruction under sanction by
the Security Council. For example, we know that
there can be vulnerabilities in national export control
regimes, which can be exploited by outside States
seeking to proliferate. The Council has decided that
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological

16-4414325/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

weapons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, and that
States shall take and enforce effective measures to
prevent proliferation. It can be comfortable to think of
resolution 1540 (2004) as a resolution that addresses
only the proliferation threats posed by non-State
actors, but that is a dangerous oversimplification.
Resolution 1540 (2004) applies equally to both State
and non-State actors, which leads me to an important
point about implementation.
The comprehensive review yielded a range of
valuable insights for enhancing the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) to better address the increased
risks. Among its contributions, the report of the 1540
Committee drew attention to the rapid developments
in science and technology affecting the proliferation
environment and highlighted the importance of those
developments in our preventive responses. The report
emphasized the need for States to better account
for and control vulnerable materials and to better
enforce resolution 1540 (2004) within their respective
systems. The report updated its information on the
implementation of the resolution for all 193 States
Members since the first time since December 2010.
Based on those results, and others, we see the
comprehensive review process as a meaningful success.
Now that the comprehensive review is concluded,
we look forward to working with our colleagues to
evaluate what more can be done within the framework
of resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent the proliferation of
WMDs, including to our through non-State actors.
On a particular note, we would welcome a
discussion in the Council on optimal approaches to the
enforcement of obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Our new resolution 2325 (2016), which incorporates
the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the
1540 Committee based on the comprehensive review
will promote the implementation of the resolution in
the coming years by providing better guidance to the
1540 Committee and the international community. We
commend Spain for the substantial achievement of the
resolution’s adoption today. The existential threat we
all face from these weapons, and from those who would
use them, cannot be overstated. This resolution makes
meaningful progress towards countering that threat.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016). Allow me to express our sincere appreciation
26/83

15/12/2016

to the Government and the delegation of Spain for their
leadership of the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004). Today’s resolution is a well-deserved result
following the efforts by the members of the Committee,
including Spain’s membership and chairmanship. The
timing of the conclusion of this comprehensive review
coincides with increasing security challenges posed
by armed groups and terrorist groups, including their
proven use of chemical materials as weapons. We
cannot exclude the possibility that such groups could
obtain technologies to develop other weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs).
The situations in the Middle East, North Africa
and the Sahel face genuine threats from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
organizations using WMDs in terrorist attacks against
targets both in those regions and beyond in Europe and
elsewhere. Terrorism recognizes no physical borders
or moral strictures. Therefore, our main concern
must remain comprehensively combating terrorism,
including by preventing terrorists from obtaining
or developing dangerous materials by successfully
recruiting people with specialized knowledge on
technologies related to chemical, nuclear, biological
and radiological applications.
The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) included important debates on ways to further
the current regime in order to make it more responsive
to those challenges. We should therefore streamline our
ambitions on the scope of the regime by refining the nature
of the commitments emerging from the comprehensive
review so as to safeguard their preventive nature while
avoiding impractical mechanisms and instead focusing
on developing cooperation mechanisms with national
Governments, international organizations, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
as well as improving awareness-raising activities and
transparency. We should respond to emerging dual-use
technologies. We should close the funding gap by using
the trust fund of the Office for Disarmament Affairs
related to the activities of the 1540 Committee.
In conclusion, Egypt will spare no effort in
promoting the working methods of the Committee
and developing its performance in order to ensure
the faithful implementation of resolution 2325 (2016).
We are committed to pursuing our national efforts to
develop our response to contemporary challenges. In
that regard, I stress our belief that the one and only way
to prevent terrorists from obtaining weapons of mass
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

destruction is to rid the entire world of all such weapons
in all their forms. That is the goal we shall continue to
work towards, in cooperation with our partners in the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously. I take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to Mr. Üzümcü.
Mr. Üzümcü: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council. I welcome the adoption today
of resolution 2325 (2016), concerning the mechanism
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I thank
you, Sir, for the kind invitation to me to attend this
important meeting.
As an all-encompassing treaty, the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) seeks to achieve
its goals not only through core disarmament and
non-proliferation measures, but also by engendering
international cooperation and offering assistance and
protection against chemical weapons. These pillars of
the Convention translate in turn into several programme
areas. I will confine my remarks to the parts of our
mandate that most directly support the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Today, 94 per cent of the world’s declared chemical
weapons have been destroyed under international
verification. That amounts to more than 65,000 tons of the
deadliest poisons ever produced, including Syrian and
Libyan chemical weapons. An entire class of weapons
of mass destruction is now at the threshold of being
completely eradicated. That would be an unprecedented
achievement in the history of disarmament. Apart from
clearly contributing to global security, the possibilities
for non-State actors gaining access to military-grade
stockpiles have been virtually eliminated.
The objective of banishing a category of weapons
will remain elusive, however, without related measures

S/PV.7837

to prevent their re-emergence. The Convention therefore
creates obligations in the context of non-proliferation
that broadly translate into two main areas: industrial
verification and data reporting, on the one hand,
and the promulgation and enforcement of national
legislation, on the other. Industrial inspections are an
essential part of our mandate. Since 1997, 3,400 such
inspections have been carried out in over 80 States
parties. More specifically, in the context of resolution
1540 (2004), many of the measures contained in its
operative paragraphs that deal with chemical weapons
correspond to the obligations that States parties have
already assumed under the Convention.
The effectiveness of legislative and other
regulatory measures and of the internal structures that
administer them is critical to preventing non-State
actors from gaining access to materials that could aid
the development of chemical weapons. Full compliance
at the national level with the obligations arising from
the Convention provides a good measure of protection
against proliferation. In that regard, through a range
of programmes that are regularly conducted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), we have assisted our States parties in fulfilling
their obligations. In particular, the OPCW secretariat
reviews drafts of implementing legislation and provides
comments thereon in order to ensure that the drafts meet
the requirements of the Convention. Our internship
programme for legal drafters is aimed at enhancing the
technical skills of participants so as to enable them to
complete a draft of national implementing legislation.
The OPCW secretariat has actively focused on
offering practical, on-site assistance tailored to the need
of States parties that have requested it. A mentorship
programme facilitates the transfer of best practices
between States. These activities have produced
concrete results. Some 118 States parties have adopted
legislative and administrative measures to implement
the provisions of the Convention that are the most
pertinent to its object and purpose. Thirty-two States
parties have adopted implementing measures that cover
some of the initial measures. Forty-two States parties
have yet to adopt implementing legislation. For States
parties that possess declarable industrial facilities,
additional measures are required under the Convention.
Criminalizing activities that the Convention prohibits
and establishing measures that would enforce those
rules accords entirely with the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004).

16-4414327/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Controls on transfers of scheduled chemicals are an
important aspect of the Convention’s non-proliferation
regime. Such activities are regulated under article VI
of the Convention and are mentioned in paragraphs
3 (c) and (d) of resolution 1540 (2004). Hundreds of
thousands of tons of scheduled chemicals are traded
internationally every year for purposes not prohibited
under the Convention. it is evident that this perfectly
legitimate trade needs to be monitored and controlled.
OPCW works closely with customs authorities and
the chemical industry, and that cooperation is making
further progress through certain new arrangements.
We also count on the invaluable support of
the chemical industry worldwide, which has fully
understood the importance of preventing any misuse
of chemicals. The Scientific Advisory Board of the
OPCW, composed of 25 eminent experts, provides its
recommendations for mitigating the proliferation risks
emanating from scientific and technological advances.
The threat posed by terrorists represents an everpresent danger. We know from recent investigations that
Da’esh has in fact used chemical weapons in Syria and
Iraq. The international legal framework offers several
avenues for enhanced cooperation and coordination by
international organizations in the context of counterterrorism. The OPCW Open-ended Working Group on
Terrorism regularly regularly reviews the opportunities
for enhanced interaction and coordination between the
concerned international entities, including the 1540
(2004) mechanism.
We also have an active partnership with the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Together with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, OPCW co-chairs the Working Group on
Preventing and Responding to WMD Terrorist Attacks.
Early next year, OPCW will host a tabletop exercise,
with the participation of various organizations, to test
an inter-agency mechanism to respond to a chemical
terrorist attack. The mechanism will enhance the
interoperability of relevant organizations for an effective
response. We believe that the newly established OPCW
Rapid Response Assistance Mission will provide an
important capability to the mechanism.
We must continue to strengthen our cooperation
in order to fully implement our legal obligations,
whether they originate in international treaties, such
as the CWC, or instruments such as resolution 1540
(2004). OPCW remains ready to further strengthen its
28/83

15/12/2016

cooperation with relevant international institutions,
relevant communities and civil society in order to
ensure that non-State actors do not reach out to weapons
of mass destruction.
The President:
Mr. Raja Adnan.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Adnan: At the outset, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) welcomes the opportunity to
address the Council at this important meeting.
The IAEA’s mission is Atoms for Peace and
Development, and nuclear security at the IAEA
addressed activities by non-State actors. The IAEA
contributes to global efforts to achieve effective
nuclear security in States by establishing current,
comprehensive and complete global nuclear security
guidance. It supports implementation of that guidance
through peer reviews and advisory services, and assists
in the form of capacity-building, including education
and training. It leads and enhances international
cooperation in nuclear security, in response to
IAEA policy-making organ’s directions. The IAEA
further facilitates initiatives in nuclear security and
in organizing information exchange meetings with
other organizations. It strengthens the international
cooperation and coordination of assistance in a way that
underpins the use of nuclear energy and applications.
It also assists in adherence to, and the implementation
of, nuclear security related international instruments.
A key nuclear security instrument is the Amendment
to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (CPPNM), which finally entered into force in
May, 11 years after it was adopted. In that regard, all
countries are encouraged to adhere to the Convention
and its Amendment.
Reports to the IAEA’s Incident and Trafficking
Database indicate continued reports of nuclear material,
such as highly enriched uranium and other radioactive
material, including sealed sources out of regulatory
control — most notably lost or stolen. Such incidents
continue to occur and States must remain vigilant.
The fact that criminals have obtained high-enriched
uranium, albeit far less than the amount required to
make a nuclear weapon, indicates that there is interest
in such material. Additionally, the potential for missing
radioactive sources being used in a radiation dispersal
device cannot be ruled out.
In order to specifically address those issues, the
IAEA, in consultation with States, has developed a top
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

tier nuclear security fundamentals document containing
the objective and essential elements of a State’s nuclear
security regime. That and three corresponding guidance
documents provide recommended requirements for the
physical protection of nuclear material and facilities,
physical protection of other radioactive material and
associated facilities, and nuclear and other radioactive
material out of regulatory control. In addition to those
recommended requirements, the IAEA will continue
to develop many implementing guides to support
Member States.
Last week, the IAEA held the International
Conference on Nuclear Security, where there were
extensive discussions that are relevant to today’s
debate. It brought together some 2,000 participants,
including more than 45 ministers from over 130 Member
States. The Ministerial Declaration that was adopted
welcomed the positive impact of the IAEA’s increasing
nuclear security efforts, inter alia, highlighting the
collective commitment to improve nuclear security at
the national, regional and global levels; being vigilant
about the threats, having concrete measures to protect
against malicious acts involving nuclear or radioactive
material; and, being cognizant of the need to support
the central role of the IAEA.
Each State carries full responsibility for nuclear
security within its borders. However, nuclear security in
a State may also depend on the effectiveness of the nuclear
security regime in other States. Therefore, continued
collective vigilance is essential as threats — including
insider threats and cybersecurity — evolve. Upon
request by States and subject to available resources,
the IAEA provides practical nuclear security assistance
by identifying national priorities based on threat
assessments and a gradual approach to implementation.
Nuclear security assistance is also provided through
mutually agreed individual national Integrated Nuclear
Security Support Plans (INSSPs). Planned activities
have to take account of technological developments
to make sure that they represent the state-of-the-art
response. The assistance provided through those plans
is approved by the IAEA policy-making organs. The
current plan runs from 2014 — 2017. Under the plan, we
draw up guidance to assist States to meet their respective
international obligations, which includes the CPPNM
and its Amendment, resolution 1540 (2004) and others.
Next year, a new nuclear security plan 2018 -2021 will
be developed and considered by the IAEA’s policymaking organs for approval. The recommendations of

S/PV.7837

the recent International Conference on Nuclear Security
will contribute to that new plan.
I would like to end by making a few points about
cooperation with resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage
States to share their INSSP with the cerp 1540 (2004) as
we believe that doing so helps the State to demonstrate
how it is meeting the obligations relating to nuclear
material, as set out in the resolution, and to identify
any assistance that it is receiving or may require. We
invite 1540 experts to attend our information exchange
meetings and, with the agreement of our Member
States,our regional INSSP meetings so those experts
can discuss and promote the resolution. We provide
those experts with the information that we have already
provided or are planning to provide a State that has
approached the Committee for assistance. In doing
so, we reduce duplication and unnecessary effort. We
look forward to continuing that close relationship in the
years ahead.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Kingdom of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo,
for presiding over and convening this important debate
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We also welcome the briefings made by the Deputy
Secretary-General and other invited speakers.
Resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously
on 28 April 2004, is a milestone to which Chile
contributed, as it was then a non-permanent member of
the Security Council. It is the first Council resolution
that, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, established concrete measures to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery among non-State actors.
The terms and objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
remain fully in force because, as threats evolve, it is
necessary for States to develop effective measures
to combat them. In that regard, we wish to highlight
the final report of the 2016 comprehensive review
of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) — under the leadership of Spain, as Chairman
of the Committee — as well as the adoption today
of resolution 2325 (2016), which our country has
co-sponsored and which reflects the results and
recommendations of the aforementioned report.
We are convinced that strengthening national
capacities, assistance and cooperation are essential to
advancing the implementation of the resolution. That is

16-4414329/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

why Chile has made a significant effort at the level of
national agencies to adopt the necessary measures for
its implementation. In keeping with our commitment to
the United Nations and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Chile
hosted a training course for focal points and contacts
in Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Santiago
from October 24 to 28, and attended by experts from 21
States of the region.
It is important to stress that the use of chemical
weapons or toxic chemicals has gone from being
a threat to a worrying reality, as confirmed by the
investigations carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well
as by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigation
Mechanism (JIM). We hope that their findings will
have a deterrent effect on those who intend to continue
to use chemical weapons in the future. Our country’s
commitment to addressing the challenge of preventing
the resurgence and use of chemical weapons is tangible
insofar as the work we do through our mission to the
OPCW in the areas of prevention, responsiveness and
legal issues, under the heading of the Sub-Working
Group on Non-State Actors and in close collaboration
with the Director-General of that organization.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that our
country is making ongoing efforts to establish effective
national controls with a view to combating the trafficking
in weapons of mass destruction and dual-use material.
In that regard, we are grateful for the support shown
by the 1540 Committee, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, partner countries and especially
the Organization of American States, a key regional
body in the area that has facilitated and supported such
efforts. We also thank the leadership of Spain and the
excellent work it has done during its presidency of the
1540 Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I align myself, Sir, with all the delegations that
congratulated your country on its work in the Security
Council over the past two years. I am convinced that
Spain has left its mark in carrying out its duties as
President and through its leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), as well as on the women and peace and
security agenda.
30/83

15/12/2016

As the President highlights in his concept note
(S/2016/1013, annex) for this debate, the risk of the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State
actors, particularly terrorists, poses the greatest threat
to international security. We are convinced that, in
order to prevent a catastrophe, States must lend their
assistnace to the 1540 Committee and other relevant
bodies in order facilitate national-level implementation
of the resolution, by helping countries to develop their
action plans, encouraging the timely presentation
of national reports and fostering the exchange
of experiences.
In our region, for example, we are engaged in an
exercise of peer review that will take place next year
in conjunction with Chile, with the support of the
Office for Disarmament Affairs United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism. It is necessary to
offer that same type of support to also strengthen
the legal systems, focusing on the implementation of
the resolution, not just in preventing the acquisition
of WMDs, but also in ensuring the accounting and
physical security of related materials.
With regard to nuclear weapons, in order to comply
with resolution 1540 (20040, all of our actions must
lead to the absolute eradication of nuclear-weapon
arsenals in a transparent, verifiable and irreversible
fashion and within a multilaterally agreed upon and
defined time frame. As far as chemical weapons are
concerned, it is necessary to promote education and
outreach among industry, academia, universities and
research centres on the responsible uses of chemicals,
as noted here, as well as the obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In terms of biological
weapons, we firmly believe that we need to strengthen
and implement policies on import and export controls
and transshipments of dangerous goods, thereby
carrying out rigorous assessments end-users in order to
avoid potential diversion of said materials.
I would very briefly like to share three proposals
that could bolster the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
We could complement the existing international
legal framework on disarmament and non-proliferation
by fostering synergies between the provisons of
those instruments and resolution 1540 (2004) and
the development of complementary processes at the
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

global and regional level that would avoid a duplication
of efforts.
It would be of benefit to broaden the geographical
composition of the 1540 Committee with a view to
enriching the debates, proposals and considerations that
are part of the internally workings of the Committee.
Furthermore, we must promote activities for
education, as mentioned this morning, and outreach
among industry, academia, universities and research
centres on the responsible use of chemical and
biological material and nuclear energy, as well as on
the obligations from the main international instruments
in those areas.
Finally, it is my pleasure to inform the members
of the Security Council that my country’s commitment
to this issue is of high priority, and for that reason
Colombia co-sponsored resolution 2325 (20106), which
we adopted this morning.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make the following
additional remarks in my national capacity.
As the scenario of terrorist organizations gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction has become a
disconcerting reality, the objectives of the Security
Council laid out in resolution 1540 (2004) take on
new relevance and urgency. This open debate is very
timely and important, and we pay tribute to the Spanish
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We
welcome the report of the Committee, and we were
pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016), adopted
this morning. We look forward to championing its
implementation as a member of the Security Council
for the coming two years.
Before embarking upon today’s subject, I would
like to state what is perhaps obvious, that is, that there
is a close connection between the lack of disarmament
when it comes to weapons of mass destruction and
the risk that such capacities could fall into the wrong
hands. We must therefore redouble our efforts to reach
tangible results in the field of disarmament.
Sweden is deeply concerned by the reports of the
United Nations and Organization for the Prohibition of

S/PV.7837

Chemical Weapons (OPCW) with regard to the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq and by the OPCW
Director-General’s assessment that the terrorist group
Da’esh may have the capacity to produce chemical
weapons. We are disappointed with the outcome of
the recent Review Conference of the Parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention, which we believe
could have been more ambitious and robust. That
is particularly regrettable as we face the real threat
of terrorist organizations with access to weapons
of mass destruction, and rapid advances in science
and technology.
Nuclear security also remains a concern. We have
been an active partner in the Nuclear Security Summit
process, which reached its conclusion in Washington,
D.C., earlier in the year. We need to remain vigilant and
must continue to engage within the framework of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Sweden
welcomes the successful outcome of the ministerial
conference on nuclear security held earlier this month.
We hope that the upcoming review cycle on the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
negotiations of a treaty banning nuclear weapons will
contribute to the enhancement on nuclear security.
We have taken a number of measures at the national
level to engage on the topic of today’s debate. We have
made a substantial special voluntary contribution to
the United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities, part of which is earmarked
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also recently made a significant contribution to
the Joint Investigation Mechanism (JIM) and the
missions of OPCW in Syria, as well as the IAEA
Nuclear Security Fund. We continue successful nuclear
security cooperation with Georgia, Moldova, Russia
and Ukraine, and we have recently engaged with health
institutes in Tajikistan and Zambia in the field of
biological security.
Turning to the contents of the report of the
1540 Committee, we strongly agree with the
recommendations regarding the significance of
national control lists in implementing resolution 1540
(2004). However, it is important that we do not limit
our vigilance to items and materials. Knowledge and
information also constitute important factors in the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. We share
the report’s conclusions on cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, and we are concerned
with the challenges described in the report as pertains

16-4414331/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to the shortages in assistance match-making as an
important task as we move forward.
The threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors is a matter of
grave concern, and one with which the Council must
remain fully engaged. Following the excellent work of
the Spanish presidency, my team and I look forward
to working closely with our Bolivian friends and
colleagues in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the implementation of the recommendations
of the comprehensive review over the coming years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, we fully support the statement to be made by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
in the light of our cooperation that will unfold over the
next two years in the Security Council.
We welcome, of course, the adoption of the report
on the comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as resolution 2325
(2016), adopted today, of which we were a co-sponsor.
As the only universally binding instruments covering
all types of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
those resolutions are among the pillars of the global
non-proliferation architecture and provide essential
tools for countering the growing threat of terrorism.

15/12/2016

With regard to non-State actors, the resolution 1540
(2004) architecture is an important tool, in our view,
useful in order to remedy such a shortfall. Similarly,
more attention should be paid to the protection of
critical infrastructure relevant to the non-proliferation
of WMDs from the risk of cyberattacks. In that
regard, resolution 1540 (2004) can also provide a
useful framework.
As a responsible non-proliferation actor, Italy
ratified the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. The increasing number of
ratifications this year provides further opportunities for
international cooperation in the areas of prevention and
criminal investigations. Supporting that momentum,
we recently hosted a meeting in Rome of the Nuclear
Forensics International Technical Working Group of
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
Synergies among the relevant international and
regional bodies are crucial, so as to avoid gaps in the
non-proliferation regime and its architecture. As the
next Chair of the Group of Seven in 2017 and of the
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction, Italy will focus on
improving synergies among the Group of Eight Global
Partnership Working Group and the mechanisms of the
1540 Committee.

The increase in the number of national reports and
voluntary national implementation action plans, as well
as the inclusion of resolution 1540 (2004) elements
into the daily work of international and regional
organizations, are very good news. Accurate and timely
reporting is a crucial instrument for achieving concrete
long-term results. As such, we recognize that capacitybuilding aimed at improving reporting is essential.

Likewise, border control and export controls are
crucial instruments in the fight against the proliferation,
smuggling and trafficking of WMDs. In November, we
organized a table-top exercise on that issue in Rome,
within the framework of the Mediterranean track of the
Proliferation Security Initiative. We also fully applied
the European Union export-control legislation, which
provides a valuable example of a border-control policy
that is aimed at curbing proliferation.

We are concerned by the proliferation risks posed
by non-State actors that are increasingly making
use of new technologies, scientific developments
and international trade networks. In that regard, the
outcome of the recent Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention is
disappointing. At the Security Council last August, the
Secretary-General recommended that the international
community must invest more in tackling the risk of
the proliferation of biological weapons, which get less
attention than do nuclear and chemical threats.

Finally, education, training and institutional
capacity deserve special attention when it comes
to the effective implementation of the resolution.
Every year, Italy organizes the International School
on Nuclear Security at the International Centre for
Theoretical Physics in Trieste, in collaboration with
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Furthermore,
inspectors from the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are often trained at Italian
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear defence
centres, and the Italian chemical industry participates

32/83

16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

widely and effectively in the OPCW Associate
Programme, training experts from other countries
in various industrial operations, thereby facilitating
industry-related implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
We thank Spain for its leadership in effectively
steering the comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), and we stand ready to offer our full support to
the incoming Chair, Bolivia. Through our chairmanship
next year of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), we will also work to broaden
cooperation on the issue of non-proliferation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Bylica: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia.
In accordance with the President’s request, the full
text of the European Union statement will be circulated
in writing, and I will deliver only a condensed
version now.
The European Union welcomes the timely,
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), which
was co-sponsored by all 28 EU member States. The new
resolution reiterates the decisions and requirements
of resolution 1540 (2004) and re-emphasizes the
importance for all States to implement the resolution
fully and effectively.
The EU and its member States believe that resolution
1540 (2004) remains a central pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture. The resolution must
continue to be the cornerstone of the global agenda
for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to and by non-State actors. Resolution 1540
(2004) has become even more important in the current
context, which is characterized by acute and diffuse
threats, in which the distinction between international
and internal security is blurred. The future development
of the 1540 Committee should therefore take account
of new and emerging trends in nuclear, chemical and
biological security. We are pleased to see that the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004) and
the report prepared by the 1540 Committee, under the

S/PV.7837

able chairmanship of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
and his team, reaffirm the centrality, importance and
authority of resolution 1540 (2004) in the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture.
In June, the EU submitted to the 1540 Committee
a report entitled “European Union support to the
full and universal implementation of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)”. That report
demonstrates the strong and consistent commitment by
the EU and its member States to resolution 1540 (2004)
over the past decade. That includes the very substantial
and long-standing EU support to the Global Trust Fund,
which is managed by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA). Earlier in 2016, the
EU and its member States carried out targeted outreach
towards the States that have yet to submit a first report
to the 1540 Committee. That EU outreach effort might
give rise to EU follow-up support action at the request
of the countries concerned.
The EU now stands ready to adopt in the coming
weeks a new, ambitious funding scheme designed to help
implement the outcome of the comprehensive review. It
will take the legal form of a European Council decision
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
EU. Based on our fruitful cooperation in the past, we
will again ask the Office for Disarmament Affairs
to perform the role of implementing partner for that
project. We will seek to promote reinforced cooperation
between UNODA and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We are also keen to foster closer
cooperation between EU-funded projects implemented
by UNODA and those implemented by the European
Commission through the EU Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear Centres of Excellence. That
initiative is a capacity-building programme with
over 55 partner countries and eight regional Centres
of Excellence, and is financed under the Instrument
contributing to Stability and Peace, with a budget of
around €250 million for 2010-2020.
Another means of supporting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is the robust EU exportcontrol regime for dual-use items. The EU has
developed a dedicated export-control programme for
dual-use goods, costing €30 million, in order to help
the authorities in 34 non-EU States to strengthen their
export-control regimes and better comply with the their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

16-4414333/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15/12/2016

At the international level, the EU and its member
States continue to support such treaties and regimes
as the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We also continue to support the Group of Eight
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction and a number of
other initiatives.

by working together we can succeed in preventing the
worst-case scenario from happening.

The risk of non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
using weapons of mass destruction is a major threat
to global security. However, as the threat level
increases, so does the awareness and the international
community’s response. Throughout 2016, in addition to
the comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004),
several other initiatives were taken, such as the fourth
Nuclear Security Summit, the work of the United
Nations-mandated Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which attributed the use of chemical weapons in Syria
to the Syrian armed forces and Da’esh, and last week’s
International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Security
Conference, to name but a few. The EU participated
proactively in all those efforts.

I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for promoting discussion on the importance of
preventive mechanisms for countering the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State
actors, particularly in the context of the just-concluded
review of resolution 1540 (2004). The OAS would
also like to take this opportunity to recognize the
Kingdom of Spain for its very capable leadership
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

The EU Global Strategy, issued in June 2016,
will provide the foundation for us to continue, and
even step up, our efforts in the coming years. We will
continue supporting the multilateral disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control treaties and regimes.
We will use every means at our disposal to assist in
resolving proliferation crises, as we successfully did on
the Iranian nuclear programme.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the readiness
of the EU and its member States to implement,
in a proactive manner, the outcome of the 2016
comprehensive review as well as the new resolution.
We will do so in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts and the United
Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, in partnership
with all United Nations States Members and with other
non-governmental stakeholders.
The use of nuclear or biological weapons by
non-State actors, particularly terrorists, would indeed
be catastrophic. Unfortunately, the Organization for
the Prevention of Chemical Weapons has already
concluded that a non-State actor has used chemical
weapons in Iraq, and the Joint Investigative Mechanism
has attributed to Da’esh at least one chemical weapon
attack in Syria. That is completely unacceptable, but
34/83

The President (spoke is Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Treppe1.
Ms. Treppel: It is an honour to be here this morning
at this open debate of the Security Council on behalf of
the Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS).

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
more than a decade ago, the Organization of American
States, through its Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), has focused on promoting a regional
framework for cooperation among its member States to
ensure the effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) throughout the Americas. As we have also been
tasked with implementing resolution 1373 (2001), as well
as the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism,
the OAS is uniquely positioned to promote both global
and regional instruments at the hemispheric level. We
know, however, that the successful implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a responsibility shared among
States, international organizations, the private sector,
the scientific sector and society as a whole. It is for that
reason that I would like to acknowledge our strategic
partnerships and strong collaborative relations with
other organizations, especially the 1540 Committee,
its Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).
The OAS is pleased to see the focus that the recently
approved resolution 2325 (2016) places on the role of
regional organizations and regional collaboration, and
in that spirit the OAS celebrates the agreement reached
with the Office for Disarmament Affairs to designate,
with financial support, an OAS 1540 Regional
Coordinator for the Americas. I am also pleased to
report that the OAS is working with the UNODA
Regional Office in Lima to organize a regional 1540
conference early next year.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The OAS is committed to increasing dialogue and
strengthening political outreach and awareness among
the countries of the hemisphere. Since 2014, we have
been promoting the development and implementation
of national action plans in the Americas to complement
existing national legislative frameworks for combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Currently, CICTE is supporting the efforts of 10
countries in the region in this critical area, including
Chile, the Committee’s current Chair, and Panama,
which, as Vice-Chair and host of the upcoming CICTE
annual meeting, has designated the prevention of
proliferation of WMDs and terrorist financing as the
key topic for debate. Furthermore, the Government of
Panama, together with Spain and the OAS, sponsored
a non-proliferation side event in the framework of
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly
in September.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
will continue to pose a growing threat to international
peace and security. The more complex and asymmetrical
the violence, the greater the risk of terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. We know that in most
Latin American and Caribbean countries the human,
financial and material resources allocated for emergency
preparedness and response are limited. While the
humanitarian impact of WMDs is undeniable, few if
any countries currently have the capacity to address the
humanitarian consequences of an attack caused by a
weapon of mass destruction.
In the interests of time, I will not go into detail
here, but my written remarks set forth a series of
measures that we believe Member States should take
into account to enhance their 1540 frameworks and
prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction and
related materials to all non-State actors.
We believe that regional bodies play a very important
role in addressing proliferation and terrorism, so allow
me to conclude my remarks today by reaffirming OAS
support for existing non-proliferation and arms control
systems, as well as our commitment to improving their
effectiveness throughout the Western Hemisphere.
Because the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) must reconcile international security and
strategic trade needs, the OAS will also continue to
encourage the enactment of legislation that supports
both non-proliferation objectives and commercial
interests and that criminalizes offenses related

S/PV.7837

to the proliferation and financing of weapons of
mass destruction.
Thank you again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity. The OAS reiterates its firm commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
has every confidence that this open debate will make
important contributions to its ongoing review.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: I would like to start by thanking Spain
for inviting the African Union to this very important
debate, and also Minister Alfonso Dastis Quecedo for
making the journey to New York. I would also like to
thank all the ministers and high-level representatives
who have come to the Security Council to debate on
a very important item for the African continent. I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing, and I welcome all the other briefings made
this morning, which were very insightful.
The regional dimension is certainly a very
important one if we are really to tackle this question
and achieve tangible results. As the Council knows,
with the entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty, Africa
is a nuclear-weapon-free region. The African Union
has always been committed to global disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts. As early as 1964, the first
Summit of the Organization of African Unity adopted
the landmark Cairo Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa. That Declaration formed the basis for and
origin of subsequent efforts that culminated in the
adoption of the Treaty of Pelindaba, which established
the continent as a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
It is indeed our view that nuclear-weapon-free zones
remain an instrumental approach to strengthen global
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament norms and
consolidate international efforts towards achieving the
objectives of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
I wish to take this opportunity to underscore that
the African Union remains strongly committed to
the three pillars of the NPT, namely, disarmament,
non-proliferation and peaceful applications of nuclear
science and technology, which are all mutually
reinforcing and equally fundamental for the authority
and effectiveness of the regime.

16-4414335/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) added a
critical and important tool to the global disarmament
and non-proliferation framework. That tool responds
to the changing challenges in the international security
environment and the growing range of actors within it.
With the evolving threat of terrorism and transnational
organized crime, the need to have a robust, effective
and transparent approach to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring, proliferating or using weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery becomes a
necessity and requires collective responsibility.
The threats and risks that resolution 1540 (2004)
aimed to address more than 10 years ago remain
omnipresent. The increasing terrorist attacks in
different regions and intelligence reports from various
States indicate that terrorist groups continue to seek
the material and the technology to construct and deploy
weapons of mass destruction. For those reasons, the
resolution continues to enjoy international consensus
and support, especially in Africa.
In that regard, following the adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) — which extended the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) — the twentieth ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in January 2013,
adopted a decision calling for the full and effective
implementation of the resolution. It also requested the
Commission of the African Union, in collaboration
with the 1540 Committee and the relevant regional
and international partners, to support Member States’
efforts to that end.
The AU Commission has undertaken a number
of activities to give political and practical support to
the implementation of the resolution. Those activities,
combined with the indispensable technical support
provided by the 1540 Committee and partner States and
organizations, have contributed to achieving significant
progress in implementing the resolution. Such a
statement cannot be made without duly recognizing
the strong commitment of Member States themselves
and the leading role they have taken in achieving
that progress. Indeed, without national ownership
and leadership, no effort will produce a long-term,
sustainable impact.
Assistance is a key component in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Many African countries
continue to face challenges that impact their ability to
dedicate the human and financial resources required
36/83

15/12/2016

to implement the regional and global disarmament and
security frameworks, including resolution 1540 (2004).
Therefore, we believe that we need to capitalize on the
mandate of the 1540 Committee and resolution 2325
(2016), adopted today, and on the expertise and resources
of partner States and specialized agencies in order
to ensure that gaps and challenges faced by Member
States are well provided for through a consolidated,
well-structured and mutually agreed process.
In conclusion, allow me to state that the African
Union Commission reaffirms its commitment to
collaborate with the African Commission on Nuclear
Energy, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty Organization and the 1540 Committee in
order to enhance the capacities of its member States to
prevent, counter and respond to the global agenda to
stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano: Financing is an essential component
of proliferation. Therefore, financial measures are one
of the most effective tools to counter proliferation.
Preventive measures make it difficult for criminals to
raise or transfer funds, thereby reducing the capacity
of proliferation networks. Financing intelligence
provides advanced warning of attempts to illegally
transfer sensitive goods or materials. Shipments can be
discovered and interdicted on the basis of suspicious
transaction reports by financial institutions. Every
movement of goods has an associated financial
transaction. Financial investigations can follow
the money trails to look behind transactions and
declarations, analyse proliferation networks and
identify facilitators.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is a
global standards-setting body for combating money
laundering and the financing of terrorism and
proliferation, with a total of 198 jurisdictions included
in the global network. The FATF was established in
1989 to combat money laundering associated with
drug trafficking and has expanded its role since then.
In 2001, we developed effective tools to fight terrorist
financing. From 2008, in response to the increased
threat of proliferation, the FATF took up the task of
combating proliferation financing. Since then we have
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

analysed how proliferation networks use financing and
have adopted international standards to that end.
The FATF standards set specific requirements to
give effect to Security Council resolutions, including
targeted financial sanctions to counter proliferation
and terrorism. Standards are enforced through rigorous
peer-review and follow-up procedures, which have
greatly increased the number of jurisdictions that
comply with the requirements. That gives the Security
Council more effective tools.
It is important to underline that the role of the
FATF in countering proliferation goes beyond targeted
financial sanctions. We have built the infrastructure
needed to combat the financing of proliferation with
criminal laws and investigative powers, due diligence
and suspicious transaction reporting by financial
institutions and transparency requirements regarding
the control of corporate vehicles and legal arrangements.
We apply measures that weaken the ability of non-State
actors to maintain facilitation networks and to raise
or spend money. The FATF provides guidance on
cooperation and coordination, both domestically
and internationally.
To sum up, the FATF standards provide a
comprehensive basis to combat the financing of
proliferation by both State and non-State actors.
However, we still face important challenges. Some
countries simply do not have the capacity to exercise
effective controls. We need to support those countries.
Many more countries do not understand the risks, or
do not fully exploit the opportunities of financial
intelligence to counter proliferation. More work is
needed to link up the relevant authorities in each country.
Finally, at the global level, we need to ensure
that emerging financial technologies can develop
without being exploited for the purposes of terrorism
or proliferation. One of the priorities of the Spanish
presidency of the FATF is therefore to establish a
partnership with the international community to ensure
that new technology and developments properly manage
associated risks.
The financial measures that the FATF promotes are
an important tool against proliferation. We stand ready
to support further progress under the leadership of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica.

S/PV.7837

Mr. Hamilton (Jamaica): On behalf of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) secretariat, I
would like to register my thanks to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and in
particular the Permanent Mission of Spain for convening
this high-level meeting on resolution 1540 (2004), with
a focus on threats related to non-State actors and the
possible use of weapons of mass destruction.
From the inception of the CARICOM regional
programme, which seeks to assist CARICOM member
States to effectively assume their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), the 1540 Committee has stood
foursquare in support of our efforts, both in terms of
its overall engagement and its support for regional
initiatives that focus on implementing strategic trade
legislation and regulations, and on regional initiatives
to build necessary capacity within the Caribbean to
prevent proliferation.
As for the leadership of the Caribbean Community
and for entities within the region that focus on the
prevention of trade in and use of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear weapons and related materials,
I can say with certainty that ongoing cooperation with
the 1540 Committee remains a cornerstone of our
continuing regional effort to combat proliferation, both
within the Caribbean and in the hemisphere at large.
Without question, regional progress in preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is inextricably linked to the economic viability of
CARICOM member States. Indeed, we have borne
witness to the impact of poverty, privatization and
marginalization and its influence on promoting
radicalization, both within the region and around
the world. Fighting terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction can be successfully waged
only by fully appreciating the intersection between
such corollary realities. Those realities are not absent
from the Caribbean, as has been exemplified by the
involvement of Caribbean nationals as foreign terrorist
fighters in the conflicts in Iraq and Syria, and on the
side of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
While that may be fading in our collective
memories, we are all too cognizant of the region’s
susceptibility to external shocks, including those
occasioned by acts of terrorism, as was the case with
the attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001.
Notwithstanding the fact that such events took place far
away from the Caribbean and occurred in the United

16-4414337/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

States, the economic impact on the region and the
reverberations felt in regional markets resulted in the
loss of over $900 million in revenue and thousands of
jobs, particularly in the tourism and hospitality sectors,
within the first year after the attacks
It is for that reason that terrorism and the
proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear materials has continued to be of significant
importance to CARICOM member States over the
past 15 years, even as regional Governments have
been grappling with the influx of small arms and
light weapons, as well as the deleterious impact of the
continuing drug trade and spiralling gun-related crime,
which has ensued from that confluence of events.
Given the increasing competition for critically
needed economic space and resources to effectively
deal with such challenges within the security realm, it
is fundamental that initiatives aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, reducing
trade in strategic goods and related technology and
promoting the adoption of important correlated security
measures, such as the implementation of effective
export controls, receive greater levels of support from
the international community.
CARICOM remains grateful for the assistance
that has been provided by the United States, Canada,
Australia, the Republic of Korea and the United
Kingdom, among other countries, but it is not nearly
enough. In order to place non-proliferation firmly and
securely within the contemporary regional security
vernacular and to elevate it to actionable levels within
CARICOM member States, engagement on the matter
cannot be piecemeal or sporadic. It requires sustained
interaction with both policy and enforcement entities
within the region and the provision of equally sustained
material support going forward. CARICOM therefore
views today’s high-level deliberations as a significant
and encouraging step forward in that regard, and is
confident that its outcome will strengthen the region’s
ongoing efforts to advance its objectives within the
non-proliferation realm.
Let me also emphasize that the involvement of
industry, academia and civil society in this discourse
is commendable, as there is the need for an allhands-on-deck approach so as to fully achieve the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), effectively
combat non-State actors and simultaneously enhance
security and aid national development, particularly in
38/83

15/12/2016

the global South. I would therefore observe that today’s
debate has particular relevance to the Caribbean, given
the expansion of a regional process first initiated in
October 2013 in Freeport, Bahamas, at the symposium
entitled “Public and Private Sector Avenues to Building
Maritime and Port Security Infrastructure and
Facilitating Secure Trade in the Caribbean through the
Implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)”.
That gathering of CARICOM States, facilitated by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the CARICOM resolution 1540 (2004) implementation
programme and the Stimson Center, was fundamental
in charting a way forward to encourage greater
cooperation with industry and Governments in the
region, both in implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
and in fostering an agenda for joint action on improving
port security and on aiding development. With the
initiation of the Freeport process, CARICOM member
States agreed to deepen their cooperation aimed at
meeting their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
through increased public-private collaboration aimed
at addressing security vulnerabilities at ports within
the Caribbean region and at combating the transit,
transshipment, export, re-export and brokering of
strategic goods and dual-use materials.
The Freeport process has led to new and
unprecedented cooperation aimed at strengthening
port and border security and at undertaking important
mandates under paragraph 3 of resolution 1540
(2004). It has also resulted in a new partnership
among CARICOM, the World Customs Organization
and the United States National Nuclear Security
Administration, focusing on strategic trade-control
enforcement and will be expanded to other designated
CARICOM member States through 2017.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that CARICOM
member States are cognizant of the emerging
vulnerabilities posed by chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials to the safety and
security of the region’s maritime space and are fully
aware of those attendant risks that can jeopardize
the achievement of secure trade and commerce.
Activities within the context of the CARICOM 1540
programme underscore the continued commitment
felt by CARICOM members to implement resolution
1540 (2004) and signals a prevailing commitment to
non-proliferation, which will necessitate even greater
levels of support by the international community to
fully achieve such important objectives.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Once again, let me register my profound thanks
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We trust that this dialogue will result
in a renewed engagement to realize even more
meaningful gains in the 1540 implementation process
and serve to enhance regional security and strengthen
non-proliferation, while also enhancing the ability of
CARICOM and other Member States to effectively
confront threats posed by proliferators and non-State
actors alike.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Today’s debate is timely as
it coincides with the conclusion of the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), which will
provide useful guidance for Member States in their
implementation of the resolution.
Pakistan has been a consistent supporter of
the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), and our
commitment to its implementation has remained second
to none. It is in the interests of all States to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to States as
well as non-State actors. During the open consultations
conducted under the comprehensive review, we, along
with many other States, stressed that its emphasis
should be on an effective, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States,
across the board, rather than on expanding its scope.
Resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today, reflects the
balance required to make the mechanism more effective.
Improved matchmaking by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
making it more responsive to requests by States for
assistance, is imperative. In that regard, we welcome
provisions along those lines in resolution 2325 (2016).
Closer cooperation between the Security Council and
international and regional organizations is needed in
order to coordinate activities so as to avoid duplication
and to focus on the most important areas.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has positively contributed
to the advancement of non-proliferation goals. Its
success owes less to its representing action under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations than
to the cooperative approach that it has engendered
aimed at promotinng implementation. The resolution
stresses the importance of engagement with States and
recognizes the voluntary nature of country visits, which
are to be conducted at the invitation of States. That

S/PV.7837

is expected to enhance ownership of the resolution’s
implementation. We would also like to highlight the
resolution’s provisions that none of the obligations in
resolution 1540 (2004) should be interpreted in such a
way as to alter the responsibilities of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Let me underscore Pakistan’s commitment to its
non-proliferation obligations, including the steps taken
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Pakistan has submitted four national implementation
reports under the resolution. Our fifth report on its
implementation will be submitted shortly, and, next
February, we will organize a seminar on promoting
better implementation of the resolution at the
regional level.
Pakistan has elaborated and implemented a
comprehensive export-control regime that is fully
harmonized with those of the Nuclear Suppliers Group
(NSG), the Missile Technology Control Regime and
the Australia Group. We have also declared voluntary
adherence to NSG guidelines. Pakistan is participating
in the IAEA Incident and Trafficking Database. We
have effectively participated in and contributed to the
Nuclear Security Summit process. Our ratification of
the 2005 amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and our adherence to the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) guidelines are among
the recent steps that we have taken. Pakistan has been
an active partner of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism since its inception, in 2007, and has
contributed to the development of its guidelines. We
declared a unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing and
offered to translate that into a bilateral arrangement on
non-testing with India.
Those credentials clearly establish Pakistan’s
eligibility to become a member of the NSG. The grant of
waivers to long-standing non-proliferation regimes and
rules carries obvious proliferation risks and undermines
regional strategic stability. It is therefore critical that
an equitable, non-discriminatory and criteria-based
approach to promoting civil nuclear cooperation and
membership in export controls regimes, in particular
that of the NSG, be adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): The mere existence of weapons
of mass destruction constitutes a threat to humankind,

16-4414339/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and therefore to international peace and security.
The possibility that those weapons might fall into the
hands of non-State actors, particularly terrorists, is a
matter of special concern, as the recent use of chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant demonstrates.
As a member of the Security Council at the time,
Brazil actively participated in the discussions leading
to the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), and we have
remained firmly committed to its implementation.
The international community must maintain a
balance between development and security, without
obstructing the legitimate right to development and
the use of technology for peaceful purposes. It should
be highlighted, moreover, that States have the primary
responsibility for control over the tangible or intangible
goods that leave or enter their territories.
Our Constitution forbids the conduct of any
non-peaceful nuclear activity in Brazilian territory.
Brazil is a party to all of the major treaties and
conventions in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation. We have incorporated into our
national legislation all obligations deriving from those
instruments, as well as those based on resolution 1540
(2004).
Brazilian legislation clearly safeguards the peaceful
applications of sensitive and dual-use goods and items,
especially in activities related to industry, research
and development. The Brazilian Government promotes
ongoing and structured outreach in order to inform the
private sector of applicable restrictions and controls.
Brazil has followed with interest the current
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004),
which has just been concluded, and took part in the
open consultations convened in June by the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). As the comprehensive review’s final report
recognizes, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that will require continuing
efforts at the national, regional and international levels.
We are pleased that both the final report and resolution
2325 (2016), which was just adopted, also attribute a
key role to international cooperation and assistance to
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We acknowledge the important work carried out
by the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts,
particularly in trying to match cooperation offers and
requests. In order to address some of the shortcomings
40/83

15/12/2016

in that process, countries in a position to do so should
help countries in formulating their assistance requests.
Brazil has taken part in cooperation and assistance
initiatives that contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), particularly in the drafting of
national legislation on chemical and biological weapons
and related materials.
Notwithstanding the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), confining international efforts only to
the countering of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is ineffective. Disarmament measures
are indistinguishable from any reasonable strategy to
prevent those weapons from falling in the hands of
non-State actors.
Over the past 50 years, the international community
has succeeded in adopting multilateral legally binding
instruments that ban biological and chemical weapons.
In the light of the unimaginable suffering that such
weapons are capable of inflicting, it is perplexing that
the same approach has not been applied in the case of
nuclear weapons, as clearly mandated by article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In October, the General Assembly’s First
Committee took a decisive step in filling that gap.
General Assembly First Committee draft resolution
A/C.1/71/L.41, adopted by more than two thirds of the
delegations present and voting in the Committee, calls
for the convening of a conference in 2017, open to all
States, international organizations and civil society, to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear
weapons, leading towards their total elimination.
Time and again the international community
has been confronted with the argument that security
concerns hamper the objective of disarmament. That
is a false dichotomy. Relying on nuclear-deterrence
doctrines and strategies undermines the mediumand long-term security of all States. The risk that
non-State actors may wish to acquire nuclear weapons
is only one among many examples of such long-term
security challenges. As the Secretary-General himself
once said, and the Deputy Secretary-General repeated
earlier today, “there are no right hands for the wrong
weapons”. It is imperative that the international
community take concrete steps to achieve long-overdue
nuclear disarmament.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Allow me to begin by
thanking Spain for organizing this open debate on
such a timely and pertinent issue. I would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and both teams, in
New York and in Madrid, on an exemplary job done
in leading the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two
years and in the conduct of the comprehensive review
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like, however, to highlight a few aspects of significance
to my country.
Since its adoption, in 2004, resolution 1540 (2004)
has played a central role in countering the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
as the only global legally binding instrument in that
field. Nowadays, the rise of terrorism and the growing
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery by non-State actors makes
the need for its full implementation more relevant than
ever. In that regard, new scientific and technological
developments must be taken into consideration and
adequately addressed.
The results of the comprehensive review
demonstrate that, despite the achievements, a lot
remains to be done by Member States. The unanimous
adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) earlier today and
the large number of sponsors — my own country,
Bulgaria, is one of them — should be interpreted as a
reaffirmation of the commitment of Member States to
fully implement resolution 1540 (2004).
Prevention is of the essence. As the saying goes,
States need to be successful 100 per cent of the time,
while terrorists need to succeed only once. The
objective of resolution 1540 (2004) is prevention, and
measures to that end will be effective only if they are
fully implemented at all levels — national, regional
and global.
Bulgaria has been a strong supporter of resolution
1540 (2004) since its adoption. At the national level,
we have put all the necessary legislation in place in
that regard. However, having legislation in place is
not sufficient — its enforcement is of much greater
importance. Our efforts are therefore geared towards
further strengthening coordination and information
exchange among implementing agencies. Enforcing
the legislation is one of the elements that we find of

S/PV.7837

particular importance for the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Bulgaria is in the process of developing a national
strategy for countering weapons of mass destruction, in
which significant emphasis will be placed on preventing
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery by non- State actors.
The submission of national reports is another
aspect that merits attention. It is essential that all States
provide such reports. They allow for the identification
of areas that might need further strengthening and can
serve as a great tool in assessing needs for assistance. In
that regard, the newly strengthened role of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) in facilitating technical assistance could
only but be aided by national reports. Bulgaria has
submitted several reports on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including updated information
in 2015. Besides efforts at the national level, we are of
the view that improved cooperation between the 1540
Committee and the three counter-terrorism committees
would be of great benefit for achieving the objectives
of the resolution.
It is important to take into consideration other
initiatives whose objectives are also aimed at countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
whose activities contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. Bulgaria actively participates in
both initiatives, and in 2017, within the framework of
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
Bulgaria will host a seminar on developing programmes
and exercises in nuclear security.
Furthermore, the recognition of the positive role
that parliamentarians, civil society, academia and
industry play in the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is also an element to be welcomed, as
efforts to counter the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors can be successful only
if all act in concert.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Bulgaria’s
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.

16-4414341/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): I congratulate
Spain on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this high-level debate on preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
The Philippines recognizes the threat posed to
peace and security on the domestic and international
fronts by non-State actors acquiring, manufacturing
and using weapons of mass destruction. In order to
mitigate those risks, the Philippines continues to put in
place legislative and other measures so as to make the
environment difficult for non-State actors to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. Those measures include
the following.
First, the Philippines has enacted its Strategic
Trade and Management Act of 2015, which, together
with the Human Security Act of 2007, provides a legal
framework to regulate the trade in dual-use items and
ensure that the Philippines is not used as a transshipment
point for such items.
Secondly, we are considering amending the Human
Security Act to include nuclear terrorism and penal
provisions contained in the amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
Thirdly, we will be setting up a Philippine nuclear
regulatory authority under the proposed comprehensive
nuclear regulation act, which will regulate the nuclear,
security and safety aspects of the peaceful utilization of
ionizing radiation sources.
Fourthly, on an operational level, in order to
detect any illicit trafficking in nuclear and radioactive
materials within and across our borders, the Philippines
has installed 20 radiation portal monitors at major ports
and compels users to submit a transport security plan
before transporting radioactive material.
In adopting a whole-of-nation approach, the
Philippines continues to consolidate its efforts to
mitigate the risks to its domestic security posed by
non-State actors, by working together with the various
agencies in Government and with the private sector and
civil society.
On the international front, the Philippines
believes that the threat posed by non-State actors
acquiring, transporting or using weapons of mass
destruction requires a collective and coordinated global
response. In that context, the Philippines continues
to actively engage with partners in the international
42/83

15/12/2016

arena to enhance its capacities and share its national
experiences. The Philippines hosts the Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Risk
Mitigation Centre of Excellence Regional Headquarters
for South-East Asia and has developed a proactive
Philippine national CBRN action plan. It is also a
founding member of the Group of Friends of CBRN
risk-mitigation and security governance, which, in line
with its goal of raising awareness of CBRN mitigation,
co-hosted a side event last September at Headquarters
on CBRN risk-mitigation in the context of combating
terrorism. At the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Forum (APEC), the Philippines, as Chair of APEC’s
counter-terrorism working group, is pursuing efforts to
address the foreign-terrorist-fighters phenomenon. In
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Philippines actively participates in discussions in
that regard through the ASEAN Regional Forum, which
the Philippines will chair next year. The Philippines
is now an active member of the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Global Partnership
Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction. That web of partnerships synergizes with
our domestic efforts, as well bilateral and regional
engagements, on CBRN issues.
In conclusion, one has to recognize that non-State
actors have been quick to adopt new technologies that
make it easier for them to acquire, transport and use
weapons of mass destruction. States must therefore
keep up with those developments and step up efforts
to prevent non-State actors from doing so and protect
our populations from the threat of a nuclear, chemical
or biological catastrophe. We must continue to enhance
our cooperation with each other, with the private sector
and with civil society so as to combat that threat as one
global community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to present some remarks
from our national perspective.
Poland strongly supports the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Since 2004, we have
submitted five national reports on the implementation
of the resolution. Recently, we actively participated
in a comprehensive review on the status of its
implementation. We also had the honour to join the
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

co-sponsors of resolution 2325 (2016), which was
adopted earlier today.
We particularly welcome the provisions of the
new resolution that relate to the delivery of more
effective assistance by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to States,
enhancing cooperation between the 1540 Committee
and other United Nations bodies and international
institutions and drawing on expertise from industry
and the scientific and academic communities. Such
an inclusive approach will contribute to building more
secure societies. We join others in calling upon all
States that have not yet done so to present their first
national reports on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
The threat of the proliferation or use of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors continues
to be grave and requires urgent action. In particular,
significant efforts remain to be taken to address existing
gaps in national implementation by some States that
need to make the production, use, storage and transport
of materials related to chemical and biological weapons
more secure. The reports by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism have confirmed that
toxic chemicals have been used as weapons in Syria by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and we repeatedly
hear of new allegations that terrorists are still trying to
use them.
Biological agents also pose a deadly threat to our
societies. The recent eighth Review Conference of the
Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention proved
that States must put much more effort into suppressing
biological challenges.
The resolution adopted today accurately states that
more attention should be given to enforcement measures
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and related materials and to the strengthening of
international export and transshipment controls.
Poland has therefore completed a comprehensive
review of its national procedures for the interdiction of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. As a result, a document on the
subject entitled “National Interdiction Mechanism” was
agreed and is now ready to be adopted by the Polish
Government — most probably by the end of this year.
That mechanism aims at the effective implementation
of our international obligations on non-proliferation,

S/PV.7837

including United Nations and European Union sanctions.
It also includes guidelines to ensure that, in the event
of any action to interdict the suspected transport of
WMDs, all national authorities concerned will be
ready to react promptly and appropriately, working in
conjunction with international partners. As a follow-up
to that work, Poland is now considering its accession
to the Protocol of 2005 to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation.
Let me conclude by thanking the Spanish team for
its excellent work in chairing the 1540 Committee over
the past two years, and by wishing the best of luck to
Bolivia as the next Chair of the Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this
open debate and for the excellent work done during the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004).
While aligning myself with the statement by the
observer of the European Union, I would like to make
the following three points.
First, in the aftermath of the attackas of 11 September
2001, the Security Council developed a vision of a safer
world in which humankind was to be spared from the
terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
However, that vision has been severely compromised in
recent years. Since 2013, the repeated use of chemical
weapons in Syria, both by Government actors as well
as by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
has dramatically increased concerns about the use of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors, as has
ISIL’s use of chemical weapons in Iraq. Holding those
responsible for such heinous acts accountable remains a
major challenge for the international community.
Secondly, besides international frameworks,
conferences and national regulations, responsible
involvement by the private sector is vital for
non-proliferation to be successful in a globalized world.
After all, it is the private sector that must implement
export-control and non-proliferation legislation, under
Government supervision of course. Against that
backdrop, Germany, with the support of many other
Member States, initiated the Wiesbaden process, which
focuses on private-sector engagement in the context
of resolution 1540 (2004). Listening to the concerns

16-4414343/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and concrete proposals of industry representatives is
instrumental in identifying practical measures that we
can adopt to prevent non-State actors from obtaining or
using WMDs.
Thirdly, for Germany, resolution 1540 (2004)
continues to be an essential pillar of the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture, as well as an important
tool for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. Germany supports
resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted today, and
especially welcomes its aim to strengthen the role of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), especially by further improving
the matching mechanism.
We also welcome other initiatives aimed at further
strengthening resolution 1540 (2004) in a long-term
perspective, such as the work of the Group of Friends
of resolution 1540 (2004), in which Germany actively
participates. We encourage all States to fully fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). That means
adopting and enforcing effective national legislation.
It also means establishing and implementing export
controls on dual-use goods and technologies. Germany
stands ready to assist other States in doing so, including,
for example, by sharing experiences and identifying
effective practices. Submitting an initial first report
to the 1540 Committee is an essential first step in
identifying national strengths and weaknesses in that
matter. My country will continue to support targeted
outreach towards States that have yet to submit a report.
Let me conclude by stressing that Germany, together
with partner nations and international organizations,
will continue to actively contribute to reducing the
global risk of WMD terrorism. We stand ready to
implement the outcome of the 2016 comprehensive
review on resolution 1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico commends you, Sir, for holding this
open debate and for Spain’s bold leadership in the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004).
The comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004)
took place in the context of historical developments in
several areas of multilateralism, which shows us that
when there is a political will, relevant, sensitive and
efficient diplomacy is possible. The paradigm shift
44/83

15/12/2016

represented by the adoption by the Security Council
and the General Assembly of the concept of sustainable
peace as a process and goal for all illustrates that we
are witnessing a new era for the United Nations. Since
the founding of the Organization, Mexico has pointed
out that a secure and peaceful international system
must be based on international cooperation and the full
application of international law, not on the possession of
weapons,and even less so on the existence of weapons
of mass destruction.
The 1540 regime is valuable because, within
its framework, the most important obligations
pertaining to international security, disarmament and
non-proliferation must be fulfilled, in particular those
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, among other relevant instruments. The
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a task
that requires continuous and joint efforts on the part
of the international community. Current technological
advances and commercial interaction can facilitate
access to weapons of mass destruction by non-State
actors, thereby creating challenges for all of us.
What does not exist cannot proliferate. Weapons
of mass destruction should simply not exist. We must
prohibit all of them without any exception. Mexico will
continue to call for the prohibition and elimination of
all weapons of mass destruction, based on an equitable
and nondiscriminatory approach, so as to prevent the
humanitarian impact of those instruments of war.
Nuclear-weapon States must fulfil their obligations
under the NPT and take unequivocal steps towards
their elimination. The year 2017 will be crucial in
complementing and strengthening the disarmament,
non-proliferation and, above all, nuclear-arms
prohibition regimes by beginning with negotiations on
a legally binding instrument on that issue.
On 14 February 2017, we will celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, known as
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which led to the establishment
of the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely
populated region, which, in turn, led the way for the
establishment of five nuclear-weapon-free zones in the
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

world. That is a crucial contribution to international
peace and security of the world that fills Mexico and
all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
with great pride.
With regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the work of the Open-Ended Working Group on
Terrorism of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its Sub-Working Group
on Non-State Actors is noteworthy. Mexico commends
the OPCW for its support to Libya and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism for identifying
those responsible for using chemical weapons in Syria.
It is a priority matter to prevent a humanitarian tragedy
resulting from biological weapons, given the potential
risk owing to the availability and accessibility of the
scientific know-how.
Mexico welcomes the report on the comprehensive
review on resolution 1540 (2004) and its
recommendations and strategy on the subject for the
coming years. We support the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and welcome the outstanding work being
carried out by its Group of Experts in developing useful
tools for the full implementation of the resolution. At
the national level, we have worked in coordination
with the responsible agencies to update our national
report on the implementation of the resolution and the
matrix. Those tools contribute to transparency and
confidence-building, and they also serve as a resource
for the exchange of information and the dissemination
of good practices in the area. We have reported on
the promulgation of laws and the development of
normative frameworks and control measures pertaining
to chemical substances. We have also provided
information on the safety and security of radiological,
chemical and biological materials. Five years ago,
Mexico took the decision to close the door to the
transfer of goods and technology of dual-use that could
be used for unauthorized purposes or fall into the hands
of unauthorized end-users, including non-State actors.
We continue to strive to improve our exportcontrol policies so as to comply with our legally
binding commitments, as well as with the voluntary
and political obligations assumed upon becoming a
member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia
Group and of the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies. We have developed a national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),

S/PV.7837

on which much work remains to be done. The approach
based on international cooperation is also a strength of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), because it allows direct dialogue with States to
be carried out when making visits at their request.
The 1540 Committee has established itself as a
platform of cooperation to facilitate assistance. We must
continue working towards that end by strengthening the
mechanism for dealing with requests for specific needs
and offers of assistance in specific areas. Likewise,
the frank dialogue that the 1540 Committee has
developed with international organizations, academia
and industry in the pursuit of compliance with the
resolution is commendable.
My country will continue to work actively for
initiatives that contribute meaningfully to multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, such as
resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the excellent work that you and your team have done in
conducting a comprehensive review on resolution 1540
(2004). I would also like to emphasize the opportunity
that the review has given Member States to be able
to voice their opinions and convey to the Council
their ideas regarding the process of the review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular
through the open consultations organized in June.
Spain’s initiative to create the Group of Friends
of resolution 1540 (2004) deserves special mention.
In addition to generating a valuable exchange among
its members, it has allowed us to follow the most
important aspects of the review process throughout
the year. We look forward to Spain’s leadership in
continuing to drive the activities of the Group, of which
Argentina is a member and to which we hope to add
even more countries.
There are myriad painful cases in which
international terrorism has given ample evidence of its
capacity for destruction. The use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors has stopped being an
abstract or theoretical problem in recent years and has
highlighted the need for Member States to redouble
their efforts to prevent terrorist groups from gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, their related
materials and their means of delivery.

16-4414345/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

For Argentina, resolution 1540 (2004) represents,
in terms of its scope and legal nature, the most robust
response by the United Nations to the problems
posed by weapons of mass destruction and access
to them by non-State actors. Since its adoption 12
years ago, Argentina has addressed that resolution
by striving to preserve the balance between our
traditional commitment to non-proliferation and our
reaffirmation of the sovereign right to the peaceful use
and development of advanced technologies, including
nuclear, chemical, biological or pharmaceutical
technologies, or nanotechnology. Both of those
principles are enshrined in the text of resolution 1540
(2004) and have been reaffirmed in resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted this morning by the Council
and which Argentina co-sponsored. In that respect, on
26 October 2004, with its first national report followed
by successive updates, the last of which is in the process
of being drawn up, the Argentine Republic, as an active
member of the five non-proliferation regimes, as well as
the Proliferation Security Initiative, has demonstrated
its unwavering commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
Member States must redouble their efforts to
strengthen and update their national export-control
systems, which we believe should be based on four
fundamental pillars. The first pillar is a transparent
and standardized national licensing system. The second
pillar is the effective compliance with current legislation
applicable to export control, including aspects of
brokering and transshipment. The third pillar is the
promotion of corporate awareness of the importance of
industrial development and the security of international
trade. The fourth pillar is close regional cooperation.
With regard to regional cooperation, I wish to
emphasize that Argentina is a provider of assistance
under the framework of resolution 1540 (2004)
and conducts capacity-building activities for the
identification of strategic goods at the subregional
and regional levels, as well as in the field of SouthSouth cooperation with African countries. Our
commitment to our region of Latin America and the
Caribbean is inescapable, and we will continue to
provide assistance to those countries that request it, in
accordance with paragraphs 19 and 20 of the resolution
that we just adopted. Moreover, Argentina welcomes
the new resolution’s recognition of the positive role
played by civil society, including industry and the
academic world, as well as its recognition of the key
46/83

15/12/2016

role that parliamentarians play. All of those groups
are fundamental in implementing the obligations that
emanate from resolution 1540 (2004).
We believe that it is vitally important to ensure that
dual-use chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials are properly protected, far from those actors
who would not hesitate to use them to terrorize and sow
panic and destruction. It is illusory to think that we live
in safety while such materials lack proper protection
and international regulations are not being applied at a
global level.
In order to achieve our objectives and face the
challenges imposed by the current international context,
it is essential to have appropriate institutional support.
In that regard, my country welcomes paragraph 9 of
the new resolution, which calls on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
analyse the effectiveness and efficiency with which it
fulfills the mandate of its special political mission with
a view to strengthening that mission and assuring that
it is fully ready to carry out its duties. We look forward
to the report on the results of that evaluation, which the
Committee will provide next year.
There are several challenges facing the future of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its implementation. First,
there is the challenge of addressing the global threat
posed by non-State actors, which is made particularly
complex by the associated proliferation risks.
Secondly, there is the challenge of ensuring the better
channeling of requests for assistance in order to enable
concrete and effective responses. Thirdly, in relation
to universalization, we believe that those States that,
for various reasons, have not yet submitted their first
national report, should be encouraged to do so, and that
they should assisted to do so, if they so request. Fourthly,
challenges regarding new technologies, particularly
in terms of legislation and export controls, must be
analyzed and incorporated into the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Lastly, a major challenge will
be to develop and consolidate a network of contact
points at the regional and global levels.
Allow me to conclude by congratulating Spain on
the work that it has carried out over the past years in
its capacity as Chair of the 1540 Committee, as well
as by extending Argentina’s determined contribution to
assisting the next Chair of the 1540 Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7837

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, let me
congratulate the Spanish presidency on convening this
timely debate. The tireless efforts of Madrid to advance
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) are also
very much appreciated. We would like to welcome
today’s adoption of resolution 2325 (2015), which
Hungary co-sponsored.

allow, Hungary provides active assistance to partner
countries both within the framework of the European
Union and on a bilateral basis. In that context, I would
like to highlight the assistance we have given to Bosnia
and Herzegovina in joining the Wassenaar Arrangement.
We believe that such activities contribute to improving
the practical implementation of the resolution.

I align my statement with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ham Sang-wook,

Hungary has traditionally been active in the field
of non-proliferation, export controls on sensitive
technologies and materials and, more recently, the fight
against terrorism. That is why we have already taken
various legislative and executive measures to ensure
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004). Furthermore,
we are continually reviewing our policies with a view
to identifying what further action may be necessary.

Mr. Ham Sang-wook: It is a pleasure to address
the Security Council today on behalf the 35 partners
of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). I
would like to discuss the Regime’s efforts and what we
can do together in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

The threat of non-State actors and terrorists using
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), whether nuclear,
chemical or biological, is one of the greatest facing
the international community today. Its scope is not
limited to a specific country or region, but rather has
global ramifications. Non-State actors have already
demonstrated some capability for acquiring and using
WMDs. The chemical weapons used by Da’esh in Syria
and Iraq serve to underscore how important it is for
the international community to broaden and deepen
its understanding of such actors. We clearly have more
work ahead of us if we are to understand how such
actors operate in every area of WMD proliferation.
Building and maintaining WMDs still requires
specialized knowledge and infrastructure. However,
with technology advancing rapidly and opening up
new possibilities, the international community has
an obligation to monitor non-State actors engaging in
proliferation activities, and it should also emphasize
the sharing of relevant information on such groups.
Particular attention should be paid to unstable and
failed States. The possession by such States of WMDs
is obviously exceedingly worrying, since there is a
significant risk that they may end up in the hands of
non-State actors. It is therefore vital to monitor related
equipment and parts of weapons, as well as other
dual-use items that may fall into the hands of unstable
and failed States.
The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) rightly emphasizes assistance and regional and
international cooperation. As its means and capabilities

The MTCR and Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) have been complementing and reinforcing each
other since that milestone resolution’s adoption, in
2004. The resolution provides a binding international
norm under the Charter of the United Nations, and
some of its provisions are directly relevant to the
work of the MTCR. It not only recognizes efforts by
multilateral arrangements such as the MTCR, it also
stipulates that States should establish national export
controls in order to prevent the proliferation of WMDs,
their means of delivery and related materials. There can
be no doubt that the resolution has led to more countries
enacting export control legislation, as we can see from
the comprehensive review report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
For its part, the MTCR has played an important
role since 1987 as the only export control regime for
means of delivery. In 2002 its mandate expanded to
include preventing terrorists from acquiring missiles
and missile technology. Two aspects of its work
are particularly important to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). One is its work on updating the
MTCR technical annex list of controlled items. Thanks
to the efforts of technical experts to keep the list up to
date, the annex serves as an international benchmark
for export controls on means of delivery. A growing
number of non-partners of the MTCR now adhere
to the annex, and it is also cited in certain Security
Council resolutions.
The second significant aspect of the MTCR’s
work is its efforts to engage with non-partners. We are
conducting outreach activities with various entities,
including non-MTCR partner States, international

16-4414347/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

organizations and industry and academic actors. The
Regime hopes to enhance awareness through such
outreach on export controls and to reduce the capacity
gaps between nations.
What can the MTCR and the 1540 Committee
achieve together in the future? The Committee’s report
points out that, despite some progress, it is clear that
significant effort will be needed to address the gaps
in export controls in many States. I believe that the
MTCR can be helpful in two ways. First, it can share
its expertise, experiences and best practices with
States Members of the United Nations through further
exchanges with the 1540 Committee. From the first
contact, in 2005, between our two bodies until the latest,
which occurred last year, we have been talking to each
other, but we still have room for further cooperation.
We would like to continue to participate in the 1540
Committee’s meetings, while the Committee could
also consider taking part in the future in our biennial
technical outreach meetings, in order to deepen our
mutual understanding.
Member States may also find the MTCR’s adherence
policy helpful in implementing the resolution. When
a State declares its full adherence to the MTCR, the
Regime invites it to technical outreach meetings
and provides it with select materials presented at the
MTCR licensing and enforcement experts’ meetings. In
addition, the MTCR meets with adherent States to give
them updates on the Regime, and those countries are
listed on its website and in its public statement. I believe
that becoming an adherent is the easiest and best way
for Member States to improve their implementation of
missile-related export controls. Ultimately, the MTCR
guidelines and resolution 1540 (2004) share the same
goal — stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery worldwide. It is
more important than ever that we cooperate in order to
achieve that common goal.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the MTCR’s
continued support for resolution 1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Song Young-wan.
Mr. Song Young-wan: I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for inviting me to address the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG). This is a welcome opportunity
for the NSG to further strengthen its cooperation
with the United Nations and continue the tradition of
48/83

15/12/2016

consultations with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
As we know, the Council’s adoption of resolution
1540 (2004) was motivated in part by an egregious case
of nuclear proliferation. The discovery of a far-reaching
proliferation network that provided nuclear technology,
expertise and designs to at least three countries revealed
gaps in the international non-proliferation regime that
were exploited by non-State actors. Resolution 1540
(2004) aimed at closing those gaps by obliging all
States to take binding steps to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, by terrorist groups and criminal organizations.
Consequently, the work of the 1540 Committee
and the NSG is complementary and mutually
reinforcing. For its part, the NSG seeks to contribute
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons through the
implementation of two sets of guidelines, the first for the
export of nuclear material, equipment and technology,
and the second for transfers of nuclear-related dual-use
equipment, materials, software and related technology.
The purpose of the NSG guidelines is to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to limit the
risk of such proliferation by controlling transfers that
could contribute to the making of nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices. The guidelines
not only assist NSG participating Governments in
implementing paragraph 3 of resolution 1540 (2004),
but have also found application outside the Group. In
fact, NSG guidelines and control lists increasingly
represent the global standard for nuclear and dual-use
nuclear-related trade. The final document of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons makes reference
to them, and they are cited in the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s Model Additional Protocol.
Moreover, NSG watch lists have been adopted by United
Nations sanctions committees, where they are used
to trigger catch-all controls for shipments to certain
countries. In addition, 15 NSG outreach partners have
harmonized their national controls with the guidelines
and control lists, and several more are in the process
of harmonization. All told, approximately 80 States
Members of the United Nations implement nuclearexport control lists.
Since the key objective of today’s high-level
meeting is to reflect on the practical measures that
Member States and other actors can take to prevent
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

non-State actors from acquiring or using WMDs, let
me simply state the obvious: the NSG guidelines could
be used by any State as part of its efforts to establish
an effective export-control system consistent with
international non-proliferation norms, including the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The NSG
welcomes voluntary adherence to the guidelines by
non-participating Governments and works hard to
ensure that the guidelines and control lists remain
relevant, keep pace with emerging and evolving
technologies and reflect the growing and globalizing
supply chain. In order to promote adherence, the NSG
troika, which is composed of the current, previous and
future Chairs of the Group, engages in outreach with
interested States.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), although the NSG as an organization
is not in a position to provide technical assistance,
40 NSG participating Governments have registered
with the 1540 Committee for the purposes of offering
their expertise and experience to States requesting
assistance. In addition, individual requests for
assistance are circulated to participating Governments
for consideration. Moreover, a number of participating
Governments have outreach programmes in place
that give effect to the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) by further developing and enhancing exportcontrol systems with partner countries. In 2014, the
NSG informed the 1540 Committee of the publication
of a document entitled “Good Practices for the
Implementation of Brokering and Transit/Transhipment
Controls”, authored by Germany with the help and
support of a number of participating Governments. The
document outlines good national practices intended
to assist interested States considering introduction or
further development of national controls on brokering
or transit/transshipment and was published on the 1540
Committee’s website.
The comprehensive review notes that closer
engagement to coordinate activities with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations is
needed to avoid duplication and to focus on areas most
in need of action. The NSG stands ready to engage fully
in productive discussions with the 1540 Committee
and other interested parties in order to achieve our
common goal of strengthening the international
non-proliferation regime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Roux.

S/PV.7837

Mr. Roux: On behalf of INTERPOL, I would like
to commend Spain for convening this timely high-level
open debate. I would also like to thank and congratulate
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), with Spain as its Chair, as well as its
Group of Experts, for their relentless efforts during
the comprehensive review process, crowned by the
production of the final report on the 2016 comprehensive
review and the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).
During the most recent open consultations of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), last June, INTERPOL emphasized that the
threat of the use of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear (CBRN) materials by terrorist groups,
criminals and other non-State actors was real and had
today become one of the most significant challenges
to public safety and security on a global scale. This
alarming reality was affirmed in the final report on the
2016 comprehensive review, which refers to the
“increasing risks of proliferation in relation
to non-State actors arising from developments
in terrorism”.
More disturbingly, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons recently confirmed
that Da’esh had used chemical weapons in Iraq
and developed a programme to make improvised
chemical weapons.
In 2010, in response to the growing concern about
the illicit trafficking in CBRN materials, INTERPOL
launched a comprehensive CBRN terrorism-prevention
and response effort to support its 190 member countries.
Since then, INTERPOL has been supporting its
member countries in countering non-State-actor-based
CBRN threats, in accordance with its mandate and
Constitution. Our activities range from data analysis,
multi-agency capacity-building and countermeasure
programmes, to regional cross-border operations,
resulting in the arrest of traffickers and the seizure of
illegally trafficked CBRN materials.
In a clear sign of committing to sustainably
assisting its 190 member countries in the prevention
of and response to CBRN terrorism, INTERPOL has
identified the following four actionable objectives in
its recently adopted global counter-terrorism strategy:
first, to facilitate intelligence-sharing and threat
analysis among member countries on subjects and
modus operandi linked to CBRN incidents; secondly, to
enhance the capacity of our member countries to prevent

16-4414349/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and respond to CBRN by assisting them in establishing
countermeasure programmes; thirdly, to design and
coordinate cross-border intelligence-led inter-agency
operations to intercept the illicit trafficking in CBRN
materials; and, finally, to maintain and develop strategic
CBRN partnerships on a global scale. INTERPOL
will continue to adopt a dual-track global engagement
policy to maintain and establish sustainable bilateral
partnership frameworks with relevant international
partner agencies and further consolidate its integration
within major relevant multinational frameworks.
Against that backdrop, we were particularly
pleased by the reference made in the final report to
the enhanced cooperation between INTERPOL and
the 1540 Committee. Indeed, INTERPOL has been
regularly exchanging official letters with the 1540
Committee, outlining the terms of their collaboration
and establishing respective points of contact. We
believe that further strengthening of the points-ofcontact network would only benefit the enhancement
of interaction and coordination between the Committee
and international organizations. Since the launch of
INTERPOL’s CBRN capacity, most of the activities
conducted have been supporting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), making INTERPOL an active
1540 assistance provider agency.
In the light of the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), INTERPOL is looking forward to consolidating
and continuing to play its role within the framework of a
strengthened assistance mechanism, a mechanism that
makes resolution 1540 (2004) the main global umbrella
under which relevant activities are given priority, new
initiatives are systematically launched and successful
matchmaking opportunities between donors and
assistance providers ultimately result in concrete and
effective support to member countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Roux
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bekkers.
Mr. Bekkers: A large-scale chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear incident would not just affect the
physical infrastructure of the affected State, but would
also have widely catastrophic implications reaching
beyond national borders. Non-State actors do not act
under the lawful authority of any State, and therefore
do not abide by the same international commitments
that States do. Other delegations have also pointed that
out this morning.
50/83

15/12/2016

Resolution 1540 (2004) addresses that critical gap
in the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
by specifically targeting non-State actors. Through
the years, the resolution has become an important
component of the global security architecture. In order
for Security Council resolutions to remain relevant,
their practical implementation at the national level is
crucial, and that is where regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations remain
extremely valuable. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is the largest regional
security organization, with 57 participating States.
Its comprehensive approach to security encompasses
political, military, economic, environmental and
human aspects. As such, it is ideally placed to address
the needs of its participating States in their national
implementation of the resolution.
As an example of the importance we attach
to resolution 1540 (2004), our quarterly magazine
includes a special section on the resolution — unrelated
to the fact that this high-level debate it being held.
Since 2011, the OSCE has been actively supporting its
participating member States with the implementation
of the resolution. Let me therefore highlight some of the
most important achievements in this field.
First, the OSCE created an informal group of
friends on resolution 1540 (2004), co-chaired by
Spain and Belarus, and appointed a coordinator on
non-proliferation issues.
Secondly, we established a directory of resolution
1540 (2004) points of contact within the OSCE.
Currently, 51 of the 57 participating States have
officially appointed their point of contact to the OSCE.
The directory has been shared with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
Thirdly, annual meetings of the point of contacts
were held in 2014 and 2015. The first point-of-contact
training in the OSCE area, held in June in Kaliningrad,
was hosted by the Russian Federation, which the
Russian representative referred to this morning.
Fourthly, in order to directly support the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts, as well as to
effectively utilize the expertise and resources of
both organizations, in 2011 the OSCE and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
concluded a memorandum of understanding. This year
we signed a cost-sharing agreement with the United
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific.
Fifthly, and most important, the OSCE, together
with the 1540 Committee and UNODA, directly assisted
15 OSCE participating States in the development of
their national implementation action plans on the
resolution. Those plans have proved to be a helpful
national coordination tool, as well as a transparent and
effective mechanism for obtaining donor support. We
will continue to do so in the OSCE.
In conclusion, the OSCE believes that strengthening
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and in
particular strengthening the role of the 1540 Committee
and its Group of Experts, could positively contribute to
preventing non-State actors from obtaining weapons
of mass destruction. Therefore, at the formal open
consultations here in New York, we have presented
our recommendations in order to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We very
much look forward to the final report from the 2016
comprehensive review.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on an issue of serious concern
for the international community. We also thank the
briefers for their very significant input.
We welcome the adoption today of resolution
2325 (2016), which aims to enhance the architecture
of resolution 1540 (2004) by promoting its full
implementation through increased cooperation,
assistance, transparency and outreach mechanisms. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their means of delivery to non-State actors continues
to constitute one of the biggest and most serious threats
to international peace and security today.

S/PV.7837

weapons of mass destruction to terrorist activities and
to maintain effective domestic controls to prevent WMD
proliferation. Through the years, India has enacted
effective laws and regulations and has institutionalized
an array of administrative mechanisms to prohibit
WMD access to non-State actors and terrorists. After
the adoption in 2004 of resolution 1540 (2004), India
took additional steps to further strengthen its existing
legislative and regulatory mechanism for exercising
control over WMDs and their means of delivery.
Meeting new proliferation challenges requires
new approaches for evolving a more cooperative and
consensual international security order that effectively
addresses genuine proliferation concerns and
differentiates between responsible States whose actions
strengthen non-proliferation and those that weaken the
realization of those objectives.
India is party to all 13 universal instruments
accepted as benchmarks for a State’s commitments to
combat international terrorism. India welcomes the entry
into force of the 2005 amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM)
this year. Alongside the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and
resolution 1540 (2004), the amended CPPNM would
strengthen the global nuclear security architecture and
enhance international cooperation and coordination.
As we continue efforts to achieve universal
adherence and reporting to those instruments, we must
not forget the urgent task of closing out negotiations on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
at the United Nations, which has been under discussion
since 1996. Such a delay hints at a lack of collective
will on an existentialist issue that has become the most
serious threat to world peace since 1945.

As a victim of terrorism for more than three decades,
India is cognizant of the catastrophic dangers that the
transfer of WMDs to non-State actors and terrorists
could entail. It is imperative that the international
community come together to eliminate the risks related
to sensitive materials and technologies falling into the
hands of terrorists and non-State actors.

India’s Global Centre for Nuclear Energy
Partnership has steadily strengthened its portfolio of
programmes and activities, with a particular focus
on nuclear security, and has conducted more than 30
international and regional programmes involving more
than 300 participants from approximately 30 countries.
In February 2017, India will host in New Delhi the
Implementation and Assessment Group meeting of the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

On its part, India is fully conscious of the
responsibilities that come with the possession of
advanced technologies and is committed to maintaining
effective law-based controls to prevent the transfer of

India has supported the general objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution is in line with
the General Assembly resolution on measures to
prevent terrorists from gaining access to weapons of

16-4414351/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

mass destruction, which was initially presented by
India in 2002 and has been adopted by consensus every
year since then — and is currently being co-sponsored
by more than 70 Member States. That broad support
reflects the ongoing concerns of the international
community with respect to the risks posed by terrorists
gaining access to WMDs and sensitive materials
and technologies. The resolution enumerates a number
of measures at the national and international levels to
address that threat.
India has always expressed its readiness to offer
assistance to other countries in capacity-building and
in fulfilling their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004) and has organized several regional workshops
in that regard. The resolution has contributed to greater
awareness among States of the need for effective measures
at the national level to prevent terrorists and non-State
actors from gaining access to sensitive materials and
technologies. The monitoring of its implementation by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is facilitated by States reporting
their implementation measures.
Providing assistance and cooperation to States
that request it is a key element of the implementation
process. Such assistance programmes should be suited
to national or regional requirements.
We welcome the fact that resolution 2325 (2016),
adopted today, focuses on enhanced cooperation with
other terrorist sanction regimes and hope that it will
lead to strengthening international cooperation and
prevention mechanisms.
India has contributed to international efforts
in enhancing nuclear safety and security standards
through various United Nations initiatives. The
international community should continue to exercise
the utmost vigilance to prevent terrorist groups
from gaining access to WMDs and related materials
and technologies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Resolution
2325 (2016), adopted today, is a most significant and
historic resolution, co-sponsored by more than 60
United Nations States Members, including my country,
and is the most noteworthy follow-up to resolution 1540
(2004). We commend the immense progress achieved,
but acknowledge the many strides still to be made. We
52/83

15/12/2016

find that countries vary in their response and ability to
adhere to the resolution’s expectations. My delegation
therefore proposes the following measures.
First of all, we must exercise strict control over the
implementation of national commitments, since not all
States execute evenly the commitments.
Secondly, we must strengthen our close and
continuous interaction with both the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) as well as with wider United Nations membership,
through sharing technologies and experiences that are
not only positive but also negative, so that we may
avoid repetition in other countries or regions. There
is an obvious need for greater outreach by the 1540
Committee and its experts to not only support its
implementation but also to enhance capacity-building
to enable countries to formulate their long-term national
action plans for achieving the aims of resolution 1540
(2004) with enhanced domestic legislation, compliance
with other related non-proliferation regimes and
counter-terrorism instruments. Focus should also be
placed on related trade controls; illicit trafficking,
non-proliferation and disarmament; and international
counter-terrorism instruments. We therefore support
the idea of developing inter-agency coordination with
proper frameworks and mechanisms.
Thirdly, it is evident that we will also need to
work closely with national points of contact in each
county, as well as focus on strengthening a network
of such contacts. As funding for travel will be
limited, innovative strategies will have to be adapted.
Since scientific achievements in the nuclear field are
accelerating rapidly, I wish to highlight Kazhakstani
President Nursultan Nazarbayev’s initiative to establish
a United Nations register of scientific developments
leading to the creation and advancement of weapons
of mass destruction, which would track those negative
scientific discoveries. Much progress can also be
achieved through the creation of online training
modules, to be offered on the 1540 Committee website
and available in various languages for different
categories of Government personnel, such as lawmakers, executives, law enforcement officials, border
control agents and criminal prosecutors.
Fourthly, the 2016 review process has proved the
need for identifying and articulating assistance for
country-specific needs. Hence, we recommend greater
outreach in Africa, the Asia-Pacific region, the Middle
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

East and Latin America, in a true spirit of understanding
and partnership among countries.
Fifthly, such collective action would also imply
working closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and other control, monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms, such as the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other entities.
As incoming Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, we
are ready to substantively implement provisions on
enhancing ongoing cooperation among the 1540
Committee, the 1267 Committee and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
In conclusion, we call for multilateral confidence
and trust in order to create a powerful, global
anti-nuclear movement and prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We need to rise above our
national interests when it comes to the common good
for all people and the planet.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
First of all, we would like to commend the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative
of Spain, and all members of the 1540 Committee for
their dedicated work on the comprehensive review
process. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Spain for its excellent work during its term in the
Security Council, including promoting the objectives of
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism.
We cannot agree more that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery constitute serious threats to international
peace and security. Those threats are continually
evolving and include the use of developments in
science, technology and international commerce by
non-State actors for proliferation purposes. As proof of
that new phenomenon, we have confirmed information
by the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition

S/PV.7837

of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism
that toxic chemicals were used as weapons in Syria by
both the Syrian Government and Da’esh, and there are
new allegations that terrorists used chemical weapons
in Iraq.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the fundamental
pillar in the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We welcome the report of the 1540
Committee on the comprehensive review, as well as
resolution 2325 (2016), which Estonia also co-sponsored.
We are particularly pleased that the resolution reflects
new and emerging risks and developments in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
stresses the need to continue enhancing cooperation
between the 1540 committee and other relevant Security
Council Committees, such as the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
It is also important that the resolution underlines the
importance of a dialogue between the 1540 Committee
and Member States, including visits to States, and points
out the involvement and crucial role of civil society,
industry and academia in the effective implementation
of the resolution.
Estonia attaches great importance to its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destructions, as evidenced through its implementation
of the resolution 1540 (2004). We support multilateral
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
treaties and regimes and we are commited to their
full implementation. We will continue to contribute
to a number of global and regional non-proliferation
initiatives, such as the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation Security
Initiative. We will also continue supporting the
resolution by sharing our experience and knowledge in
the area of export control of dual-use items.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Estonia’s
readiness to proactively implement the outcome of the
2016 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): The threat that the world faces
today from the proliferation of weapons of mass

16-4414353/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

destruction to non-State actors is greater than ever.
Advances in science and technology, combined with the
evolving nature of terrorism, present challenges never
seen before.
For the people of Israel, the scale of the danger posed
by the combination of terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction is not an abstract notion. Israeli citizens
have lived under conventional and unconventional
threats for decades, and continue to face the threat of
terrorism on a daily basis. Therefore, Israel understands
the grave nature of that threat and views the prevention
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors as a matter of paramount importance.
The situation in our troubled region is further
aggravated by the reckless actions of certain States that
increase the threat of terrorists acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. For its part, Iran continues to promote
subversive activities throughout the region through
its support for terrorist organizations, which includes
supplying weapons, financial and political support and
military training, while in Syria the Al-Assad regime
continues its unrelenting use of chemical weapons,
brutally attacking and maiming its own population. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
concluded that the Syrian regime was responsible for
four chemical weapons attacks on civilians.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism report (see
S/2016/738) shows a persistent and worrying pattern of
using chemical weapons. Let us be clear — the Syrian
regime’s use of chemical weapons is neither an isolated
incident nor an aberration of conduct. Those are not the
actions of an unruly individual; chemicals are a weapon
of choice for the regime and reflect a modus operandi
of the Syrian authorities, which have set up specific
military units for those purposes. The systematic
tactical use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad
regime has been emulated by terrorist organizations and
incentivized non-State actors to obtain the material and
know-how required for the production and use of those
horrific capabilities. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
report’s findings leaves no room for mistake. It should
be clear to everyone sitting in the Chamber today that
the primary responsibility for the widespread use of
chemical weapons in Syria lies squarely at the feet of
the Al-Assad regime.
We have all seen the full extent of the vile actions
of that regime. In the past few days, Al-Assad’s troops,
54/83

15/12/2016

supported by Iranian-backed militias, have been coldbloodedly executing innocent women and children
in Aleppo and preventing frightened civilians from
escaping to freedom. Throughout the past five years,
the Al-Assad regime has been committing unspeakable
atrocities all across Syria — executing, starving and
besieging its own people, with the help of Iran and its
terror proxy, the terrorist organization, Hizbullah.
The dire consequences of Al-Assad’s actions are
clear. Not only are they responsible for the erosion of
the absolute prohibition against the use of chemical
weapons, but they also create further incentives for
others to violate that prohibition. The international
community must unequivocally condemn the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and act with resolve in order
to address that issue.
Against that troubling backdrop, now more than
ever it is imperative for the international community
to step up its efforts to prevent the spread and use of
weapons of mass destruction. Israel views resolution
1540 (2004) as an essential tool in our collective
efforts. Each country’s implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) will help protect other countries from
potential proliferators, including terrorists, by
ensuring that they do not have access to the world’s
most dangerous weapons. In the reality we are facing
today, in which States and terrorist organizations alike
use weapons of mass destruction, we have a shared
duty to increase efforts to better monitor weapon-ofmass-destruction-related materials and ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Israel is committed to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and co-sponsored resolution
2325 (2016), adopted here today. As detailed in the
reports submitted by Israel to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004 and in 2012,
Israel has taken wide-ranging legal and practical steps
intended to curb proliferation. Israel will continue to act
determinedly to support global efforts to eradicate the
threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Spanish presidency for
organizing this important debate.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The involvement of non-State actors in wars and
conflicts has increased lately and had a horrendous
effect on civilian populations, most especially women,
children, the elderly and the disabled. Non-State
actors use weapons of mass destruction (WMD) with
impunity and in total lawlessness, showing little or no
regard for civilian immunity, proportionality or the
distinction between combatants and non-combatants.
The staggering number of refugees and forced
migrants worldwide bears witness today to the
devastation wrought by WMDs and frightfully potent
conventional weapons.
My delegation reiterates the Holy See’s consistent
and firm opposition to the production and use of
weapons of mass destruction. Any act or weapon
that aims indiscriminately to destroy entire cities
or extensive areas, together with their inhabitants,
is contrary to all international humanitarian law and
all civilizational ideals, and merits unequivocal,
unqualified and unhesitating condemnation.
The Holy See notes with grave concern that
technological advances in the destructive power of
weapons systems produce ever more frightening
catastrophes for innocent civilian populations. Just a
little more than a week ago, Pope Francis observed:
“We say the words ‘No more war!’, but at the same
time we manufacture weapons and sell them to
those who are fighting”.
This gifting and selling of arms take place at
different levels. Some States supply arms to client
States even in the knowledge that they will be used
to perpetrate mass atrocities, suppress fundamental
human rights and turn back the development of entire
peoples and nations. Transactions are often carried
out through international crime syndicates, which,
as Pope Francis stated last week, is “an easy way to
grow rich, but the price is very steep: blood”. Fighting
and defeating the illegal and criminal arms trade is
fundamental to preventing non-State actors from
possessing and using weapons of mass destruction
and thus to prevent the atrocities they would commit
with those weapons. Strengthening relevant laws and
conventions at the multilateral, bilateral and national
levels is a necessary step in the right direction.
Business as usual with regard to policies concerning
weapons of mass destruction and all weapons systems
must be replaced with a new global ethic. Profits,
geopolitical advantage at any cost and the logic of fear

S/PV.7837

and mistrust must be replaced by addressing the wider
security, political, economic and cultural dynamics that
lead State and non-State actors alike to seek security,
legitimacy and power in the production of weapons,
rather than in expending their resources to promote
socioeconomic development, diplomacy, political
participation and respect for fundamental human rights.
The Holy See has repeatedly called on weaponsproducing nations to severely limit and control the
manufacture and sale of weapons and ammunition to
unstable countries and regions of the world where the
likelihood of their illegal use, or their falling into the
hands of non-State actors, is a real and present danger.
The proliferation of weapons, regardless of whether
they are weapons of mass destruction or merely
conventional, simply aggravates situations of conflict
and results in unimaginable human suffering and
material costs, profoundly undermining development
and the search for lasting peace.
Non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament
underpin global security, respect for human rights
and sustainable development. Without such principles,
the achievements of the much vaunted 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development would be in serious
jeopardy. Without them, catastrophes that could have
been prevented will continue to occur. Without greater
international and regional cooperation, in particular,
among weapons manufacturing States, to control and
limit the movement of weapons of mass destruction, it
is simply an illusion to speak of a global strategy to stop
the proliferation of such weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First of all, I thank Spain
for its efforts in convening today’s meeting. We also
welcome the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).
Slovenia also aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today. I
would now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Slovenia supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
strengthen global capacity to prevent, detect and
respond to the use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) for terrorist purposes. The response to that
threat must be coherent and comprehensive by using
all instruments at our disposal for effective action, as

16-4414355/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

also emphasized in this year’s review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I will
briefly touch upon the practical measures adopted by
my country to prevent non-State actors from accessing
WMD technology.
Slovenia submitted its fourth national report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) last month
and joined the Group of Friends of resolution 1540
(2004) to help to encourage greater transparency in the
resolution’s implementation. We believe that a regional
approach prevents duplication and overlapping,
creates synergies and enhances the effectiveness of
a response compared to an individual response. Due
to its geographic position, the region of the Western
Balkans will remain in Da’esh’s sights as a possible
transit and logistics route between Europe and Syria or
Iraq, including for the trafficking of weapons of mass
destruction and that is why it remains in our particular
focus. As a practical measure, we have expanded the
Slovenian-led Western Balkan Counter Terrorism
Initiative, which links individual initiatives in that area
with the integrity of the integrative internal security
governance concept, which includes measures against
serious and organized crime, as well as those on
border security.

15/12/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in today’s high-level open
debate on stopping the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. From the outset,
we would like to thank Spain for its leadership and the
inclusive approach it has taken to the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004). We congratulate
Spain on compiling a thorough report and were pleased
to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016) adopted today.
Our initial assessment of the report is that it makes a
number of important conclusions and recommendations.
We support the Committee’s continued efforts to ensure
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
by working with international, regional and subregional
organizations. We agree that the Committee should also
work closely with civil society, industry and academia.
The report and the resolution adopted today rightly
underline the potential proliferation risks posed by
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce and the threat posed by non-State actors in
accessing weapons of mass destruction.

As a country with an operating nuclear power
plant, a research reactor, a central storage facility for
institutional waste and more than 1,000 sources of
ionizing radiation, Slovenia attaches great importance
to nuclear security. Several ministries in my country
are involved in nuclear security matters, all in the
first line of defence against the illicit trafficking of
radioactive and nuclear materials. We highly value the
central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in the global nuclear security framework. Slovenia is
a member the Board of Governors for the third time
since our independence. We also welcome the entry
into force of the Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, which
specifically refers to the protection of nuclear facilities
and material in use, storage, as well as transport and
provides for expanded cooperation among States.

It was therefore disappointing, indeed difficult
to comprehend, that the recent Review Conference
of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) failed
to agree an intersessional programme, which would
have included the review of new developments in
science and technology and their potential dual-use
applications. Progress in such fields will not wait
for the decision-making processes of Member States
parties and the threat of use of biological weapons
is a reality that we all face. Recalling the advice of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs to
us during the June consultations on resolution 1540
(2004), BWC States parties did however step up their
thinking on preparedness and response. Australia’s
skills training course held in October under the
auspices of the Secretary-General’s mechanism was
timely, strengthening regional capacity to respond to
potential use of a biological weapon. Such mechanisms
are useful in meeting the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004), particularly given their strong deterrence value.

In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Council
that Slovenia will continue to implement resolution
1540 (2004) as well as the recommendations of the
comprehensive review and we call upon all States to
do the same.

We believe that the BWC Review Conference
outcome does not in fact reflect the desire of States
parties to strengthen the Convention, but we need to
carefully consider its implications and ensure that the
BWC continues to be the key multilateral reference

56/83

16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

point for combating the real and growing risk of the
use of biological weapons. We equally need to note the
findings of the comprehensive review report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and measures
relating to biological weapons.
We have been similarly hard pressed in addressing
the threat posed by the use of chemical weapons,
including by non-State actors. Prevarication and lack of
consensus on issues can only send the wrong message to
potential proliferators. We were pleased, therefore, that
the Council unanimously agreed to extend the mandate
of the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Once again, Australia commends Spain for its
exemplary leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
in carrying out the comprehensive review. We look
forward to welcoming Spain, as outgoing Chair of
the Committee, to the next Australia Group meeting
to address participants on the capacity-building and
assistance measures available under resolution 1540
(2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Spain for its efforts in the Security Council over the
past two years.
(spoke in English)
Today’s open debate on reinforcing the preventive
system to avoid the use of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorists is a great opportunity to stress the key
importance of this topic to our common security. We
commend Spain for its strong engagement on resolution
1540 (2004), including by establishing the Group of
Friends of the resolution. The Group has proved to be
an important forum contributing to steering ideas and
soliciting views on the comprehensive review. Slovakia
is proud to be one of its founding members.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make some remarks in my national capacity.
There is no doubt that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is a major global threat
to international peace and security. It should therefore
be our utmost priority to avoid and prevent weapons

S/PV.7837

of mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorists
and other non-State actors. According to the non-profit
The Investigative Project on Terrorism, the deadly
toll of terrorism around the globe has jumped nearly
eightfold in the past five years. A study has found that
an average of nearly 30,000 people per year have been
killed by terrorists since 2010, when the death toll from
terrorism was about 3,200. The authors of the study
say that the exponential increase shows two troubling
trends: more attacks are taking place and tend to be
deadlier than ever.
Furthermore, while current terrorist attacks have
been horrific, security experts fear the fallout we
could see if any of the terrorist groups were to carry
out a major attack using any type of weapon of mass
destruction. It is possible. We already know that
ambitious, violent groups and individuals — such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
and its affiliates — are trying to find the materials they
need for an attack using weapons of mass destruction.
Preventing them from doing so is challenging but highly
necessary. It is not just a matter of strong domestic
controls over those technologies. It is a matter of
improved and strengthened international cooperation.
In that regard, I wish to highlight the importance,
centrality and contribution of resolution 1540 (2004).
It has become a significant component of the robust
global security architecture and an effective tool
in tackling the non-proliferation challenges related
to non-State actors. The comprehensive review
process has provided us with the opportunity to work
together towards its enhanced functioning. We highly
welcome the conclusions and recommendations of the
comprehensive review report. It is a firm basis for the
non-proliferation agenda in order to achieve the full
implementation of the resolution. We also welcome
today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) as
a further solid contribution to global non-proliferation
efforts. Slovakia is proud to be one of the sponsors.
Three words — prevention, awareness and
assistance — are key to our efforts. Based on the
comprehensive review, we see it as essential in the
upcoming period to intensify our efforts to prevent
non-State actors from exploiting new technologies. We
should also reach out to industry and civil society to raise
awareness and create true partnerships in safeguarding
sensitive items. Countries with difficulties in national
implementation and reporting should have access to
adequate and tailored assistance.

16-4414357/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15/12/2016

I am pleased to inform the Council that Slovakia
has submitted to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) its updated 2016 national
report, together with a detailed, up-to-date matrix.
Both documents reflect the current state of domestic
laws and regulations for the implementation of the
resolution. Since issuing our last national report,
we have introduced a range of legislative, executive
and enforcement measures. Through the adoption of
necessary legislation on dual-use items, we have further
strengthened our national export control system.

international and regional organizations. In that regard,
we underscore the importance of a comprehensive
approach to preventing the proliferation of WMD,
which in our view must be based on strengthening all
non-proliferation regimes, including the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the Chemical
Weapons Convention; the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
their Destruction; resolution 1540 (2004), and effective
national export control systems.

In addition, Slovakia also contributes to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through its
participation in multilateral initiatives, such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. Within
the Global Initiative framework and in close cooperation
with our United States and Canadian partners and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
January 2017 Slovakia will co-host, in Bratislava, a
legal framework workshop entitled “Vigilant Marmot”.
The workshop consists of three goals: first, addressing
challenges in adopting and updating national legal
frameworks for nuclear security; secondly, highlighting
obligations under international legal instruments
against radiological and nuclear terrorism; and
thirdly, considering practical models for implementing
those obligations.

We note the timely and relevant nature of resolution
1540 (2004), which is a unique instrument providing
a comprehensive approach to the non-proliferation of
WMD in the context of non-proliferation to non-State
actors, including terrorists. We support the outcome
of the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which is aimed at increasing
the effectiveness of national efforts in that area and
optimizing the interaction of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) with participants in
the process, first and foremost States and international
and regional organizations.

To conclude, let me assure those present that
Slovakia remains fully committed to its disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations and stands ready
to continue to assist the international community in
combating proliferation threats and challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Ms. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
The States members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) are convinced of the exceptional
importance of the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), their means of
delivery and related technologies and materials. Today,
as the issue grows in relevance it is becoming a priority
goal of the world community in general and regional
organizations in particular.
We are convinced that it will be possible to
effectively countering the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction only through the joint efforts of the
international community as a whole and coordinated
actions and measures undertaken by States and
58/83

The States members of CIS believe it important
to fully and effectively implement all provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) through voluntary plans of
action on the implementation of the resolution. States
members of CIS cooperate in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and are open to further
cooperation with the 1540 Committee and the relevant
specialized international and regional organizations,
as needed.
We are convinced that through the joint efforts of CIS
and international organizations, under the coordinating
role of the 1540 Committee, we will be able to increase
the efficiency of our implementation of the resolution.
CIS member States welcome innovative approaches,
in particular conducting regional training courses for
national contact points and peer reviews of resolution
implementation with the aim of exchanging experiences
and national practices. CIS member States, noting the
generally positive trend with respect to implementation
of provisions, underscore the importance of remaining
up to date as we take into account the specific features
and real expert and financial capacities of each country.
We stand ready to cooperate with all interested
parties in strengthening the international weapons of
mass destruction non-proliferation regime.
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Urruela Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We are living in complex times overshadowed
by the terrorist threat. It is imperative that all Member
States fulfil their obligation of preventing the
proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related material, as well as their
acquisition by non-State actors, and ensuring that
States have the necessary resources and capacities to
meet those obligations. As we have seen, the threat of
terrorism has no respect for borders and no country or
region is immune from a potential attack.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is the bedrock of the
international non-proliferation regime. We wish to
underscore in particular its preventive and cooperative
nature as it seeks to bolster adherence to its provisions
in the area of non-proliferation, without downplaying
its direct link to compliance on the part of all States
with the obligations emanating from the other pillars
of disarmament, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
Guatemala is firmly committed to full compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004). In addition to having
submitted our third report and updated our matrix,
as required under resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006), Guatemala has requested technical assistance
from the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) to develop a national action plan for the
implementation of the resolution. Various relevant
legislative steps are also under way. Last month,
members of the 1540 Committee’s Group of Experts
paid their first visit to my country to help us begin
drafting the national action plan. Representatives of
various governmental bodies met with the Panel and
together identified the key elements to be included in
the plan.
The recently completed comprehensive review
process of resolution 1540 (2004) identified areas where
implementation of the resolution can be improved. It
also recognized some elements and practices that are
already being implemented, such as the important
role being played by the Group of Experts in terms
of training. While we would have preferred a more
ambitious and far-reaching outcome of the review, we
would like to highlight some of the recommendations
contained in the report, which we think represent a step
in the right direction.

S/PV.7837

The universal, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the resolution will be possible only
if all Member States play a central role and have the
resources to do so. In terms of ​​assistance, during the
open formal consultations that took place in June,
Guatemala, like other delegations, recommended
that the Committee expand its role beyond that of
matchmaking, going so far as to put together its own
assistance and capacity-building programmes for
States. In that regard, we welcome the invitation to
the Committee to develop, together with relevant
international organizations, projects to help States meet
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
In addition, we welcome the decision to pursue
the regional approach in general and to continue to
strengthen and foster communication and cooperation
with specialized regional and international bodies in
order to achieve full implementation of the resolution.
We welcome in particular the role played by the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean and
the role played by the Organization of American States
in assisting States that seek their support in establishing
national action plans, bringing their legislation into line
with the resolution and building capacity in various
relevant Government bodies, among others.
With regard to the Committee’s resources and
administrative structure, we regret that it has not
been possible to make progress in strengthening the
special political mission that supports the Committee’s
work. We hope that the Committee can soon reach
agreement on this important issue, in particular given
the success of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
Finally, the best way to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to stop them from
falling into the hands of non-State actors is to ensure
that they no longer exist. An important first step is their
legal prohibition; the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention are examples
of how that can be done. However, the worst and most
deadly weapons, which imperil the very existence of
humankind — nuclear weapons — are the only weapons
of mass destruction that have not been prohibited. Faced
with this unacceptable risk, my country is committed
to furthering multilateral efforts currently under way
to begin negotiations on a legally binding instrument to
prohibit nuclear weapons.

16-4414359/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending the delegation of Spain for convening this
meeting and for its excellent leadership in facilitating
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the preparation of the
comprehensive review report. We also welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).
Ethiopia has been taking all the necessary measures
to implement resolution 1540 (2004), including by
strengthening the legal and administrative framework
to prohibit the manufacture, acquisition, possession,
development, transport, transfer or use of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. However, we note
with great concern the threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to international peace
and security and to humankind. No doubt advances
in science and technology and innovation increase
the possibility of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors, as indicated in the
comprehensive review report.
Ethiopia views the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction under the agenda of the
1540 Committee from the broader aspect of the total
ban and elimination of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
The objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) could be best
achieved through gradual control and the reduction
of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, leading
towards a total elimination and ban of weapons of mass
destruction. It is to be recalled that the first resolution
adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 1 (I)) had
the objective of eliminating national armaments, atomic
weapons and all other major weapons adaptable to mass
destruction. Seventy years after the establishment of
the United Nations, nuclear weapons remain one of the
weapons of mass destruction for which there exists no
customary or conventional international law prohibiting
their use.
It is imperative for the international community,
including the Security Council, to work towards the
adoption of a comprehensive and universal legal
framework on the prohibition of the production and
use or the total ban of nuclear weapons and their means
of delivery. Much more needs to be done to ensure
the universal accession to and full implementation of
the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical
60/83

15/12/2016

Weapons Convention. Such measures will significantly
decrease and eliminate the risk of their proliferation
into the hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups.
Ethiopia welcomes the progress registered in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) since
the last comprehensive review in 2011. Ethiopia
also welcomes the convening of the first regional
assistance conference in Addis Ababa in April.
The use of such regional meetings as a platform for
matchmaking between States and assistance providers
could be further strengthened to establish an effective
international cooperation framework. In this regard,
Ethiopia welcomes the identification of a set of
recommendations in the comprehensive review report,
including recommendations for the Committee to adopt
a regional assistance approach, including through
the holding of regional and subregional assistance
conferences. We further encourage members of the
Security Council and relevant actors to work toward the
full implementation of those recommendations. In our
view, this would contribute to the achievement of the
objectives set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
I wish to conclude by reiterating Ethiopia’s
continued commitment to contribute our share for
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
recommendations outlined in the comprehensive review
report and the broader objective of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union. I will read out
a shortened version of my statement, in view of time
constraints. My full statement will be available via
PaperSmart and on Twitter.
Let me begin by paying tribute to the energy,
leadership and vision of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
for the way he has structured the work on this issue.
We also pay tribute to the energy and the work of his
Deputy Permanent Representative, his staff and the
Group of Experts for their outstanding work.
The open debate we are having today is a fitting
manner to close the comprehensive review of 1540
(2004). Today’s debate illustrates the inclusive way
in which Spain has conducted the review. We have
engaged all Member States, both the members of
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Council and the non-members of the Council in
the General Assembly. This was a best practice and
should be followed by all of us. The great number of
co-sponsors, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
is a testament to the effective way you, Mr. President,
have handled this.
I would also like to underline the statement made
by the representative of Italy. Realizing the goals of the
resolution is of crucial importance in the coming period
and, together with Italy, during the split term 2017/2018
year in the Security Council, we are committed to
working hard on the realization of these goals. Let
me make three points in this context with regard to
implementation, nuclear security and the threat of
biological weapons.
First, with regard to the need for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we
really need it on a global scale and we need it to be
comprehensive. We need it to be comprehensive by
Member States, but also by international and regional
organizations and industry. With so many actors, we
need coordination to ensure efficient and effective
implementation and to prevent overlap or competition
by different organizations. In that regard, the work
done by the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
is indispensable.
Furthermore, at the national level, we have a great
instrument at our disposal: the national action plans.
They help improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of technical assistance and international cooperation.
It is a truly forward-looking instrument that will help
us put more emphasis on action rather than reporting.
We therefore strongly encourage Member States to use
national action plans.
My second point concerns nuclear security. We are
all aware of the horrendous effect that a terrorist attack
using nuclear or radiological weapons would have. In
order to address such a threat, nuclear security is key.
It is a prime example whereby the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) can count on a solid international
organization. Of course, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has a crucial role to play in that
regard. We need close cooperation between the IAEA,
Member States and the 1540 Committee to strengthen
nuclear security worldwide. The outcome of the Nuclear
Security Summit in March sets an ambitious goal of
how the ensure nuclear security. Let us work together
to make that a reality.

S/PV.7837

My third point concerns biological weapons.
The possibility of a biological attack by non-State
actors is real, and we need to address that threat
more comprehensively and urgently than ever. The
international framework needs to be strengthened. It
should be updated given the rapid pace of technological
development in the biological sciences. Resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted today, provides a good
platform for making progress in that regard. We therefore
strongly encourage all partners to integrate that fully in
their efforts to implement today’s resolution.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our deep thanks to
Spain for its outstanding effort and inclusive approach
with regard to the review. It led to outstanding results
and sets an example with regard to substance and
process. And, together with Italy, we stand ready to
offer our full support to the incoming Chair, Bolivia,
for the swift and effective implementation of this very
important resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the invitation to participate in this open
debate, and I congratulate the Spanish presidency on
its outstanding leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the
past two years.
Peru reiterates its commitment to and full support
for the hard work of the Security Council to promote
dialogue and cooperation to confront the threat posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their delivery systems. The adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic milestone in
addressing the new threat to international peace and
security in the context of the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons among non-State
actors, in particular terrorist groups. In keeping with its
long-standing traditional approach, Peru co-sponsored
that resolution because it believes that we must act
urgently towards promoting the universalization and
comprehensive implementation of multilateral treaties
aimed at preventing the proliferation of WMDs and
ensuring that States implement effective national
legislation allowing them to check the unlawful transfer
of that category of weapons, their related components
and delivery systems.
More than ever, States need to strengthen measures
to prevent the financing of prohibited activities related

16-4414361/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems
and related materials, as well as maintain an account
of the quantity and physical protection of components
related to weapons of mass destruction, thereby
ensuring security with regard to their production, use,
storage and transport.
My country has fulfilled its commitments
concerning nuclear security, radiological security and
the physical protection of nuclear materials and has
adopted a number of administrative and penal measures
aimed at the effective implementation of the measures
contained in resolution 1540 (2004). It has also
initiated a technical assistance project with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
headquartered in Lima, to implement resolution 1540
(2004). In that vein, Peru has rigorously adapted
its internal legislation to the standards established
in resolution 1540 (2004), as we have shown in the
submitted reports on our level of compliance with
the resolution.
We note with concern the existence of non-State
actors attempting to develop, obtain, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems to
advance their interests. We welcome the fact that
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
has created a dynamic of cooperation and prevention
among States, primarily identifying ways for greater
and better scientific cooperation and technology
transfer, and specifying in particular the role of civil
society, the scientific and academic communities,
private enterprise and non-governmental organizations
in the areas of capacity-building and delegation of the
obligations assumed by States in the framework of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, my delegation emphasizes that the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
task that requires the participation of the international
community, in general. I reaffirm Peru’s strong and
constant commitment to preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation
joins others in thanking you, Sir, for convening
this timely and relevant open debate under the item
“Preventing catastrophe: A global agenda for stopping
62/83

15/12/2016

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors”.
My delegation welcomes and appreciates the
leadership demonstrated by Spain as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and as the facilitator of the 1540 comprehensive
review process this year. South Africa is looking
forward to the release of the report that we hope will
strengthen the resolution and provide an added impetus
in tackling the challenge of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). Allow me to share South
Africa’s perspective on the theme before us.
South Africa is of the view shared by the majority
of States Members that have expressed grave concern
about the catastrophic consequences of use or the
threat of the use of weapons of mass destruction,
including by non-State actors. South Africa reaffirms
that no cause could ever justify the use of WMDs
anywhere, by anyone or under any circumstances. In
that context, since the dawn of our democracy in 1994,
South Africa has remained steadfast in its commitment
to muitilateralism in addressing peace and security
challenges facing the global community, including the
horizontal and vertical proliferation of WMDs and their
means of delivery. South Africa reiterates its view that,
given the existential threats that I have described and
that are succinctly outlined in the concept paper (see
S/2016/1013, annex), the only guarantee that WMDs
will never be used by anyone is their total elimination
and the legally binding assurances that they will
never be produced again. We therefore encourage all
Member States to participate constructively in the
United Nations Conference to begin in 2017, which will
negotiate a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons.
The global threats and challenges of the use and
continued existence of WMDs can be addressed in
a balanced, non-discriminatory and comprehensive
manner within the relevant multilateral instruments
and organizations, including those covered by
resolution 1540 (2004). However, that requires the clear
commitment and necessary political will of all States
to faithfully fulfil their obligations in a non-selective
manner. Furthermore, while dealing with the challenges
posed by WMDs, it is imperative that no warranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
States Members, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that context, the opportunities
provided by such technologies, for example in the
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and particularly in such areas as food security, public
health and clean energy, cannot be overlooked.
Regarding the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), over the years South Africa has strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focusing on WMDs and their means
of delivery, which includes the establishment of the
Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction, whose role is to coordinate the national
implementation of our international WMD obligations
and regulations, and to monitor compliance across all
relevant stakeholders. The Council has also played
an invaluable role in assisting countries of our region
and beyond in strengthening their national controls,
legislation and capacity over sensitive items that may
contribute to the development of WMDs.

S/PV.7837

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Spanish presidency’s initiative
to convene this meeting and expresses its appreciation
for Spain’s work as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Morocco welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), which the
Kingdom co-sponsored.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to international peace and security. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares that conviction with the
international community, which remains concerned
about the threat of terrorism and the risk of non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction or their
means of delivery, developing them, trafficking them
or using them.

South Africa’s experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that the
challenges of WMD proliferation can be overcome
by, first, strengthening national legislation and
implementation capabilities, including export controls;
secondly, building capacities and strengthening
technical expertise, especially in developing countries,
including in Africa; thirdly, strengthening international
cooperation
with
other
related
international
organizations and agencies; and fourthly, strengthening
coordination with regional organizations, such as the
African Union, that play a critical role in supporting the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Ultimately,
South Africa’s experience has illustrated that the
transparent, irreversible and verified elimination of
WMDs and measures prohibiting their production,
transfer and use remain the most effective means to
address the threats posed by such weapons.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) reflected
the common desire to strengthen the fight against
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, and in particular
to prevent their acquisition by non-State actors. The
scope of resolution 1540 (2004), which is unique in
its purview and the universal support it enjoys among
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes, is
undeniable. The 10-year extension of the mandate
of the 1540 Committee in 2011 reflected the shared
determination to pursue the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004), which has filled shortcomings in
international law. Since 2011, the terrorist threat has
been exacerbated to the point of jeopardizing the
stability and territorial integrity of States. Similarly,
the efforts of non-State actors, particularly terrorist
groups, to resort to weapons of mass destruction have
increased. It is that genuine threat that reinforces the
need for the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, the challenges and threats posed
by the proliferation of WMDs and their possible use
by non-State actors require the increased cooperation
of the international community. Equally important
are the strengthening and increased capacity of
relevant multilateral institutions and instruments.
Non-proliferation is not a goal in itself, but a means
towards a world free of WMDs and their means of
delivery. Therefore, selective and discriminatory
practices will not serve our collective interest in
strengthening peace and security. What is needed is a
balanced implementation of the various international
legally binding instruments.

Morocco
shares
the
conclusions
and
recommendations of the 1540 Committee’s review of
resolution 1540 (2004) and encourages the Committee
to pursue its efforts to assist Member States in fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution, with the valuable
support of its Group of Experts. Morocco believes that
only active international cooperation and appropriate
technical assistance — based on the principles of
solidarity and shared responsibility and focused on the
mobilization of resources, the exchange of information
and best practices — can help to strengthen national
capacities for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), especially in Africa.

16-4414363/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15/12/2016

The existing assistance mechanism should be
further strengthened to meet the expectations of States
that need it. It should also be able to effectively support
States in the implementation of the resolution. Morocco
therefore welcomes the relevant recommendations
of the Committee, including those relating to the
strengthening of the assistance provided directly by
the Committee to Member States that request it. I also
reiterate that without the contribution of enhanced
regional and subregional cooperation, national efforts
will remain insufficient.

In conclusion, Morocco will continue to fulfil its
obligations pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and will
continue its fruitful cooperation with the Committee.

While supporting the 1540 Committee’s relevant
recommendations, Morocco believes that the Committee
should take measures to facilitate and encourage
coordination, particularly at the subregional level.
That is dictated by the importance of proximity and
shared borders in the fight against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials. The 1540 Committee
should also further develop its cooperation with relevant
international organizations and agencies. For example,
the Group of Experts could further engage with those
organizations regarding requests for assistance.

My country recognizes the fundamental
responsibility of States, consistent with their respective
national and international obligations, to maintain the
effective security of all nuclear, chemical and biological
material under their control, including material used
for military purposes. We firmly believe that the best
tool available to nuclear-weapon States to increase
nuclear security within their territories is precisely a
reduction of non-civilian material, thereby contributing
to the laudable and broader goal of achieving general,
complete, verifiable and enduring nuclear disarmament
for the sake of both its citizens and the rest of humankind.

The Committee should also promote the exchange
of experiences, both in New York and at the regional
and subregional levels through, for example, meetings
of national focal points. To that end, I take this
opportunity to announce that in early March 2017
Morocco will organize, along with the 1540 Committee
and the Office of Disarmament Affairs, a meeting of
the national points of contact, which will focus on
training and coordination.
I particularly emphasize the recommendations
aimed at strengthening transparency and the
involvement of Member States. I note with satisfaction
the Council’s request to the Committee, in the operative
part of the resolution adopted this morning, to hold
periodic meetings open to all Member States. The
Committee could improve its dialogue with Member
States by continuing the current practice of public
information meetings and open debates of the Council,
as well as by organizing special and thematic meetings.
That would allow Member States to express themselves
directly and collectively consider the challenges and
opportunities associated with the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
64/83

Mr. Castro Córdoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this important debate. As an
unarmed democracy, Costa Rica considers disarmament
and non-proliferation to be fundamental pillars of its
foreign policy, as they contribute to the well-being
and survival of humankind. Therefore, such topics are
always of the highest relevance to us.

Once again, we iterate our support for negotiating a
universal legally binding instrument prohibiting nuclear
weapons, with a view to their complete and verifiable
elimination. We therefore welcome the adoption by
the First Committee of the General Assembly of draft
resolution A/C.1/71/L.41, entitled “Taking forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations”, with
a view to establishing and maintaining a nuclearweapon-free world.
Globalization and technological development can
help the international community to limit new risks
and threats. However, these tools are a double-edged
sword, since they also allow for the possibility that in
the long term weapons of mass destruction may fall
into non-State hands. We must therefore continue to
work to promote the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States; continue to seek cooperation
in order to facilitate that implementation; research
and develop mechanisms for monitoring and reporting
implementation; improve awareness of the information
gathered and its availability to States; encourage the
exchange of information on best practices and national
legislation that can assist other States; strengthen
international mechanisms for controlling technology
and the materials needed to develop such weapons;
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and redouble efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring any weapons of mass destruction and
to control the export and import of the materials,
equipment and technology needed to develop them.
We continue to call for compliance with Article 26
of the Charter of the United Nations, which states that
the Security Council shall promote the establishment
and maintenance of international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s
human and economic resources. We firmly believe that
a world without weapons of mass destruction is essential
if we are to achieve humankind’s chief objectives, that
is, peace, security and sustainable development.
Our great challenge lies in effectively implementing
all the international instruments created for that purpose,
including resolution 2325 (2016), adopted this morning,
and of which Costa Rica was a sponsor. In Costa Rica,
from the President to the relevant institutions, we
are working and coordinating our efforts to achieve
a more robust national nuclear security strategy, in
accordance with the instruments of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, international standards and
recommendations for best practices. Similarly, in
the first quarter of 2017, with the assistance of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and other international organizations, we will
be reviewing Costa Rica’s current legislation in order
to improve the application of our obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004).
As a country without an army, we do not possess
any weapons of mass destruction and our laws prohibit
anything that when activated produces asphyxiating,
poisonous, paralysing, irritating or tear gases, as well
as any substance that has irreversible physical or mental
effects. That is why we will continue to work until a
world free of nuclear weapons and mass weapons of
mass destruction — for some a utopia but for us an
attainable goal — becomes a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh would like
to thank the Spanish presidency of the Council for
organizing today’s high-level open debate, and the
briefers for sharing their valuable insights.
We believe that the action-oriented and balanced
approach of resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today,
will help Member States to further consolidate their

S/PV.7837

frameworks for complying with resolution 1540 (2004).
In that regard, we would like to emphasize four points.
First, today’s resolution correctly recognizes that
the task of implementing resolution 1540 (2004) is a
long-term undertaking. It is therefore crucial to support
its implementation in a context-specific and with a
common but differentiated approach. The regular
sharing of best practices, including through the pointsof-contact network, would be particularly useful.
Secondly, the wide differences in implementation
among Member States will continue unless meaningful
financial and technical assistance is provided to
overcome the structural constraints that many States
face. Our delegation would have preferred to see the
review of resolution 1540 (2004) result in a more
institutionalized and predictable approach to such
assistance. Failing that, we expect Member States
and relevant entities that are in a position to do so to
redouble their efforts to provide concrete, needs-based
assistance to interested States that request it. The Group
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) should continue to help Member
States to better identify and articulate their needs.
Thirdly, today’s resolution makes a strong case for
further enhancing the 1540 Committee’s cooperation
and interface with relevant international, regional and
subregional entities. We would like to emphasize the
importance of avoiding duplication and to reaffirm the
suggestion about facilitating assistance and sharing
expertise on a regional basis. The competent regional
entities may be encouraged to support interested States
in further strengthening their national export control
measures pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Fourthly, my delegation highlighted some of our
ongoing and future national initiatives at the formal
open consultations organized by the 1540 Committee
in June. While we remain seized of those initiatives,
we would like to note the rapid advances that have been
made in science and technology that are susceptible to
abuse or the risk of proliferation by non-State actors,
including terrorists. We call on the 1540 Committee
to help enhance our information and knowledge base
about the evolving risks, especially those requiring
our pre-emptive action. The threat of weapons of mass
destruction falling into the hands of unauthorized
non-State actors has rightly been called a catastrophe.
As a responsible member of the international
community, Bangladesh remains committed to stepping

16-4414365/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

up its efforts to help prevent such situations and their
potentially grave consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We are grateful to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain for convening
today’s important high-level open debate and for his
statement. We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the other briefers for theirs.
Indonesia, as a party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention
on Chemical Weapons and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as a member of the Southeast Asian
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, and as a party that has
ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
welcomes today’s focus on countering the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
by non-State actors. In that regard, Indonesia would
like to thank the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for its presentation of its first
five-year comprehensive report, covering the period
from 25 April 2011 to 24 April 2016. We are grateful
to the Committee’s successive Chairs, Vice-Chairs and
other support staff for their hard work in producing the
detailed report.
While we are still reviewing its contents, some
trends seem clear. The report acknowledges that
States’ reporting has increased and that most States
have enhanced their measures prohibiting activities
by non-State actors relating to nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
Indonesia stresses, and the report itself underlines,
that the 1540 Committee plays a vital role in
facilitating matchmaking, particularly in view of
the discrepancies between countries’ economic and
industrial capabilities. The report’s recommendations
for improving the delivery of tailor-made assistance are
very important. We would therefore appreciate hearing
from the Committee about the factors that resulted in
a drop in the total number of requests submitted for
assistance in the period under review by comparison to
those submitted before 2011.
We also note the Committee’s observation that
funds in the United Nations Trust Fund for Global
and Regional Disarmament, managed by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, have been
used mainly for outreach activities, including those
related to visits to countries, and less for projects more
66/83

15/12/2016

directly linked to implementation. It would be useful
to hear the Committee’s views on how it and other
relevant entities can further assist countries in need of
support for preparing project proposals. Meanwhile,
we reiterate our call for the immediate establishment
of a fund dedicated to supporting Member States in
implementing their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). We believe it is extremely important to have
intensified support from the Committee and its Group
of Experts, including through close cooperation with
national points of contact for resolution 1540 (2004),
along with adequate support from other relevant parts
of the United Nations system.
The Committee’s report and the concept note (see
S/2016/1013, annex) for today’s debate point out that
the threat of WMD proliferation by non-State actors is
likely to be exacerbated by the rapid advances in science,
technology and international commerce that could
make the risk of their misuse more probable. While it
is right and important that States should take robust
measures to counter any WMD activities by non-State
groups in this environment, Indonesia believes that
what is of the essence is the fundamental question of
whether States have sufficient capacity to ensure that
their authority will prevail in every area throughout
their territory. Only when States are in proper control
of all their regions can national authorities ensure that
WMD, criminal and terrorist activity by non-State
actors is dealt with and effectively deterred. Therefore,
countries requiring assistance in building enforcement
capacity in their territories need to receive full support.
As my delegation has stressed in various United
Nations forums, it is crucial that the Security Council
and other relevant United Nations system entities
step up their principled prevention, credible political
solutions, and dialogue and mediation in order to
help resolve conflicts peacefully. Lasting peace and
stability will go a long way towards bolstering conflictaffected countries’ focus and energies in thwarting all
WMD activity by non-State elements in their countries
and regions.
Indonesia also stresses the importance of the
peaceful use of nuclear energy for development and the
need for robust international support to that end. The
1540 Committee’s observation that there is a positive
correlation between the use of nuclear energy and
implementation rates of 1540 obligations is noteworthy.
Indonesia fully supports the aims of resolution 1540
(2004), but it also believes that the issue of WMD
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

acquisition by non-State groups must be considered by
all States Members of the United Nations in an inclusive
manner. Our actions should flow from multilaterally
negotiated instruments.
At the formal open consultations in June, Indonesia
outlined in detail many of its actions in the context of
its implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Suffice it
to say that Indonesia’s deep commitment to the issue is
demonstrated by its vigorous adherence to, inter alia,
the treaties and instruments that I mentioned previously.
Through various national laws and programmes, we
have instituted comprehensive measures to counter the
development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems.
Regionally, Indonesia is actively participating in
various Association of Southeast Asian Nations forums
on export controls and non-proliferation.
In closing, Indonesia would like to underscore
that, as long as a single nuclear or other weapon of
mass destruction exists, the threat to humankind of
its use, by design or accident, will persist. Just as we
are seeing detailed reports and matrices on progress in
non-proliferation, it is imperative that there be the same
emphasis on nuclear-disarmament obligations. The
lackluster approach on the latter and the flawed notion
of nuclear haves and have-nots is morally indefensible
and unsustainable. It negates the delegitimization of
these weapons and invites proliferation.

S/PV.7837

especially during the process of the comprehensive
review of its implementation.
The Constitution of Ecuador expressly condemns
the production, possession, commercialization,
importation, transfer, stockpiling and use of weapons
of mass destruction regardless of who does it. For
this reason, Ecuador is developing the legislative and
regulatory framework appropriate for preventing the
proliferation and illicit trafficking in these weapons
and their delivery systems.
The National Assembly of Ecuador is about
to approve, as a step prior to ratification, the 2005
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, thereby reiterating our
commitment to fighting sabotage and smuggling of
nuclear materials and their possible use for terrorist
purposes. Ecuador played an active role in the recent
international conference on nuclear security convened
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which organized the meeting as the right forum for
addressing challenges in the field of physical nuclear
security in an inclusive manner, where all IAEA member
States were represented and expressed their ideas and
their commitments. Ecuador is concerned that in forums
with limited participation outside the framework of the
United Nations or its specialized agencies and bodies in
which only a few States participate, issues of universal
interest, such as nuclear security, are addressed.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.

As long as nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
remain in the possession of States, there is a risk of
their use. For this reason, when we speak of weapons
of mass destruction and the risk of their proliferation
to non-State actors, we cannot overlook the primary
responsibility of States to fulfil their obligations
under the various international, universal or regional
instruments in this sphere, including their destruction,
without forgetting that the 85 per cent of existing
nuclear material in the world is for military purposes.
By its very nature, then, it is outside international
nuclear-security agreements.

Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate on a subject of universal
concern, namely, the proliferation and possible use by
non-State actors of nuclear, chemical, bacteriological or
radiological weapons. At the same time, we commend
Spain for its successful chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),

Nor can we forget that the sole category of
weapons of mass destruction that is not prohibited
by a universal legally binding instrument are nuclear
weapons. For this reason, Ecuador, along with other
States, sponsored resolution A/C.1/71/L.41, which was
adopted in October in the First Committee by almost
two-thirds of the United Nations membership, which
called for the start of a negotiation process in 2017

All countries must exercise their responsibilities to
make the world safe and peaceful for all. To that end,
Indonesia calls on nuclear-weapon States in particular
to show political will and contribute constructively
to ensuring that negotiations advance toward the
realization of a universal and legally binding instrument
for the prohibition of nuclear and other WMD, leading
to their total elimination.

16-4414367/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

on a treaty banning nuclear weapons with a view to
their complete elimination. In so doing, my country is
fulfilling its obligations under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We
urge all States, beginning with nuclear-weapon States
and States possessing nuclear weapons, to participate
in these negotiations that will have authentically
inclusive nature.
As long as stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction
exist, the risk of their being used for criminal or terrorist
purposes is high. So the best guarantee that this does
not occur is to completely eliminate them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and I wish to make
the following remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, I welcome the outstanding background
work carried out by the delegation of Spain during the
comprehensive review process of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Twelve years after the adoption
of that resolution, we must face reality. For the first
time, non-State actors have used weapons of mass
destruction, in Syria and Iraq. What must we do with
this reality?
In the immediate term, we must improve the
implementation of relevant provisions and commitments,
including through greater international cooperation. In
this regard, Belgium welcomes the unanimous support
of the Security Council for resolution 2325 (2016),
which it adopted today.
First of all, with respect to chemical weapons, the
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons needs to be improved. To date, only
118 States parties have sufficient national legislation in
this area. We must therefore pay greater attention to
making sure that all States abide by their obligations.
We must also unequivocally condemn any views of
weapons of mass destruction regardless of where or by
whomever they are used. For that reason, the Security
Council must be unanimous in its condemnation of any
use of chemical weapons in Syria, whether by Da’esh
or by the Syrian regime. The use of chemical weapons
cannot go unpunished, and concerted international
action in that regard is important.
68/83

15/12/2016

Secondly, with respect to the nuclear aspect, it is of
paramount importance to secure the existing sensitive
material and to reduce its quantity. On its part, Belgium
has considerably reduced the quantity of sensitive
nuclear material in its territory. We have created a new
specialized police unit at the federal level in order to
ensure a permanent armed response capacity at our
nuclear sites. Until it is fully rolled out, those sites are
currently secured by military units. Our nuclear experts
are at the forefront of international efforts to design
and test various types of fuels that could eventually
replace highly enriched uranium in our reactors used
for cutting-edge research. That is also a contribution to
non-proliferation.
Radioactive sources are also equally vulnerable
and could be diverted for nefarious purposes. We
must therefore support new medical and industrial
technologies that would enable us to significantly replace
or reduce the use of those sources. We will continue to
support the nuclear security work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, including financially.
Thirdly, with regard to biological weapons, we
regret that the eighth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention did not succeed
in making a qualitative leap at the very moment when
we are seeing growing threats. But we must not give up;
the collective and individual challenge before us is too
important. Recent experience has shown that proactive
and creative initiatives can support the aims of the
Convention where diplomatic negotiations are lagging
behind. One example would be peer-review exercises,
a new approach that could help boos confidence in
conformity with the Convention.
In conclusion, initiatives could also be developed at
the industrial and academic levels, including drafting
codes of conduct and boosting biosafety, including by
devising new standards.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Blocher.
Ms. Blocher: Allow me to extend the thanks
of Mr. David Malone, Rector of the United Nations
University, for the invitation to participate in this open
debate. Rector Malone regrets not being able to attend
in person, as he is meeting with the University’s Global
Governing Council this week in Tokyo.
The United Nations University, established by
the General Assembly, exists to contribute through
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

collaborative research and education to efforts to resolve
pressing global issues and to do so by functioning as
a bridge between the academic community and the
United Nations. Our Charter, given to us by the General
Assembly more than 40 years ago, mandates us to work
with academia worldwide to address pressing global
problems of human survival, development and welfare.
It is hard to think of a more pressing global
problem of human survival than the risks entailed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Resolution 1540 (2004) provides an important
framework for cooperation in the crucial global effort
to prevent non-State actors from obtaining weapons
of mass destruction, one of the most pressing security
challenges of our time.
The occasion of this year’s comprehensive review
of the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), conducted under the able Spanish chairmanship,
provides an opportunity to step back and assess how
the United Nations response to this threat could be
strengthened. Academia has a special role to play in
assisting Member States in that important work. The
worldwide academic community has undertaken
significant research in the physical sciences and has
helped to disseminate technical knowledge, skills
and data. It can also help by identifying areas of
vulnerability and devising recommendations on how to
adjust response mechanisms.
Since the 2009 comprehensive review, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) has made a concerted effort
to engage scientific expertise. In April, the United
Nations University was fortunate to be asked to
contribute to the effort, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, through the
organization of a formal dialogue between the 1540
Committee and academia and civil society. In June,
the dialogue continued on the margins of the formal
open consultations on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Looking forward, we see important opportunities
for the Security Council to benefit from ongoing and
systematic engagement with academia and civil society
on these issues around the world. We also believe that
academic partners can provide valuable assistance to
Member States in their efforts to promote transparency
and awareness-raising on the purpose and content
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as States’ ensuing

S/PV.7837

obligations. We hope Member States and the Security
Council will avail themselves of these resources in
the months and years ahead. The need for effective
action is so great that such opportunities must be
carefully exploited.
Allow me once again to express my thanks for the
opportunity to address the Council here today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Blocher for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Spanish presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate and
for its successful chairing of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We welcome the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) today, which we also co-sponsored.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to convey the following remarks in my
national capacity.
The risk of nuclear terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and related
materials and technologies have become major
challenges to our common security. The chance of
such weapons falling into the hands of unauthorized
actors is indeed alarming. In fact, the acquisition of
those technologies and materials may be a bigger
challenge than an actual WMD. Increasing threats
emanating from terrorist groups make the possibility
of exploitation of security vulnerabilities with criminal
intent highly probable, while some actors have already
demonstrated readiness to acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction, as demonstrated in the reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Political commitment is crucial to all of us in
developing the policies, strategies and systems to
strengthen security at all levels. In that regard, full
compliance with the obligations under international
arrangements such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention, resolution 1540
(2004) and others must stand out as a priority for the
international community.

16-4414369/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Georgia is a non-nuclear State, a status we achieved
after the removal of 1.83 kilograms of highly enriched
uranium from the Breeder-1 Neutron Source Facility in
December 2015. Repatriating highly enriched uranium
was a step in response to the communiqué of The Hague
2014 Nuclear Security Summit.
However, the threats posed by the proliferation
of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
(CBRN) weapons and materials, as well WMD-related
technologies, remains a subject of serious concern for
Georgia, not the least due to our close proximity to a
region that poses a high risk of proliferation. In that
regard, Georgia has been taking various measures
while implementing CBRN national actions plans.
In recent years, several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials via Georgia’s occupied
regions were detected and duly prevented by our law
enforcement agencies. During the 2006-2016 decade,
25 cases of illicit smuggling of radioactive materials
were intercepted, 11 of which were from the occupied
territories of Georgia. However, in the absence of
an international presence inside those regions, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any type of
verification activities on the ground, thereby increasing
the risk of the proliferation of WMD-related materials.
Georgia actively cooperates with the European
Union and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, within the framework of the
European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Centres of Excellence Initiative, to promote
an integrated CBRN approach across the area covering
South-East Europe, the Caucasus, Moldova and
Ukraine. With the aim of contributing to the success of
the project, the CBRN Regional Secretariat was opened
and successfully functions in Georgia.
To promote CBRN-related topics at the United
Nations, the Governments of Georgia, the Kingdom
of Morocco and the Republic of the Philippines have
established the United Nations Group of Friends on
CBRN Risk Mitigation and Security Governance. The
Group of Friends is a consultation and dialogue forum
aimed at integrating the CBRN component into the
international security architecture, sensitizing States
to the importance of mitigating CBRN risks, and
fostering regional cooperation on CBRN challenges. It
also promotes the activities aimed at building capacity
and developing capabilities between and among partner
70/83

15/12/2016

States and the implementation of the resolution 1540
(2004).
It is our belief that through promoting such joint
efforts we can succeed in advancing a robust preventive
system against the proliferation of WMD.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I nowgive the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to commend the leadership of
Spain for both organizing this timely open debate and
delivering the 2016 comprehensive review report. With
the target year of 2021 fast approaching for achieving
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), this
retrospective yet simultaneously forward-looking
review is critical to assessing how far we have come
over the past five years. In this regard, my delegation is
honoured to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016).
Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540
(2004) has successfully mobilized the international
community to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) by non-State actors, with
nearly 10,000 measures in place in the 1540 matrices
this year. This means that more than 500 measures
have been adopted by each Member State, which is a
significant achievement indeed.
However, challenges from non-State actors,
including terrorist groups and violent extremists who
seek to obtain WMD materials and their means of
delivery for malicious purposes, continue to arise at
breakneck speed. Recent advancements in science,
technology and international commerce have lowered
the threshold for these actors. Increasing reports of
the potential detonation of dirty bombs and other
attempts to acquire nuclear materials by dangerous
actors alarm us every day. Recently, the use of mustard
gas by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Syria was identified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism.
Against this backdrop, I would like to make the
following three points for further consideration in
our joint efforts in combating WMD proliferation to
non-State actors.
First, it is essential to raise awareness of resolution
1540 (2004) by enhancing our outreach activities.
Indeed, given the extensive nature of the obligations
imposed by the resolution, ensuring a strong link
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

between each and every stakeholder, including the
industry, academia and civil society, will certainly
be key to success. In that regard, in recent years the
Republic of Korea has actively supported the outreach
events held by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Phnom Penh, London, Seoul,
Kathmandu, Wiesbaden, Santiago and Addis Ababa
through its contribution to the Trust Fund for Global
and Regional Disarmament Activities. Last September
in Seoul, we successfully hosted the first regional
Wiesbaden Industrial Outreach Conference, which was
attended by public and private sector participants from
Asia, Europe and the United States.
Secondly, the Security Council is not alone in
promoting resolution 1540 (2004), and we should
maximize synergetic effects by enhancing cooperation
with and building upon the achievements of various
international organizations and initiatives. This year,
my Government is privileged to concurrently chair
both the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime. This is unprecedented
in the history of export-control regimes. The
Republic of Korea views this double chairmanship
as a token of trust from the international community
for our commitment and capability to reinforce the
non-proliferation regime, and therefore feels a great
sense of responsibility. In these capacities, we will
continue to work closely with the 1540 Committee to
strengthen the non-proliferation regime.
Thirdly, while ensuring full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), we must also scale up our actions
to enable that prevention mechanism to better respond
to the evolving nature of threats posed by non-State
actors. Expanding our current non-proliferation
architecture to encompass cyberterrorism or
radiological threats, which are of growing interest to
violent extremists, among others, is essential to moving
the ongoing process forward. For example, the Nuclear
Security Summit process has significantly advanced
the concept of nuclear security as a public good and
endowed the United Nations and its specialized agency,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), with
a central role in further strengthening nuclear security.
As the Chair of the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit and
the 2016 IAEA International Conference on Nuclear
Security, Korea remains committed to working
closely with the international community to harness
the political momentum and channel it into concrete

S/PV.7837

actions that directly strengthen ongoing efforts under
resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent nuclear terrorism.
Faced with the imminent threat posed by the
nuclear and missile programmes of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as well as the consequential
threats of its WMD proliferation, the Republic of Korea
attaches great importance to the global non-proliferation
regime. With two nuclear tests conducted this year
alone and technical advancement in its delivery means
having been accelerated through 24 test launches of
various types of missiles, North Korea is now nearing
the final stage of nuclear weaponization. As such,
North Korea’s nuclear programme is the single gravest
threat to the international non-proliferation regime.
Given Pyongyang’s track record in the illicit arms trade
and blackmarket smuggling, a cash-stripped country
like North Korea could certainly be a willing supplier
of WMD materials or technology to non-State actors.
I would like to underscore the fact that only through
the denuclearization of North Korea can we dismiss
this proliferation concern, and that will be critical to
achieving the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
In closing, I would like to assure the Security
Council that the Republic of Korea remains committed
to the full and universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We will continue to work closely with the
1540 Committee in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Spain on its assumption of the presidency
and on organizing this debate.
As a hub of transport and commerce, the Kingdom
of Thailand is committed to addressing the threats to
our collective security posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. There is a genuine risk
that these weapons may fall into the wrong hands.
Given the importance we attach to the issue, we have
decided to join other Member States in co-sponsoring
resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today.
In addition to the immediate havoc caused
by their use, the existence of these weapons fuels
mistrust, exacerbates conflicts and upsets the delicate
international security landscape. The Kingdom of
Thailand fiunly believes that in order to sustain peace
and security, States must step up both disarmament and

16-4414371/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15/12/2016

non-proliferation efforts. As such, we continue to exert
every effort to implement international measures and
obligations with rigour. We have the following practical
approaches to share today.

WMD-related Items Act, which will regulate the export
of dual-use items in accordance with national and
international legal regimes. The National Legislative
Assembly of Thailand will soon consider the draft Act.

First, as an active participant in various initiatives,
including the Proliferation Security Initiative, the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Nuclear Security Summits, and as a State party to the
Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
among others, we firmly believe that increased
coordination and collaboration among initiatives and
implementation efforts can benefit and optimize our
joint efforts. In this regard, we welcome enhancing
ongoing cooperation among the counter-terrorismrelated committees of the Security Council. To this
end, we also urge closer coordination between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and other entities and initiatives, including the
International Atomic Energy Agency, to ensure that
gaps are filled and redundancies of efforts eliminated.

We also need inter-agency coordination and
engagement with civil society, industry, and academia.
The Ministry of Commerce of Thailand continually
organizes workshops and seminars to educate and
engage the private and academic sectors on the control
of dual-use items. Just yesterday, an memorandum of
understanding between the Ministry of Commerce’s
Department of Foreign Trade and multiple academic
and research institutions was signed to support the
network of WMD-related entities. We believe that the
engagement of those stakeholders in the resolution
adopted today is a step in the right direction.

Secondly, as States are in different situations
regarding threats of weapons of mass destruction and
have different resources and capacities, international
cooperation
and
assistance,
particularly
for
developing countries, is essential to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime. We welcome the constructive
role of the 1540 Committee and the sharing of goodpractices, technical cooperation and assistance among
Member States.
Thirdly, Member States must ensure effective
national implementation, as no international cooperation
can bear fruit without robust implementation within
the country through an appropriate legal framework.
Also, each State has its own specificities with regard
to its national implementation, which must be taken
into account.
As for the Kingdom of Thailand, earlier in August
the Nuclear Energy for Peace Act was promulgated
and will enter into force on 1 February 2017. The new
Act focuses not only on nuclear security, including the
physical protection of nuclear material, but also on
nuclear safety and safeguards. In October this year, the
National Legislative Assembly of Thailand approved
the Counter-terrorism and Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction Financing Act, which will be
enacted in the near future. In September this year also,
the Thai Cabinet approved the draft Trade Controls on
72/83

Lastly, we must also strengthen regional cooperation,
as the effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime in
any State also depends on the effective implementation
in the neighbouring countries. To that end, Thailand is
a proponent of promoting regional cooperation in the
work of the 1540 regime. An example of note is the joint
cross-border exercise between Thailand and Malaysia
on the detection of nuclear and other radioactive
materials out of regulatory control, held in October this
year, which aimed to combat smuggling or illicit crossborder transport of such materials.
The ultimate goal of the Kingdom of Thailand is
to attain a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
In order to reach that goal, non-proliferation should
be pursued in parallel with disarmament efforts. The
international community should make their best efforts
to secure the world by prohibiting all kinds of weapons of
mass destruction, while ensuring that related materials
and technologies benefit society through their peaceful
uses. The long-term task towards that lofty goal will
require political will and the commitment of all States.
The Kingdom of Thailand is fully supportive of such
an endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of
Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, and to congratulate
the Spanish presidency on drawing attention once again
to the great importance of and growing concern raised
by the risks of the proliferation of weapons of mass
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7837

destruction across the world, particularly when they are
in the hands of non-State actors.

strengthened practical measures at the global, regional
and national levels.

We are pleased to see the leadership shown by
Spain, particularly by Ambassador Oyarzún, in
forming the Group of Friends of Resolution 1540
(2004)— and Panama was a part of that initiative — as
well to congratulate Spain on achieving resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted today by consensus here
in the Council and which my country co-sponsored
with a view to contributing to improving the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Given the importance of joint regional efforts and
their positive impact on the international community,
last September, alongside Spain, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States, Panama held a side
event to promote greater understanding of cooperation
in export control and how to promote safe and strategic
trade and investments by addressing the risk posed by
non-State actors in the collection, proliferation and
use of weapons of mass destruction. More recently, in
November, we organized a regional conference under
the rubric “Nuclear terrorism — a global challenge”,
with the participation of some countries that are not
even from our region. The aim was to strengthen the
capabilities and cooperation we need to prevent, detect
and respond to nuclear terrorism. In 2017, my country
will assume the chairmanship of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, a platform we intend
to use to continue to strengthen the constructive and
cooperative work that we think is key to tackling this
terrible challenge.

Panama is fully committed to strengthening the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, regardless
of who may possess such weapons and their delivery
systems, because we believe that they constitute in and
of themselves an ongoing threat to peace, security and
humankind itself. We are honoured to belong to the
first nuclear-weapon-free zone, which was instituted in
Latin America and the Caribbean in 1969 through the
entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
That commitment to non-proliferation was ratified
in 1999, when Panama acceded to the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which is a key piece in the
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. Twenty
years after its adoption, there is still an urgent need
for its universalization and entry into force through a
compromise reached by all States without exception. In
that regard, I am pleased to share that Panama has been
elected Chairperson of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission
for 2017, and in that capacity we will push for the
Convention’s entry into force.
We pay particular attention to resolution 1540
(2014) because, as stated in the concept note before us
(see S/2016/1013, annex), it is currently the only legally
binding instrument available to us in the multilateral
structure, and in our case it is of high value to promote
strategic and secure trade and investments that avoid
having chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
material diverted to non-State actors for criminal
purposes. Panama does not produce, import, handle
and store nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass
destruction, but we are fully aware of the emerging
trends in the proliferation of scientific and technological
advances and in international trade and of their greater
democratization, which makes them more vulnerable
to the risk of possession and exploitation by non-State
actors. That is why Panama has just adopted and

At the national level, with a view to contributing to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we are
working on the effective regulation of dual-use material,
and we are also coming up with a national inter-agency
plan for prevention, preparedness and response with
regard to threats and incidents involving chemical,
biological, radioactive, nuclear and explosive agents.
We are also aware that our geographical position,
coasts on two oceans and the connection advantages
that Panama offers also pose a challenge when it comes
to security. We have worked to achieve a stronger
institutional structure and modern legislation that
enables us to prevent, combat and punish financing of
terrorism and financing of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Furthermore, Panama is part of
the Global Container Control Programme, an initiative
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the World Customs Organization, which is being
implemented to enable sending international alerts and
to carry out joint operations to minimize the use of
containers at sea for illegal uses.
My Government strongly condemns the recent
nuclear tests. We have reiterated that the development
of weapons of mass destruction and their use are acts

16-4414373/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

against peace and international cooperation, which can
only aggravate tensions among countries and regions,
threaten their political stability and seriously jeopardize
peaceful coexistence between peoples.
Allow me to conclude by stressing that for my
country, it is an ethical imperative that we should live
in a world free of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, since their humanitarian impact is irreversible
and unquantifiable. We share the global responsibility
to progress towards a more peaceful and safer world
with a multidimensional approach to security tied to
human rights and development. The non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction through the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is the
cornerstone for preventing disaster and for genuinely
sustainable development that guarantees a safer world.
The efforts of the Security Council and, even more,
the commitment of Member States are fundamental to
achieving a world free of the threat of radiation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset I wish to
convey our appreciation to the delegation of Spain for
organizing today’s high-level open debate, under the
agenda item “Preventive catastrophe: A global agenda
for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors”. The risk of non-State
actors, especially terrorists, using weapons of mass
destruction (WMD), including nuclear weapons, is
one of the biggest threats to global peace and security.
While no major, large-scale attack of that nature has
yet happened, terrorists have shown the intent and
capacity to develop and use WMD. Therefore, it is
the responsibility of the international community to
effectively address the possible threat of the use of
WMD by non-State actors, in all of its aspects.
While some progress has been made in adopting
measures to prevent the proliferation of WMD by
non-State actors, the rate and variability of that progress
confirms that accomplishing the objective of the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
task that requires continued efforts at national, regional
and international levels. It also requires constant and
enhanced support from the Security Council, as well
as the provision of technical assistance to States that
require the same, especially for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and voluntary national plans
of action.
74/83

15/12/2016

Afghanistan, surrounded by a number of nuclear
countries, has maintained a consistent policy of calling
for the total, worldwide elimination of all weapons of
mass destruction, including nuclear weapons. We have
done so knowing that a world free of WMD translates
into a safer and prosperous world for current and
future generations.
Afghanistan, as a State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Comprehensive Nucear-Tes- Ban Treaty, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, stands in full support of all initiatives
aimed at the realization of a world free of weapons of
mass destruction. In addition, Afghanistan joined the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) on 9 August
and the United Nations Group of Friends on Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Risk Mitigation
and Security Governance on 23 March. Afghanistan is
committed to fulfilling its international obligations and
remains dedicated to achieving the aims and objectives
of the international treaties and instruments to which it
is a State party.
In conclusion, my delegation calls upon all
Member States to support international efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery and urges
them to strengthen national measures, as appropriate,
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and materials and
technologies related to their manufacture.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We also
appreciate the transparent conduct of the comprehensive
review process of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Turkey takes note of the report on the 20112016 comprehensive review. We welcome the progress
made in the implementation of the resolution. Also,
we concur that full implementation is a long-term task
requiring strong efforts at the international, regional
and national levels.
I would like to reiterate Turkey’s strong
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1540 (2004). To that end, we are willing to further
increase our support to, and collaboration with, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of Experts. We
have contributed to the work of the Committee through
national implementation reports and matrices. With the
same understanding, Turkey co-sponsored resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted this morning. We are
fully aware of the growing risks of the acquisition,
production and use of such weapons by non-State
actors, particularly in view of the scientific advances
in sensitive technologies that are increasingly available
through cybernetworks.
Turkey has in place the necessary national
legislation to fully implement its obligations under the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and all relevant
international legal instruments, such as the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, as well as the voluntary ad hoc
mechanisms on non-proliferation, prevention of the
financing of terrorism, and export controls. Turkey also
collaborates closely with the Security Council CounterTerrorism Committee, the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities and the sanctions
regimes, whose work is complementary to that of the
1540 Committee.
Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been a key cross-cutting mechanism of international
non-proliferation efforts. The 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts fulfil a crucial oversight and
mentoring role in identifying implementation gaps and
capacity requirements for Member States, providing
assistance and match-making, as well as raising
awareness through public outreach activities. Growing
proliferation concerns and the scale and trends of global
commerce place unprecedented responsibilities on
Member States. Therefore, we welcome the Committee’s
recommendations aiming at better assistance to
Member States, particularly in areas such as export
and trans-shipment controls. Yet the recommendations
pertaining to enforcement of prohibitions, national
control lists and other possible measures should be
considered in their proper contexts, especially in the
light of the Committee’s recommendation for reducing
unnecessary compliance burdens.

S/PV.7837

In every part of the world, transit trade and
transshipments are usually the most susceptible links
in the chain of export control, in terms of diversion.
Turkey prioritizes adopting applicable methods to
reinforce transit controls in order to strengthen export
controls. Needless to say, it would be unfair to levy the
whole burden of controlling goods on transit countries
alone. More effective and equitable burden-sharing
is needed. We therefore reaffirm the importance of
strengthening controls at the origin.
The use of chemical weapons in our region
constitutes a particular source of concern for Turkey.
As a country that has never had any intention to pursue
a weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programme,
Turkey firmly opposes the development, production,
stockpiling and use of such weapons by State or
non-State actors alike.
Following the sarin gas attacks in eastern
Ghouta in Syria in August 2013, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013) to eliminate the Syrian
regime’s chemical weapons programme. As the gaps,
discrepancies and inconsistencies in the regime’s
declarations and relevant submissions on its chemical
stockpiles remain unresolved, its non-declared WMD
capabilities and the use of non-listed chemical agents
for chemical attacks continue to be a serious source
of concern.
Furthermore, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, in its third and fourth reports, established
the liability of the Syrian armed forces in three cases
that have been under investigation. The Mechanism’s
findings confirmed that the Syrian regime has not
fulfilled its obligations and continued to use chemical
weapons after the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013).
The Mechanism also found Da’esh responsible for the
chemical weapons attacks in Mare’a in 2015. The use of
chemical weapons is a crime against humanity and a war
crime. As such, we cannot allow that to become the new
normal. That is why there needs to be accountability
and prosecution.
Before I conclude, I wish to reiterate our call upon
the Security Council to take measures in accordance
with its resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209 (2015) and 2235
(2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

16-4414375/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates is grateful for Spain’s leadership
on this critically important security issue. The United
Arab Emirates thanks the briefers for their insight on
the evolving challenges in and the opportunities for
strengthening global non-proliferation efforts.
Previous speakers have highlighted the alarming
links between terrorism, weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and cybersecurity. As a member of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) and a
sponsor of resolution 2325 (2016), we welcome all
efforts to improve implementation, such as increasing
cooperation, assistance and transparency, as well as
outreach mechanisms. We affirm our full commitment
to that core international security instrument and
welcome Spain’s efforts in organizing this open debate.
At the national level, the United Arab Emirates
has enacted robust legislation to curb the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the illicit use of
related materials, in implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Ultimately, however, as we all know the only
conclusive strategy for preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
including terrorists, is to eliminate these weapons
entirely. The next priority must be to strengthen the
compliance of States with their existing disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations. When those
international norms to halt the development and
testing of nuclear and ballistic capacities, for example,
are violated, they threaten the integrity of the entire
system. This is extremely dangerous, and a world
without weapons of mass destruction controls is too
terrifying to contemplate. This is why we must work
collectively to defend and secure the entire disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture. We call on States,
such as North Korea, to fulfil their international legal
obligations in this regard.
In our own region, the United Arab Emirates
reiterates the primary importance of declaring the
Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass distraction. It regrets the failure to
convene a conference in 2012 on this issue. Additionally,
the United Arab Emirates renews its call on Israel to
join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. It is the only State in the region that has not
done so. That would contribute greatly to increased
stability and security in the Middle East.
76/83

15/12/2016

Despite the efforts of the international community
in Syria, there is substantial evidence that chemical
weapons have been used against innocent civilians with
horrifying consequences. Those responsible for the use
of these WMDs must be held accountable. Furthermore,
despite the agreement on its nuclear programme 18
months ago, Iran’s international posture has provided
cause for great concern. Although we had hoped for a
new chapter, the United Arab Emirates must continue to
express its concerns regarding Iranian nuclear activity
and the development of its ballistic missile programme.
We remain deeply alarmed by Iran’s aggressive rhetoric
and blatant interference in our region. We call on
Iran to ensure its full compliance with international
obligations and responsibilities as a matter of urgency.
Additionally, when a country directly contributes to
the proliferation of conventional weapons to sanctions
entities and individuals, including non-State actors, it
also provides a potential pathway for the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
This is important to note in the case of Iran, a State
sponsor of terrorism in our region. From Hizbullah in
Lebanon and Syria, to Houthis in Yemen and terrorist
groups in Iraq, this is unacceptable and has critically to
destabilized our region. Concerted action must be taken
to shut down the provision of support and weapons to
these terrorist entities immediately.
These urgent priorities compel the United Arab
Emirates to conclude its participation in this debate by
offering three concrete recommendations. The United
Arab Emirates welcomes the existing efforts by the
Security Council and calls for, first, greater pursuit
of violations of and the enforcement of sanctions on
the proliferation of all banned weapons, including
conventional ones. These channels are a gateway for
the transport of weapons of mass destruction and
must be eliminated. Secondly, there must be effective
verification and increased accountability for any party
that deploys WMDs. Thirdly, there must be stricter
compliance by all States with their responsibilities
under international law, as well as consequences when
these obligations are violated.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Spain for convening this open
debate and for its efforts on the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004).
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Canada recognizes the grave threat posed by the
proliferation of nuclear, biological, chemical and
radiological weapons to non-State actors. For this
reason, we reiterate our strong support for the full and
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and are pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016)
adopted today. Canada has long been a supporter of
global efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and related materials. We
have invested more than $1.2 billion in this domain over
the past decade. Moreover, we will invest $63 million in
the coming year, including up to $6 million in dedicated
1540 (2004) related programming.
(spoke in English)
As a complement to resolution 1540 (2004),
Canada is engaged in a range of efforts to reduce the
threat of WMDs, including the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism in Syria, the Global Health
Security Agenda, and the Nuclear Security Contact
Group, among others. Additionally, Canada is leading
efforts to end fissile material production, a clear and
practical step towards countering WMD proliferation.
Canada supports recommendations to encourage and
strengthen regional and subregional implementation
and assistance approaches. To this end, Canada
is funding a regional 1540 (2004) implementation
coordinator for the Caribbean Community and is
engaged in cooperation and capacity-building in the
Caribbean through the Proliferation Security Initiative.

S/PV.7837

convening this important meeting and to congratulate
you on the important and substantial work undertaken
by Spain in the course of its membership of the Security
Council and at the head of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which has been
effectively and positively reflected in the Council’s
work during the past two years. I also wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson; Mr. Kim Won-so,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and
Mr. Bryan Finley and Mr. James Min for their briefings.
The danger posed by the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) by non-State actors is alarming, in
particular given the work of terrorist groups throughout
the world, starting with the Middle East and continuing
through Africa and Europe. These groups use different
means to effectively plan and implement their work.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has stated that the terrorist group Da’esh
is using mustard gas in Syria, Lebanon and Iraq. We
must therefore examine the capacities of these terrorist
groups, which kill and terrorize people in order to
achieve their goals.
Jordan has taken concrete steps to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). We have enacted a number
of national laws, enforced effective measures and
developed national regulations to control and prevent
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery. We have submitted three reports on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.

I would like to refer to the workshop for States
members of the League of Arab States on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which was
hosted in June by Jordan, with the assistance of the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. The
workshop included the participation of representatives
of 15 Arab States, donor States, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Group of Experts and 11 regional and international
organizations, as well as representatives of the
private sector and civil society. We exchanged views,
discussed practical difficulties in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and developed a road map on
how to overcome them. We also discussed cooperation
among Member States and regional and international
organizations in strengthening national capacitybuilding.

Mr. Al-Otoom (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for

My delegation welcomes the report of the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004), which

The promise and potential of resolution 1540
(2004) lie in its continual rejuvenation. We must evolve
and adapt to new and emerging risks, technologies and
threats. The comprehensive review has confirmed that,
despite progress, full and universal implementation
remains a challenge, with deficiencies in capacity,
matchmaking and assistance mechanisms. In this regard,
we welcome measures in today’s resolution that call
for more detailed, specific assistance requests, revised
tools and templates, and a strengthening of the role of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). All of these will facilitate
effective assistance to States in the fulfilment of their
obligations and therefore combat WMD proliferation.

16-4414377/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

we hope will pave the way for the implementation of
the resolution and contribute to capacity-building. We
support the recommendations contained in the report,
in particular with regard to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) through focused approaches
to be implemented by the Committee and by
maintaining the important cooperation between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the 1540
Committee in order to update information concerning
the capabilities of terrorist groups and their ability to
use WMDs.
We emphasize the need for continued cooperation
between the 1540 Committee with other relevant
international organizations, in particular the
International Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL,
as well as the international initiatives on combating
nuclear terrorism and the international partnership to
counter the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We stress
the need for States to strengthen cooperation across their
own sectors, such as the industrial and parliamentary
sectors, civil society and the academic sector.
During its term on the Security Council as a
non-permanent member, Jordan was vehement in its
efforts towards calling attention to the work of the
1540 Committee in its belief of the need to facilitate
its success. We emphasize the importance of the
continuation of the Committee’s work and cooperating
with it to achieve a world of stability, peace and love.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express its appreciation for the convening
of this important high-level open debate dedicated to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004)
has contributed to facilitating the implementation
of important measures to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery among non-State actors. However, we stress
that its full implementation by all States is a long-term
task that will require continuous efforts at national,
regional and international levels.
As a State party to the main treaties related to
weapons of mass destruction, Algeria reaffirms its
long-standing position that the only guaranty against
use or the threat of the use of these weapons by non-State
actors is to eliminate them once and for all. Algeria
78/83

15/12/2016

remains committed to resolution 1540 (2004) and has,
in that regard, regularly submitted its national reports
in accordance with its provisions. My delegation would
like to emphasize the following points.
First, we look forward to examining in depth the
review just concluded as clearly stated in resolution
2325 (2016), which was adopted this morning, with
a view towards strengthening and following up on
resolution 1540 (2004).
Second, we view that step as part of the architecture
of disarmament in all its aspects. We firmly underline
that it is our common duty to make sure that no WMD,
no WMD technology and no WMD acquired through
trade end up in the hands of non-State actors. It is the
firm conviction of my delegation that the elimination
of WMDs is the surest way to prevent the threat that
they potentially pose to humankind in general, as was
stated 70 years ago during the very first session of the
General Assembly.
Third, we truly look forward to seeing an
articulated an appropriate balance between the need for
the peaceful use of technologies aimed at development
and socioeconomic progress and the concern to
protect ourselves from their misuse by unchecked or
inappropriate actors.
Fourth, it is evident to us that the review should
clearly indicate the right to access those technologies for
peaceful purposes and define precisely what constitutes
international cooperation and appropriate funding.
Fifth, the African Common Defense and Security
Policy of the African Union clearly defines all those
objectives, lends strong support to resolution 1540
(2004) and greatly counts on international cooperation
in all areas linked to combating WMDs. Moreover, the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy established by
the Pelindaba Treaty is today an impressive reality that
should be supported. In that regard, we recall resolution
1977 (2011), and in particular paragraphs 10, 15 and 17,
and we expect the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to take practical steps going
forward for regional cooperation.
Sixth, we understand that the actions needed
in general to achieve those goals require additional
and strong encouragement. However, we believe,
particularly in certain cases, — as set forth in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) — that nuclear-weapon States owe it to the world
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to begin fulfilling their commitment to disarmament
and to allowing equal access to the peaceful use of the
related technologies. In the case of the prolonged delay
of that fulfilment, the relevance of the Treaty could be
questioned. We do not consider those commitments
to be promises on shaky ground but indisputable
international legal obligations.
Seventh, the path taken by the international
community with regard to chemical and biological
weapons should set a similar example pertaining to
their nuclear counterparts and the threat that they pose.
My delegation deeply regrets that we are not even at
the starting blocks for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, which is an issue
that prevented any positive outcome of the most recent
NPT Review Conference.
Eighth, let me reiterate the importance of the
negotiation process and multilateral mechanisms. They
all have to be strengthened and respected. They remain
the most appropriate frameworks, in particular the
Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly.
Finally, my delegation, which is chairing the First
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventyfirst session, is sparing no effort towards achieving the
general goals of disarmament enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Our deep conviction continues
to be that the elimination of the threat of nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons must be based on the
complete elimination of those same weapons to prevent
the otherwise doomed fate that otherwise would lie in
store for all humankind.

S/PV.7837

globalization to their advantage in their sinister pursuit
to obtain knowledge and skills in the areas of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons. Several
existing groups may have generated financial resources
to achieve that end. While technical barriers may still
prevent them from producing the related sophisticated
means of delivery, nevertheless, given the deadly
nature of such weapons, even crude, low-level attacks
using toxic or radiological materials would have
deeply disturbing fatal consequences. It is imperative
to advance stronger national nuclear control and
counter-proliferation capacities coupled with enhanced
international cooperation to resolutely and effectively
address threats posed by non-State actors, such as
terrorist and other criminal groups.
Armenia attaches great importance to reinforcing
nuclear security both at the national and international
level through the ratification and implementation
of international legal instruments, as well as the
establishment of robust national legislation. It is
noteworthy that, in 2015, we adopted amendments to
the respective Government decrees on the approval of
the licensing procedure for the import and export of
radioactive materials, the rules for the physical protection
for radioactive materials and the concept of the physical
protection and security of the Armenian nuclear power
plant and nuclear materials. Those measures are aimed
at complementing the implementation of the provisions
of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its Amendment.

Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council for initiating the present open debate and for
the outstanding concept note (see S/2016/1013, annex).
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the
other briefers for substantively enriching this debate.
Armenia also welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016), which it co-sponsored.

Armenia has fully implements its international
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The national
action plan of Armenia for the period 2015-2020
outlines a series of concrete steps, ranging from
reviewing national measures that have already been
implemented to the coordination of ongoing and
anticipated activities. We are also active in counterproliferation initiatives, such as the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. The Government of Armenia is
continuously working with its international partners at
bilateral and multilateral levels to further enhance its
national capabilities in countering nuclear smuggling.

We are all witness to the growing risks of the
acquisition by non-State actors, such as terrorist and
other criminal groups, of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), including nuclear weapons and related lethal
threats to global security. Non-State actors, such as
terrorist and other criminal groups, have been using

In managing and addressing risks of the acquisition
and the use of radiological, biological, radiological or
nuclear weapons by non-State actors, such as terrorists
and other criminal groups, it is of vital importance to
acknowledge their dynamic, non- static nature. Rapid
technological progress may work to the advantage

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

16-4414379/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of those pursuing sinister goals, while national and
international actors should take every effort against
acting slowly on the uptake in policymaking and
respective legal and practical risk resistance measures
against proliferation. Such concerns require further
study as part of the threat assessment on radiological,
biological, radiological and nuclear materials. All efforts
at national and international levels to address such
threats should take these realities into consideration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Macay (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) is a priority for Belarus in the area of
international security. Adopted more than a decade
ago, resolution 1540 (2004) is more needed than
ever as a mechanism for ensuring and strengthening
international security. We believe that, above all, the
best way at the national level to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) involves an
effective mechanism for counteracting the illegal trade
in WMDs and related materials.
Belarus pursues a consistent and responsible
policy in this area and is party to all major
international agreements on nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. We became the first State to
voluntarily renounce the possession of the nuclear
weapons inherited after the collapse of the Soviet
Union. In 1996, exactly 20 years ago, we completed
the full removal of nuclear weapons from the territory
of Belarus.

15/12/2016

the sanitary epidemiological welfare of our population.
This document includes, inter alia, improved rules
on the storage, transport and procedures regarding
pathogenic microorganisms that fall into risk groups 1
to 4 of the World Health Organization. Belarus is open
to active cooperation with States in the region of Eurasia
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A
prime example of that cooperation was the trilateral
meeting for a peer review between Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan supported by Belarus, on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was held in the 2+1
format in Minsk in 2016. That review was the second
event of its kind in the OSCE region — in the whole
world, for that matter — and the first meeting to be
held in a trilateral format. We intend to continue
provide assistance to Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and other
States in the implementation of such a vitally important
international tool, namely, resolution 1540 (2004).
We are planning to hold another seminar for
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States
on the implementation of this resolution. The first
such seminar was held in 2013 in Minsk. It produced
informal recommendations on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic fo Korea
Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): At the outset, let me join previous speakers in
expressing my gratitude for the successful efforts made
by the Spanish presidency in convening this meeting.

Belarus remains committed to resolution 1540
(2004). In 2012, Belarus, in close cooperation with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, adopted a road map for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) at the national level. Special
attention was paid to export control, as well as to the
control of biological materials. A number of measures
enshrined in the road map have already been incorporated
in our national legislation. For example, Belarus has in
place a multilayer system of export controls that allow
us to efficiently counteract the spread of WMDs and
related materials. When developing that instrument, we
took into account best practices in the nuclear sphere.

First of all, I strongly and totally reject the remarks
made by some delegations — including Japan France
and South Korea — who have picked up the issue of
self-defence and nuclear deterrence of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, an act of encroachment
upon the sovereignty of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. As far as I know, the main agenda of
this meeting is stopping the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. Notwithstanding
the disregard of that agenda, some delegations have
picked up the issue of the nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea once more. It does nothing but show the sinister
political aims to increase the pressure against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in this forum.

In 2016, we adopted a new edition of our laws on
export control, a well as a new edition of our laws on

The issue of nuclear weapons on the Korean
peninsula is the product of hostile policies of the United

80/83

16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

States towards the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. As we have stated previously, if the United
States had not been hostile to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and threatened our country with its
nuclear weapons, then the issue of nuclear weapons on
the Korean peninsula would not exist. Additionally,
the Korean peninsula would not have turned into a
global hotspot.
The nuclear threat and blackmail of the largest
nuclear Power against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is reaching an extreme juncture. Joint military
exercises by the United States and South Korea took
place recently in the southern half of the Korean
peninsula, simulating a real war with the participation
of hundreds of thousands of armed forces, including
special forces an strategic nuclear assets, aimed at
decapitating the leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and occupying Pyongyang, as well as
introducing nuclear strategic bombers to Guam in the
wake of the official decision on the development and
deployment of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
anti-missile system in South Korea and after bringing
them into the Korean peninsula and its vicinity. With
strategic assests that include nuclear-powered aircraft
carriers and nuclear submarines, the United States is
driving the situation on the Korean peninsula towards
an extremely explosive situation.
It is the consistent stance of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to fundamentally remove the danger
of nuclear war posed by the United States by relying
on its own powerful nuclear deterrence and defending
regional and global peace and security. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea possesses nuclear deterrence
as a self-defence measure to protect its State and social
system in the face of the constant nuclear threat that
emanates from the United States. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will hold steadfast in its
strategy of bolstering up its own nuclear forces.
Finally, as a responsible nuclear-armed State, and
as we have already declared, our Republic will not use
nuclear weapons first, unless the forces of aggression
that are hostile towards us violate our sovereignty
with their own nuclear weapons. We will faithfully
observe our commitment to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, which we made before the
international community. We will continue to strive for
global denuclearization.

S/PV.7837

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
join other speakers in thanking the Spanish presidency
for organizing this debate.
At this meeting, the representative of the Israeli
regime once again levelled unfounded allegations
against Iran that we categorically reject. We believe
that this was another futile attempt to deflect attention
from the threat posed by the Israeli regime, which is
the embodiment of the nexus between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction.
First of all, we believe that the Israeli statement
was the output of a dangerous, paranoid, deperate and
wandering mind that is not even cognizant of what
this Security Council debate is all about. That latter
point is also applicable to the statement made by the
representative of the United Arab Emirates. Unlike
the Israeli regime, Iran has categorically rejected the
development, stockpiling and use of weapons of mass
destruction and is a committed party to all international
instruments banning such weapons. Therefore,
Iran’s interest in and commitment to preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
are unequivocal.
Unlike the Israeli regime, Iran has supported
regional and international efforts to achieve the
universality of the international treaties banning
weapons of mass destruction. As is well known, in
1974 Iran proposed the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. It was strongly
supported by the international community and numerous
resolutions and decisions were subsequently adopted by
the General Assembly and review conferences of the
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) towards its realization.
But the Israeli regime, which is not a party to
any international treaty banning weapons of mass
destruction, is the only obstacle in the way of the
establishment of the zone and continues to block all
international and regional efforts to fulfil that goal.
Council members may all recall that the 2015 NPT
Review Conference was unfortunately unable to adopt a
final document, mainly due to an external factor — the
pressure of a non-party to the NPT, the Israeli regime,
on certain States parties that ultimately objected to the
adoption of a final document. That happened because

16-4414381/83

S/PV.7837

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the final document contained a decision on a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East.
As a victim of terrorism and the use chemical
weapons, Iran is fully cognizant of the catastrophic
dangers that transfers of such weapons to terrorists
could entail. We are deeply concerned about the
relationship between terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction. That is why we emphasize that the
international community must join hands in eliminating
that risk by compelling the Israel regime to accede, as
a non-nuclear-weapon party and without any condition
or further delay, to the NPT and other major treaties
banning weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
the Israeli regime — which is born out of terrorism and
maintained by committing terrorist acts, occupation,
aggression and genocide — pose the most dangerous
threat to regional and international security and the
viability of the international NPT regime.
I would also like to react very briefly to the
statement made by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates. First of all, the accusations of the Emirates
representative are absurd, hypocritical and farcical for
the following reasons.
First, while they are busy accusing Iran of
interfering in the domestic affairs of other countries,
the jet fighters of the United Arab Emirates are busy
bombing innocent civilians in Yemen and the civilian
infrastructure of that impoverished country. Such
inhumane acts amount to war crimes.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates and other
partners have exported a host of extremist takfiri
ideologies for decades, and continue to do so, and are
funding and arming terrorists in Iraq, Syria and many
other places. The similarity between the statements
made by the representative of the United Arab Emirates
and some of its partners, on the one hand, and that
delivered by the Israeli representative, on the other,
is not a pure coincidence. It is a sign of the growing
coordination and cooperation against Iran and the
Palestinian people. It is not a pure coincidence that
the United Arab Emirates is increasingly silent on the
Israeli crimes in Palestine — a silence that could be
tantamount to betraying the Palestinian cause.
Finally, we know that the United Arab Emirates
and some its partners in the Persian Gulf region are
depressed over the nuclear deal that put an end to the
fabricated crisis. We also know how hard they attempted
82/83

15/12/2016

to impede the road to that deal, to no avail. What the
United Arab Emirates officials are doing and saying is
the expression of their frustration over the fruition of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. They in fact
tried to escalate their provocations against Iran in order
to neutralize the detente that the deal brought about in
the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Abdallah (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
fully supports the international trend towards building
an international community free from the use or threat
of use force, under the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and based on stability,
peace and equality. We reaffirm our readiness to
participate in any genuine, serious international effort
of good will to achieve that objective, particularly
with regard to preventing terrorists from possessing
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials.
Based on its conviction that the use of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, is
unethical and to be rejected and condemned; on its
firm support for efforts to declare the Middle East a
zone free of all weapons of mass destruction, first and
foremost nuclear weapons; and its desire to prove to the
world at large that it is committed to standing up against
any use of chemical weapons, the Syrian Arab Republic
has acceded to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction. In 2003,
when we were a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, we sponsored a draft resolution declaring
the Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction,
especially nuclear weapons. However, all our efforts at
the time were met by the threat of a United States veto.
Ever since it acceded to membership of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), the Syrian Arab Republic has
been committed to all accession requirements and all
resolutions of the OPCW Executive Council. We have
met all our obligations, often prior to their deadlines.
We have cooperated in all the joint work affiliated
with the OPCW and the United Nations, as has been
commended repeatedly by both organizations and
public opinion worldwide.
Some countries have sought today to fish in
troubled waters by referring to the two reports of
16-44143

15/12/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). We would
like to raise a question in that regard: Have those
delegations paid sufficient attention and thoroughly
read and analysed both reports, or did they simply
skip to the pages of conclusions in order to serve their
politicization of this file and attempts to use it in the
context of their exploitation of the United Nations to
attack the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
As we have previously reaffirmed — and here we
wish to address those delegations that heed only their
own biased views and narrow minds — my country
has extensive comments on the structural gaps in the
JIM reports, which we have submitted to the Security
Council in two formal documents. Among those
comments, to name only a few, is the fact that neither
report presents any real evidence that chemical weapons

S/PV.7837

were actually used in the incidents in which my country
was referred to.
My country calls upon the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling into the hands of the armed
terrorist groups in Syria, which have in many incidents
used toxic chemical materials against civilians as
well as the army of the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
toxic materials had been infiltrated into Syria through
the borders of neighbouring countries, particularly
Turkey. We have informed the Security Council and its
specialized committees about those and other incidents
on many occasions. However, no real measures have
been taken against those countries that have actually
been party to transporting such toxic materials to the
armed terrorist groups.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

16-4414383/83
