UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

YEAR

MEETING- 28 MAY 1975

w &aRy
NEW YORK

NOV ‘1 ct ‘2t.z

lJN/sA GcuEcTIoIN
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l822) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring Pre‘sident . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force $3/l 1694) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV .1822

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (sj$~t&f%&~) bt$ dormally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Secuhty Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it ,Fp.gears or in which infor. . ,#I’
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council,. numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in-j&r~y%&imes ‘of ~khhtions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1822nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 28 May 1975, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Shridath S. RAMPHAL

(Guyana).

1975. The Council also has before it a draft resolu-tion [S/11700] which was prepared in the course of
consultations that took place last week. In accordance
with the procedure also worked out during those
consultations, I propose to put the draft resolution to
the vote first, before the Council proceeds with its
discussion. If I hear no obejction, I shall proceed
at once to the vote.

President: The representatives of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l822)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The. situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/11694)

The draft resolution was adopted by I3 votes to
none. ’
Two members (China and Iraq) did not participate
in the voting.

3. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those
representatives whose names are inscribed on my list
of speakers.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

4. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation front
Chinese): As is known to all, China has always
held a different position in principle on the question of
dispatching United Nations forces, which we have
expounded on many occasions at the Security Council
meetings. In conformity with this position, the Chinese
delegation did cot participate -in the voting on the
-.
draft resolution S/l 1700.

1 . The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the members of
the Council I should like to express my appreciation
and admiration for the manner in which Mr. de Guiringaud presided over the Council during the month
of April. During that month the Council was required
to meet only on the question of the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Emergency Force
(UNEF), and Mr. de Guiringaud on that occasion
conducted the meeting with his usual sagacity,
patience and skill. The informal meetings that
prepared the way for the adoption of that resolution
had been led by his able deputy, Mr. Lecompt,
and he deserves the Council’s gratitude for the
important contribution he made towards the success
of those important negotiations.

5 . Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Mr. President, it is a pleasure to see you presiding over this
meeting.
:
6. ‘I welcome the opportunity today to participate in
the decision of the Security Council to renew for an
additional six months the mandate of UNDOF. We
believe this Force is important to the maintenance
of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces of 31 May 1974 [S/11302/Add.I,

Adoption of the agenda

Annex I].
The agenda was adopted.

7. On behalf of the United States, I express once
again our appreciation for all the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his associates in maintaining
UNDOF in accordance with the wishes of the
Coun& Wti -particularly commend those Govemments which contribute officers and troops to UNDOF,
the men who serve there, and the officer-in-charge,
Colonel Hannes Philipp. -We are especially pleased
that the Secretary-General is able to report that both

The situation in the Middle East:

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (S/l 1694)

2. The PRESIDENT: The report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 27 November 1974 to 21 May 1975 was circulated on 21 May
1

parties have generally complied with the Agreement
on Disengagement and that the cease-fire has been
maintained. This is a job well done.

resolution 338 (1973). As the SecretaryGeneral
observed in paragraph 35 of his report, the Disengagement Agreement “is not a peace agreement, but only
a step towards a just and durable peace on the
basis of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)“.

8. I congratulate you, Mr. President, for your
efforts in working out this resolution for presentation
to the Council and ensuring its prompt adoption. All
concerned are to be warmly congratulated on this
constructive step.

14. In conclusion, I wish to express my sincere
belief that the obstacles which *have been holding
up progress towards a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East can soon be removed, and that the
continued presence of UNDOF will definitely improve
the outlook for an early peace. Let us all hope
that concrete developments will soon give us cause
for renewed and heightened optimism.

9. Mr. SAITO (Japan): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, upon assuming the presidency
of the Council for May. We were already familiar
with your distinguished gifts as Foreign Minister,
which have now received further confirmation. I
wish also to extend the thanks of my delegation
to the representative of France, Mr. de Guiringaud,
for his and his Mission’s admirable services to the
Council during his presidency in April.

15. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation from French): Sir, it is my pleasure
to extend to you the fraternal and warm congratulations
of the Cameroon delegation upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
statesmanlike qualities, your familiarity with the
problems of the Organization, and the role and prestige
of your country, Guyana, within the great non-aligned
family are, I am convinced, a valuable guarantee of
the success of our work. You may be sure that my
delegation will always be behind you to help you to
perform your important tasks with success.

10. May we also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his continued success in
directing the operations of UNDOF. We would ask
him to convey our thanks and best wishes to Colonel
Hannes Philipp of Austria for his service as officerin-charge of the Disengagement Force since 15 december 1974, following the departure of Brigadier-General
Gonzalo Bricefio Zevallos.
1 1 . We read with care and attention the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We were pleased to note his comment
that the general discipline, understanding and bearing
of all members of UNDOF reflected credit on the
soldiers and their commanders, as well as on the
countries which have contributed contingents. We
concur with his finding, in paragraph 35, that “Until
further progress can be made towards the achievement
of ..* a just and durable peace, the situation in the
Israel-Syria sector, and indeed in the Middle East as
a whole, will remain unstable and potentially
dangerous”, and that the mandate of UNDOF should
be extended for another six months.

16. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express the sincere gratitude of my delegation to the
representative of France, Mr. de Guiringaud, who so
effectively and with such remarkable objectivity
conducted the proceedings of the Council in April.
17. The vote just cast by my delegation in favour
of the draft resolution by which the Security Council
has decided to renew for a further period of six months
the mandate of UNDOF is within the framework of
the consistent policy of the Government of the United
Republic of Cameroon to support and promote all
constructive initiatives that may create conditions for
a just peace and stability in the Middle East.

12. The delegation of Japan, therefore, voted in
favour of the draft resolution just adopted, which will
extend the mandate until the end of November.
We consider this extension essential for the maintenance of peace in the area. Since the situation there,
although quiet at present, remains unstable and potentially dangerous, our action today was needed to
provide an atmosphere conducive to the further
efforts which, my delegation sincerely hopes, will
lead to a just and lasting settlement. My delegation
wishes to pay tribute to the statesmanship of the
parties directly concerned in reaching agreement on
the renewal of the mandate.

18. Of course, on the basis of the information at
present available to us, the prospects for peace are
not yet entirely encouraging, and the situation in the
area remains unstable and potentially dangerous. There
is, however, some cause for satisfaction-and this
is made clear in the excellent report of the Secretary
General-in the fact that over the past six months
the situation in UNDOF’s area of operation has
remained calm and there have been no major ceasefire violations or loss of life. In that context I take
particular pleasure in paying a tribute to the Syrian
Government, which has been good enough to agree
to a further renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.

-13. Let us all hope that, with the extension of the
mandate of UNDOF, the momentum for ‘a settlement will be maintained by utilizing every possible
peaceful means to achieve the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 338 (1973). The time
provided by the extension must not be wasted. Soon
two years will have elapsed since the adoption of

1 9 . Let us hope that this decision, of great political
significance, will be properly appreciated by all the
parties directly and indirectly concerned, so that
during this new period-which will, of course, still
be a’difficult and thorny time-the process of peace
2

envisaged in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) may finally be decisively engaged in.

25. Finally, I should once again like to commend
the Secretary General, the officer in charge of
UNDOF and all connected with the Force for the
exemplary way in which they have carried out their
difficult tasks during the last six momths.

20. In conclusion, we should like to take this
opportunity once again to congratulate and extend
our encouragement to the Secretary General for his
tireless efforts to bring about an era of peace in the
Middle East. We should like also to congratulate and
extend our encouragement to all the SecretaryGeneral’s assistants, and particularly the Force
Commander, Colonel Hannes Philipp.

26. Mr. CAVAGLIERI (Italy): Mr. President, may
I be permitted first of all to convey to you my delegation’s warm congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
recall with pleasure on this occasion the friendly
relations that my country maintains with your own.
I should like also to associate myself with the welldeserved thanks and congratulations that have been
addressed to your predecessor, the representative
of France, Mr. Louis de Guiringaud.

21. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, may I first congratulate you personally on
your assumption of the office of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We are particularly
glad to welcome you to this important office-first,
as the distinguished Foreign Minister of a fellow
member of the Commonwealth and, secondly,
following your recent election at the Commonwealth
Conference at Kingston to succeed Mr. Arnold Smith
as Commonwealth Secretary-General. We are, I think,
extremely fortunate to have your leadership in the
important debates upon which the Security Council is
now embarking.

27. On 17 April, when the Council met here to
renew the mandate of UNEF [f82lst meeting] for
three additional months, Mr. Plaja stressed Italy’s
concern about the state of uneasiness and precariousness which characterized the calm in the Middle
East area. In spite of all efforts carried out to bridge
the differences between the parties concerned, no
substantial progress had then been achieved in the
direction of a just and durable peace as indicated in
the relevant resolutions adopted by the Council. We
therefore at that time regarded as a success the very
fact of the agreement obtained by the Council from
the parties concerned for an extension of the mandate
of the Force separating their armies, even if limited
to a three-month period.

22. I should like to congratulate your distinguished
predecessor, Mr. de Guiringaud of France, for the
great skill with which he handled our debates during
the month of April. Perhaps I might also congratulate
him on the distinction of his recent promotion to the
title of Ambassador of France.

28. May I venture to say that the prospects as they
appear today look somewhat brighter. First of all we
have to take note with satisfaction of the goodwill
shown by the parties in agreeing to a renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF for a further six months.
Secondly, nobody will deny the positive significance of
the fact that efforts have been continued on several
levels to advance the implementation of resolution
338 (1973). Finally, the series of high-level meetings
taking place or scheduled to take place among various
parties directly or indirectly concerned with the Middle
East crisis appears to be a source of hope for all.

23. My delegation was very pleased indeed to vote in
favour of the draft resolution which we have just
adopted to renew the mandate of UNDOF for a
further period of six months. -We particularly welcome
this as a demonstration of the determination of the
parties concerned to press on with their efforts to
achieve a peaceful settlement. We agree with the
judgement of the Secretary General that the continued
presence of UNDOF remains essential at the present
time. This is particularly true in view of the various
efforts which are now under way to prepare for the
next stage of negotiations towards a just and lasting
settlement in the Middle East. The continued presence
of UNDOF is more than ever necessary to maintain
the peaceful and stable background in which alone
those negotiations may prosper.

29. The current course of events, which indeed
shows a renewal of efforts towards peace in the Middle
East area, will draw further impetus from today’s
decision of the Council, which has been made possible
through an act of wisdom by the leaders of the parties
directly concerned.

24. At the same time, we must not lose sight of the
fact that, again as the Secretary-General points out
in his report, the situation in the Middle East is,
and will remain, dangerous and precarious so long
as a settlement has not been reached. The mandate
which we are renewing today cannot serve as a
substitute for that settlement, but only as a means of
promoting efforts to reach it. We therefore appeal to
all those concerned to make full use of this period
to press on with these efforts to carry the negotiations forward.

30. UNDOF has commendably carried out its
function and met our expectations. The renewal of its
mandate today should not, however, induce us to
believe that UNDOF has in itself the power of
perpetuating in the area that calm that it has so far
protected. We must bear firmly in mind that the next
six months will be crucial and that progress must
therefore be achieved on the substance of the problem.
3

31. We consider with the same deep interest any
kind of international efforts: those that may be carried
out through some kind of machinery similar to that
which successfully managed to produce the Disengagement Agreements, efforts aimed at reconvening the
Geneva Conference or efforts which may combine
.
those two kinds.

the Zionist aggressor in the Middle East. The continued
extension of the mandate of the. United Nations
forces in the area since 1967 has unfortunately enabled
the Zionists not only to consolidate their annexation
and colonization of the territories occupied and coveted
by the Israeli imperialists, but also to persist in
depriving the peoples of those territories of their
legitimate rights. While the United Nations forces
continue in their tasks of observation of the ceasefire and disengagement, no parallel action is being
taken by the United Nations to ensure that the
aggressor desists from implementing his illegal actions
and policies in the occupied territories. In our view,
such United Nations action is imperative, for the
Zionist policies in the occupied territories are as
dangerous and as disruptive as a breakdown of the
cease-fire. My delegation, therefore, has again
refrained from participating in the voting on the
resolution just adopted by the Council.

32. Our basic and fundamental task, as a member
of the Council and as a country which maintains
friendly relations with all in the Middle East, has
been recently defined by the Italian Foreign Minister.
May I quote him here again:
“We must help the parties directly involved to
overcome courageously and far-sightedly the
contradictions which for too long have crystallized
a situation which is primarily contrary to their
own basic interest.”

37. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Mr. President, first
of all I want to congratulate you sincerely on behalf
of my delegation and to express our great satisfaction
at seeing the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana
presiding over the Council. Our appreciation also
goes to Mr. Jackson, who has been conducting
very important consultations during this month. Our
thanks also go to Mr. de Guiringaud for the extremely
efficient and skilful way in which he conducted our
negotiations last month.

33. As far as Italy is concerned, we are ready to
make our contribution to current efforts. As to UNDOF
itself, we draw some satisfaction from the participation, though limited, of Italian personnel. On a broader
bilateral level, our diplomatic action to sponsor peace
continues. May I mention in this regard the very
successful visit to Cairo last month by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Italy.
34. I should like to conclude by commending UNDOF
and its members for their action in carrying out an
assignment in such difficult and demanding circumstances. We also wish to express our sincere
appreciation and congratulations to the SecretaryGeneral and to his associates for the role they so
untiringly played in this crucial matter.

38. It was with deep satisfaction that the Swedish
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
which we just have adopted. The decision by the
Council to prolong the UNDOF Mandate for a further
period of six months should assist the parties in
preserving an atmosphere in the area which will
allow further constructive efforts towards peace. We
deeply appreciate the Syrian agreement to an
extension.

35. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq): Mr. President, it is
with deep satisfaction that my delegation welcomes
you to the United Nations to. preside over the
meetings of the Security Council. Your country,
Guyana, can rightly be regarded as a pioneer of the
non-aligned movement in the great Latin American
continent. I have personally had the privilege of
witnessing the extent of your country’s dedication to
the principles of non-alignment during the Conference
of Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Countries
held at Georgetown in 1972. It was also an opportunity
for all of us who attended that conference to enjoy.
the hospitality and the genuine warmth of the people
and the Government of Guyana. I should .not fail
on this occasion to commend your representative
to the United Nations, Mr. Jackson, for his valuable
efforts in conducting the informal consultations which
preceded this meeting of the Council. My delegation
would also like to express its genuine appreciation
to Mr. de Guiringaud of France for the excellence,
courtesy and precision with which he presided over
the Council during the month of April.

39. The situation on the border between Israel and
Syria. is calm. But, as the Secretary-General has
pointed out in his report to the Council, the present
quiet is a precarious one and the situation in the
Israel-Syria sector, and indeed in the Middle East
as a whole, will remain unstable and potentially
dangerous. We have no feeling that recent developments in the Middle East have in any way contradicted the fundamental observation that further
steps must be taken in order to achieve a lasting and
stable peace in the area. On the contrary, the Swedish
delegation believes that it is now as urgent as ever
to take real steps towards a negotiated solution
in the Middle East. We shall therefore support all
efforts at finding ways and means to work towards
peace.
40. In the meantime, however, UNDOF has to carry
out its important task. It is a great pleasure for me
to convey to the men; to the officers and to the Force
Commander of UNDOF my Government’s deep

36. Iraq continues firmly to believe that no action
should be taken which would appease or accommodate
-

4

appreciation for their outstanding services to the cause
of peace. My Government’s deep appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General and his staff for the
outstanding way in which they fulfilled their diicult
task.

the Tel Aviv authorities being the only ones who do
ilot wish to apply them.
47. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to
the Secretary-General, for the objective report he has
submitted and for his efforts in the Middle East
so that a just and lasting peace can be established,
a peace that can but benefit the entire international
community.

41. My delegation wants to stress, as it did &h
regard to UNEF [ibid.], that in the interest of efficiency
and for important reasons of principle it is necessary
that the Force should be able to function as one
integrated unit within the total area of operation.
We therefore give our support to the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to this end and hope he will be
able to register substantial progress in this matter
soon.

48. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russian): I should like first of
all, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, to congratulate
you, Mr. Minister, on your assumption of the very
important and responsible post of President of the
Security Council. It is a particular pleasure for me to
welcome you to this post as a representative of a
friendly country and an active participant in the nonaligned movement, which is making an important
contribution to the maintenance and the strengthening
of peace and international security. Permit me also to
refer to the active and positive efforts of the representative of your country, Mr. Jackson, who has won
himself great .respect and authority in the United
Nations. Under your presidency, Mr. Minister, the
Council has just adopted an important resolution
which tie hope will play a positive role in resolving
the problem of a Middle East settlement.

42. UNDOF has so far been a success. But the aim
of UNDOF is to assist in creating an atmosphere
conducive to the search for peace, not to be an end
in itself. And the final judgement on UNDOF cannot
be made until we definitely can see whether this
principal aim has been fullilled.
43. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretation from
French): After the eminent personalities who have
preceded me, I should like, Mr. President, to address
to .you the sincere congratulations of my delegation
on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for this month. For those of us who have had the
good. fortune of working with you, we know that
your past, that your vast experience in international
relations, your eminent qualities as a patient and
persevering diplomat, as well as the wisdom which
we know you possess, are a certain guarantee for
the success of the work of the Security Council.

49. At the same time; I should like to express my
gratitude and congratulations to your predecessor
in the presidency of the Council during the month of
April, the representative of France, Mr. de Guiringaud,
and to associate myself with the welcome and
congratulations that have been expressed here by
Mr. Richard about .the promotion of Mr. de Guiringaud to the office of Ambassador of France. I should
also like to refer to the active efforts of his deputy,
Mr. Lecompt. Under the guidance of Mr. de Guiringaud and Mr. Lecompt, the Security Council prepared
land -adopted resolution 368 (1975) to extend the
mandate of UNEF in the Egypt-Israel sector.

44. We have just adopted a resolution which once
again renews the mandate of UNDOF charged with
the task of observing the disengagemint on the
Syrian-Israeli frontier.
45. In voting for this resolution, my delegation
wished to give the Security Council an additional
opportunity, in conjunction with the praiseworthy
diplomatic efforts being undertaken in the region,
to arrive at a just and lasting peace. UNDOF,
as its name indicates, has the essential role of
observing the disengagement of Israeli military forces
from Syrian territory. It therefore cannot constitute
a permanent line of demarcation between Syria,
which once again has evinced praiseworthy wisdom,
and the Zionist occupation forces, which have so far
refused any dialogue and any concession.

50. The resolution just adopted by the Security
Council to renew the mandate of UNDOF in the
Israel-Syria sector is designed to bring about a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem on
the basis of the immediate implementation of Security
Council resolution 338 (1973). We have to note once
again that this fundainental decision of the Security
Council, which provides for the earliest possible
achievement of a comprehensive political settlement of
the Middle East problem on the basis of the lofty
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
has so far not been implemented, This is so because
of the positidn of Israel, which stubbornly refuses
to withdraw its troops from all the Arab territories
occupied in 1967 and to acknowledge the lawful
national rights of the Palestinian people, including
its right to self-determination and the creation of its
own State. Those inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people are acknowledged by all countries and the

46. My delegation would like to avail itself of this
opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
people and Government of Syria, whose patience
and political courage have made possible the renewal
of the Force’s mandate. Israel must realize that it will
not help itself by remaining deaf to the appeal of the
international community. It is the duty of the Security
Council to ensure that its resolutions are respected,
5

whole of world public opinion; they have been laid
down and confiied by the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session in resolution 3236.

the idea that all countries in that region should
enjoy its fruits. There is a possibility of Israel’s
obtaining adequate guarantees in the interest of its
own security if it so wishes. But this is possible
only on the road to p,eace with the Arabs, not on
the road to hostility ,and confrontation with the
Arabs.

51. The decision just adopted by the Security
Council to renew for a further period of six months
the mandate of UNDOF should be used primarily
for active work towards the earliest possible achievement of a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East conflict and the establishment of a lasting and
just peace in that area.

For this, those who determine Israel’s policy should
do just one thing: they should renounce Israel’s
plans for annexing the lands it captured by force and
should recognize the rights of the Arab people of
Palestine to create their own State. Success in the
settlement of the problem and the security of Israel
will depend on what underlies its policy-annexationist
territorial ambitions or peace.

52. The position of the Soviet Union is we11 known.
The Soviet Union has, from the very beginning,
been on the side of the Arab people in their struggle
against the Israeli aggressors. As was stressed in a
statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the USSR, Mr. A. A. Gromyko, at a dinner on
23 April in honour of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Syria, Mr. Khaddam:

“From time to time, in Israel and in certain
Western capitals, there is a reversion to the idea of
separate deals with regard to the withdrawal of
the occupying forces from various parts of the
Arab territories they have occupied in isolation from
a comprehensive solution of the problem. But those
ideas are clearly designed--erroneously, of courseto make the Arab peoples forget their just demands.
The partisans of such a tactic in certain capitals
are lauding it to the skies and calling it-but,
obviously, it is a matter of a misunderstanding-a
‘step by step approach to a settlement’, although
it should properly be called a ‘tactic of proceeding
step-by-step away from a settlement’.”

“The Soviet Union has acted thus because
the cause of the Arabs is a just one and Arab
States which have fallen victims to aggression are
struggling for the liberation of their lands from the
occupiers. The Golan Heights belong to Syria, to
the Syrian people and not to Israel, just as the
other Arab territories they have captured do not
belong to Israel either.**
53. The USSR consistentiy favours the establishment
of a lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
For this it is necessary to ensure the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories they
occupied in 1%7, to satisfy the lawful rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including its right to the
creation of its own State, and to grant to all States
in the area the possibility of free existence and
development.

56. There is a special machinery, of course, which
is designed to work in order to establish peace in
the Middle East. This is the Geneva Peace Conference,
and the Soviet Union, as one of its Co-Chairmen,
proposes the resumption of its work. We, of course,
have in mind serious preparation for the Conference
and a serious approach to its tasks, although so far
we are not entirely sure that all the participants in
the Conference are aiming at the same thing.

54. As has been repeatedly stressed in statements
of Soviet leaders, all these questions are part of a
single complex whole, and a genuine settlement
requires a comprehensive approach to a solution.
The proper path to this is the resumption of the work
of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle
East, which is the most appropriate forum for the
consideration and resolution of all questions involved
in the Middle East settlement. The Soviet Union
favours careful, scrupulous preparation for this
Conference and the resumption of its work in the near
future.

57. The Soviet Government has consistently and
actively fought for the idea of eradicating this hotbed
of war in the Middle East and eliminating the cause
of tension in this area on the basis of the relevant
United Nations decisions, within the framework of the
Geneva Peace Conference. The preservation of a
situation fraught with unresolved problems in the
Middle East is advantageous only to those hostile
to the easing of international tension and those who
are interested in international adventurism, which
carries with it Ihe danger. of new conflicts and new
wars.

55. With reference to the problem of the Middle
East settlement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the USSR, Comrade Gromyko, in his statement on
14 May at a solemn assembly in Moscow on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Warsaw
Treaty, made the following statement:

58. For us Soviet people, war is no abstract concept.
We only recently, on 9 May, marked the thirtieth
anniversary of the victory in the great patriotic
war. In the course of that war, the Soviet nations
lost more than 20 million people. Thousands of our
towns and villages were destroyed by the Fascist
invaders. Now, remembering what incalculable

“The Socialist countries are firmly in favour of
a durable and just peace in the Middle East and of
6

disasters and sufferings were caused to the Soviet
people and to the other peoples of the world by the
Second World War, the Soviet Government and the
people of our country are determined not to permit
the outbreak of a’ new world conflict, the consequences of which could be ruinous to the whole of
.mankind. To the task of preventing this is subordinated
the whole foreign’ policy activity of the Soviet Union,
based on the programme of peace proclaimed at the
Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union.

60. The Soviet delegation has attentively studied the
report of the Secretary-General on UNDOF. We would
like to make some comments on the report and the
Force operations with regard to the observation of
disengagement.
61. The USSR delegation would like first of all to
draw the attention of the Council to the important
warning contained in paragraph 35 of the report to
the effect that
“the present quiet [in the Israel-Syria sector]
is a precarious one. The Disengagement Agreement.. . is not a peace agreement but only a step
towards a just and durable peace on the basis of
Security Council resolution 338 (1973). Until further
progress can be made towards the achievement of
such a just and durable peace, the situation in the
Israel-Syria sector, and indeed in the Middle East
as a whole, will remain unstable and potentially
dangerous.**

59. New confirmation of the peace-loving intentions
and efforts of the Soviet Union is provided by its
appeal to the peoples, parliaments and Governments,
adopted by the Central Commiteee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the Government
of the Soviet Union on 9 May, on the occasion of the
thirtieth anniversary of the ending of the Second
World War. This appeal states:
“The Soviet people, the Soviet State, which bore
the fundamental brunt of the clash with fascism,
once again declares its firm intention to do everything in its power, along with other nations and
States, to exclude war from the life of mankind.
Expressing the will and the fierce desire of all Soviet
people, we shall strive to see that there is full and
comprehensive confirmation, in the practice of
international relations, of the principles of peaceful
coexistence of States with different social systems,
the guaranteeing of the irreversibility of the
process of international detente, the limitation and
halting of the arms race in all its forms, unswerving
progress towards general and complete disarmament, the liquidation of existing hotbeds of threats
of war, with unfailing acknowledgement and respect
of the right of every people to independence and
equal security, the creation of a regional and general
system of security and equal co-operation among
States, the comprehensive development of mutually
advantageous relations in the economic field and
in the fields of science, technology and culture,
with the observance of the undoubted right of
every country to dispose of its natural resources
and to protect its laws and customs, the ensuring
of real guarantees for effective and equal participation of all countries and peoples in world policies;
the elimination of neo-colonialism and all kinds of
discrimination against any countries, the creation
of an international climate where potential
aggressors, those who have an interest in and a
taste for adventurism and sabre-rattling, will meet
decisive and universal resistance, and an atmosphere
in which security and the assurance of a peaceful
future will in fact be within the range of all peoples
and countries.*’

This assessment given by the Secretary-General of
the situation in the Middle East reflects the actual
state of affairs in this area and warrants the most
serious scrutiny and attention from the Security
Council.
62. The report of the Secretary-General makes it
clear that Israel, in defiance of the decisions of the
Council, still continues to discriminate against certain
contingents of UNDOF, both in the Israel-Syria
sector and, as we know, in the Egypt-Israel sector,
and is limiting the freedom of movement of the
personnel of these contingents in Arab territory
occupied by Israel forces. Thus, it is not only
undermining the well-known decisions of principle of
the Security Council but is also doing great damage
to the .effectiveness of the operations of the United
Nations forces. Decisive measures should be taken to
see that these illegal actions on the part of Israel
are ended.
63. In the report, unfortunately, reference is generally
made to the lack of progress in talks with the parties
with regard to the carrying out of joint work to
clear mines from the area of operation of the United
Nations forces. There is hardly any need here to
mention the fact that such an impermissible delay
with regard to clearing mines is posing a threat to the
life of the Syrian civilian population living in this
area, and also to the soldiers and officers of UNDOF.
It considerably reduces the effectiveness of the
operations of the Force in its observation of the
disengagement. We must demand from Israel that it
cease its sabotage in this matter and that it co-operate
with the Force in clearing the disengagement zone,
which was under Israeli occupation, of Israeli mines.
As representative of the Soviet Union, I take pleasure
in pointing out, as is made clear in paragraph 14 of
the report of the Secretary-General, that sappers from
the friendly country of socialist Poland, at the risk

We, the Soviet people, note with great satisfaction
that all peace-loving countries in the world have
responded to this appeal of the Soviet Union positively
and with great attention.
7

of their own lives, have been carrying out and
continue to carry out very remarkable work in clearing
mines from the zone in which the Force is operating.
We cannot help thinking that .other contingents of
the Force also should take part in these mine-clearing
operations.
64. The USSR delegation notes with satisfaction the
point made in. the Secretary-General’s report to the
effect that the expenditures for the Force have been
kept within the limits of appropriations approved by
the General Assembly, and that in the future these
expenditures will not exceed the appropriations
earmarked. At the same time, members of the
Security Council are entitled to expect that in the
disbursement of funds for the Force, the Secretariat
and the Command of the Force will be guided by
Security Council resolution 362 (1974) with regard to
maximum economy of resources.
65. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure

for my delegation to associate itself with the representatives who preceded me in expressing our satisfaction at seeing .you presiding over our meetings. That
satisfaction is all the greater since this is the frst
time your country has presided over the Security
Council, and the first time that it has done so in
the person of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. In
addition to my delegation’s tribute, I hope you will
accept my personal tribute also. I wish likewise to
express our gratitude to Mr. Jackson, who has
conducted the informal consultations of the Council.
66. Similarly, we wish to express our appreciation
to Mr. Louis de Guiringaud, representative of
France, who in an. outstanding manner and with
characteristic skill conducted the proceedings of the
Council during April.
67. Once again this lofty body must pronounce

itself on the subject of world peace and security,
which is the fundamental reason for its existence.
68. In fact, the precarious situation in the Middle
East has been a permanent concern of the Council
and its members, whose delicate responsibility it is
to exert every effort to consolidate harmony among
peoples. The stationing of UNDOF in the arca of
conflict is an unquestionable proof of that attitude.
69. The specific item we are dealing .with has been
the subject of a detailed report by the SecrctaryGeneral which emphasizes that the efforts made by
the Council have been gradually bearing fruit in the
maintenance of peace, which is the primary aim.
To this end, we must in justice recognize that both
Israel and Syria have contributed, for they have
‘created the necessary climate of tranquillity in the area
of operation.
70. The draft resolution we have just adopted renews
the mandate of UNDOF. for an additional period of

six months. My delegation cast a positive vote
because we have committed ourselves, and do commit
ourselves, to any decision or action intended to bring
about the complete implementation of Security Council
resolution 338 (1973):
71. Despite every effort, the present quiet is precarious and the situation remains unstable and
dangerous, as the Secretary-General states in his
report. This causes us anxiety, since what happens
in the Middle East is of concern to ail mankind,
because the existing tension may sow the seeds of
greater evils for the- imperatives of peace and justice
in the world. Therefore my delegation wishes again
to insist that the parties involved in the conflict
continue their efforts to implement as early as possible
the commitment contained in resolution 338 (19731,
to which I have referred, it being understood that,
while that may require some sacrifice because of the
delicate interests involved in the conflict,. the
demonstration of their will for peace will win the
gratitude of the international community.
72. This is a propitious opportunity to again express
to the Secretary-General our admiration for his
vigilant attitude concerning peace that has found
expression on the many occasions when he has had
to intervene so that the aspiration for peace may
become a reality.
73. My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude
to the Governments of Austria, Canada,. Peru and
Poland, whose invaluable co-operation has enabled
UNDOF to discharge the delicate responsibility
assigned to it. We must also express appreciation
to Colonel Hannes Phiiipp of Austria, the oflicerin-charge of the Force, and to. its military and
civilian staff.
74. Lastly, my delegation considers that its aflirmative vote. on the draft resolution we have adopted
once again expresses my country’s unswerving faith
in the Security Council and in the United Nations
as the best instrument for peace.
75. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, first of all may I in

turn say how very much my delegation appreciates
the honour you confer.on us by personally conducting
our work during this month in which it is your country’s
turn to preside over the Security Council. The brilliant
reputation you enjoy because of the eminent part you
have played in other forums as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guyana has made us appreciate your
presence ail the more.- We are certain that under
your presidency, and guided by your experience in
international affairs, the Council will do useful and
constructive work.
76. Before coming to the subject of our meeting,
may I also express my gratitude to those who have
mentioned the French presidency last month. In

this connexion, Mr. President, I wish to express
special gratitude to you for the particularly kind
words you addressed to me. During our presidency
last month our burden was not really great; nor,
therefore, was our merit.

complex; but, whatever the procedures taken or the
stages’of the process, it is on those requirements that
the settlement must be built. Without taking sides
over the ways or- means, and prompted -essentially
by a feeling of urgency, we therefore express the
hope that as soon as possible the conditions will be
met for a resumption of the Geneva Conference and
for genuine negotiations so that the real problems
will be finally dealt with.

77. The resolution we have adopted responds to the
immediate requirements of a situation characterized
by great uncertainties. The renewal for six months of
the mandate of UNDOF has been accepted- by the
two Governments directly concerned. This is a move
in the right direction and we are bound to emphasize
its merits and importance. But, at the same time, we
consider that this wise decision is not an end in itself.
While removing the most visible threat for the next
six months, it does not bear on the substance of the
problem nor on means to a solution. That is why
the resolution includes a provision for the implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973).
Both must be linked. As the Secretary-General
indeed points out in his report, the presence of the
Force is essential to maintain calm and to create a
situation which will promote peace efforts. But at
the same time he emphasizes that as long as there is
no progress toward the achievement of that peace
the situation will remain profoundly unstable and
dangerous.

81. In conclusion, I wish once again to pay a tribute
to the manner in which the Secretary-General and his
immediate assistants, as well as UNDOF and the
contingents which constitute it fulfilled the difficult
task entrusted to them within their respective
spheres of responsibility. They are distinguished
witnesses to the indispensable role of the United
Nations in the quest for peace.
i
82. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO (Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (inrerpreturion from
Russian): Mr. President, permit me first of all to
congratulate you upon your’ assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and extend to you,
an important statesman and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of -Guyana, our gratitude that you found it
possible to come to New York in order to conduct
the proceedings of the Security Council. We should
like also to congratulate the representative of your
country, Mr. Jackson, who skilfully and tactfully
did a tremendous amount of work in preparing for
the meeting of the Security Council this month. The
Byelorussian delegation, like many other Members of
the Organization, very highly appreciates the positive
role played by Guyana as a non-aligned State and its
great contribution to the strengthening of peace and
general security. We should like also to express our
gratitude to the representative of France, Mr. de
Guiringaud, President of the Council for April, and to
- his deputy, Mr. Lecompt.

78. The renewal of the mandate of UNDOF-as,
last month, that of UNEF-represents a manifestation of good will and hope at which we must
naturally rejoice. It is also fitting to pay a tribute
to the countries that have thus offered proof of
their confidence in the efforts under way to seek the
means for a just and lasting settlement. But obviously
we must not disappoint that confidence. Despite the
time that has elapsed since the Geneva Conference
was opened a year and a half ago and since the
Disengagement Agreements were concluded, it
appears all is not yet lost. But what would happen
if the difIiculties encountered were to delay further
the resumption of negotiations?

83. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR voted
in favour of the draft resolution, and my delegation
based itself on the premise that the parties, as appears
clearly from the report of the Secretary-General,
confirm the need for maintaining UNDOF for another
period of six months. At the same time, it should be
pointed out that the new extension of the mandate of
UNDOF in that area should be used to the utmost
to make progress towards the speedy attainment of
a comprehensive political settlement in the Middle
_East.

79. In this respect, Israel, which continues to occupy
Arab territories, has particular responsibilities.
Therefore it is up to that country clearly to manifest
its will to negotiate and to contribute by appropriate
gestures to the creation of an atmosphere which will
make real progress possible.
80. The creation of this atmosphere apart, when
one goes to the substance of the matter, as we
must necessarily do unless we are to condemn
ourselves to failure sooner or later, one observation
stands out: the three conditions for lasting peace
cannot be dissociated, namely, withdrawal from the
occupied territories, due account of the right of the
Palestinian people to their own country and recognition
of the right of all States in the region to live in
peace within boundaries that are themselves secure,
recognized and guaranteed. The settlement of these
various requirements and their synchronization are

84. However, we cannot fail to see that in that
area there is still a complex and explosive situation
which is dangerous to the cause of peace and that the
position of Israel, which has occupied Arab territory,
is very provocative and hinders a comprehensive
settlement. The fault lies entirely with Israel for the
fact that so ‘far there has been no progress towards
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
9

.*.

85. The Byelorussian SSR has repeatedly stated
and considers it necessary to stress once again that
a settlement in the Middle East can only be achieved
by a solution of such fundamental problems as the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab
territories they have occupied and the ensuring of the
lawful rights of the people of Palestine, including
its right to its own statehood. Apart from this, the
right to existence and to development of all States in
the Middle East, including Israel, should be
guaranteed.

.

-’

in the direction of peace and social progress’*. He
pointed out that “the positions’ of the Arab States
which are struggling for a just cause are being
strengthened’*. In his statement, Mr. Masherov also
declared:
“International detente is now dawning over the
world. The gloom of the cold war caused by imperialist reaction is being gradually dispelled.
Recent years, in this regard, have been particularly
noteworthy. The Programme of Peace proclaimed
by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, and actively supported
by fraternal socialist countries struggling for peace
on all continents, has been consistently implemented.”

86. As for the means of reaching a solution to the
Middle East problem, my delegation supports the very
well-founded idea that it is precisely the Geneva
Conference which is the most appropriate forum for
this purpose. The resumption of the work of that
Conference at an early date is favoured by all countries
which have a sincere interest in the firm and lasting
establishment of peace in the Middle East. The
convening of that Conference at an early date must
be accompanied by serious preparation.

90. It is with a feeling of tremendous satisfaction
that the Byelomssian people, like all peoples of the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries and the
whole of progressive mankind, has marked the
thirtieth anniversary of the victory over Hitlerite
fascism. In this regard, we cannot fail to agree with
the idea which is being expressed in connexion with
this anniversary, that the United Nations itselfemerged
and was born out of that victory, as is wholly
and fully confirmed by the whole history of the creation
of the Organization and the provisions of its Charter.
On this important date, the thirtieth anniversary of
that crucial victory over fascism, I consider it
necessary, on behalf of the Government of the
Byelorussian SSR, to state our unswerving will to
see to it that everything be done within the framework
of the United Nations for the further strengthening
of peace and universal Security. In this regard, we
should like especially to stress the tremendous intemational significance of the appeal of the Central
Commiteee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR and the Soviet Government to peoples,
parliaments and Governments on the occasion of the
thirtieth anniversary of the victory over Hitlerite
fascism.

87. As for the report of the Secretary-General,
the Byelomssian delegation would like to point out
the positive role played by the Force in the IsraeiSyria sector. Particularly I should like to associate
myself with delegations that have stressed the selfless
heroism displayed by the Polish contingent in its
performance of the task of mine-clearing in that
area.
88. Furthermore, we should like to point out the
following. First, as emerges clearly from the report,
because of the attitude of the Israeli aggressors there
is still discrimination against certain contingents of the
Force. This lessens the effectiveness of the operations
being carried out by the Force and all measures must
be taken to put an end to this abnormal situation.
Secondly, my delegation believes that any decisions
with regard to the contingents of the Force, including
questions of their rotation, should be settled with the
knowledge and consent of the Security Council.
Thirdly, we should like to express the hope that the
United Nations Secretariat will devote the most
serious attention to the problem of maximum economy
in the use of funds for the United Nations forces
in the Middle East.

91. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, at the very outset, the Tanzanian
delegation wishes to join the preceding speakers in
expressing our satisfaction at seeing you, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of a very friendly and dynamic
non-aligned country, personally presiding over the
deliberations of the Council. As a close and esteemed
friend of my country and myself personally, you
might wish me to be more modest in my compliments
to you. This, however, cannot prevent us from putting
on record here the very close collaboration and
friendship I personally, and my delegation as a whole,
have enjoyed and continue to enjoy with you and
the Guyanese delegation. In all our dealings, whether
in international forums like this one or in the field
of bilateral relations between our two countries, I
have always had the greatest satisfaction from, and
admiration for, your talents, warmth and dedication.

89. We have all witnessed the fact that international detente and peace are becoming ever more
durable and all countries have a vital interest in this
development. At an international meeting of peace
partisans to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of
the victory over fascism in the Second World War,
which took place in the middle of May at Minsk, the
capital of the Byelorussian SSR, the First Secretary of
the Central Commiteee of the Communist Party of
Byelorussia, P. M. Masherov, welcoming the participants in that meeting, stressed that “right now
there is practically no continent, no part of the world,
where heartening moves have not taken place, moves
IO

We consider that your capabilities eloquently represent the gifts :.and resourcefulness of the great
Guyanese people. We are inestimably proud of the
close and flourishing ties between our two countries,
ties which we so greatly cherish. There is not doubt
that the relations existing between the Guyanese and
Tanzanian delegations to the United Nations are the
epitome of the excellent relations between our two
countries.
92. I should like, Mr. President, to pay tribute to
the representative of Guyana, Mr. Jackson, who in
your absence occupied the office of the presidency
of the Council with distinction. His skilful conduct of
the negotiations on the resolution under consideration
is itself testimony of his outstanding capabilities and
leadership.
93. I also wish to extend my compliments to your
predecessor representative of France, for the successful conduct of his duties as President of the Council
last month, and join my colleagues, Mr. Richard
of the United Kingdom, and Mr. Malik of the Soviet
Union, in extending to him our contratulations
on his promotion. May I also place on record our
appreciation of the important contribution made by
the deputy representative of France, Mr. Lecompt,
last month.
94. The draft resolution we have just adopted and
resolution 368 (1975), which the Council adopted in
April [1821st meering+m both of which my delegation cast a positive vote-deal with two aspects of
essentially the same question: the Middle East
problem. What, therefore, my delegation said in
explaining its vote on resolution 368 (1975) applies
equally to the resolution we have just adopted.
95. We have voted in favour of the draft resolution
for the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF, on the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, in the
hope that the extension will offer a further opportunity
for a peaceful solution to the problem. As the
Secretary-General has said in his report, the quiet
which UNDOF has managed to maintain in the IsraeiSyria sector is a precarious one, for the facts are
that there is no peace in the Middle East, and there
will be no just and durable peace except on the
basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
%. In this connexion, we wish, therefore, to emphasize the provision in the operative paragraph of
the present resolution which reiterates the need for
full and immediate implementation of Security Council
resolution 338 (1973), which provides a just solution
to the problem of the Middle East.
97. In particular, we wish to stress Israel’s responsibility for removing the root cause of the whole Middle
East question, for until Israel vacates the Arab
territories which it has illegally occupied since the June

I%7 war, and until the legitimate rights of the
Palestinians have been recognized and realized, there
can be no durable peace in the Middle East, and no
renewal of the mandates of the United Nations forces
in the area will help restore that peace.
9K The abuse of the genuine efforts of the United
Nations in this respect, either by permitting undue
complacency and a slackening of efforts at reaching
a peaceful solution, or by taking advantage of the
calm to perpetuate illegal occupation and prepare for
aggressive wars, can only be perpetrated at the
expense of the very peace and security we all
desperately look for. We therefore hope that the time
and quiet provided by the renewal of the mandate
of UNDOF will be put to good use by all the
parties concerned in the search for a just and durable
peace in the area.
99. I cannot conclude my address without paying
tribute to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts
in the search for peace in the Middle East. I also
wish to join my colleagues in recording my delegation’s
appreciation for the services in the cause of peace
rendered by Colonel Philipp and the entire staff of
UNDOF.
100. The PRESIDENT: I will now make a statement in my capacity as representative of GUYANA.
101. The Council, a little while ago, adopted a draft
resolution, which the delegation of Guyana supported,
renewing the mandate of UNDOF for a further period
of six months. This extension, the second since the
creation of the Force in May 1974, does, I believe,
serve to remind us not only of the specific purpose
for which the Force was established but, more
importantly, of the urgent necessity of finding a just
and durable solution to the Middle East situation, to
which the Palestinian question is central.
102. As my delegation observed when the Security
Council in April last [ibid.] agreed to the extension
of the mandate of UNEF, the establishment of a
United Nations peace-keeping force in the Middle
East was regarded as an instrument which would
contribute to the achievement of lasting peace in the
area. It could not be construed as having been intended
to perpetuate a division between the parties involved
in the conflict, a situation which naturally could only
be in the interest of the occupying forces.
103. No one can deny that the presence of UNDOF
has, in broad measure, helped to interpose an uneasy
quiet between the Israeli and Syrian forces. As the
Secretary-General observes so succinctly in paragraph 35 of his report,-and my delegation wishes
to commend him for that report--“the present quiet
is a precarious one”.
104. The situation as it now exists is as unstable
as it is clearly untenable. A heavy responsibility

thus devolves on those who seek to perpetuate the
occupation of the territories of others and refuse to
acknowledge-indeed frustrate-the legitimate rights
of the dispossessed Palestinian peoples.

108. In reiterating thanks to the Secretary-General
for his admirable report and for his own untiring
efforts in the cause of peace in the Middle East, as
indeed in so many other situations, my delegation,
as it did in April, notes his observation contained in
paragraph 18 of his report that:

105. Unless and until such people approach the
search for a solution in the Middle East with an
attitude that is less inflexible, less intransigent, the
danger of reaching the precipice which leads to
renewed intensive hostilities will not be too far distant.
And that danger is a real one.

“Despite the efforts made towards resolving the
question of freedom of movement, the arrangements
that have been worked out still fall short of what
is required and of what is provided for in the
Protocol to the Agreement on Disengagement”.

106. It is in that context that my delegation has
followed closely, and with the keenest interest, the
efforts being made to break the apparent stalemate
and to enhance the prospects for a negotiated settlement. We believe that the extension of the mandate
of UNDOF provides the United Nations and all those
who desire genuine peace in the Middle East an
opportunity for constructive action pursuant to resolution 338 (1973&m opportunity which should not
be squandered.

109. My delegation hopes that this particular matter
will soon be resolved, thus enabling the various
contingents to function as an integrated military unit.
No obstacles nor any pretext should be allowed to
impair-the effective functioning of the peace-keeping
operation whose mandate the Council has just renewed
in the interest of peace in the Middle East and in
the entire world.

107. Not only the Middle East but all the world
has a direct, an immediate and. a vital interest in
the effective utilization of this period of extension in
the interest of peace through conflict resolution. It
would be a great mistake to believe that such periods
are infinitely extensile.

The meering rose at 12.35 p.m.
Notes
’ See resolution 369 (1975).

-

.12

HOW TO OBTAIN UNlTED NATIONS PUBLKATlONS
United Nations publications may be obtained fmm bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or Mite to: United Nations. Sales Seaion, New York or Geneva.
CO- SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
lss publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dam ks libtairies et les agenccs dtpcsitaircs du
mondc entier. Informcz-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adresss-vous i : Nations Unia, Section
des vrntes, New York ou Gmkve.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las public&ones de las Naciones Unidas cst5n en umta en librtrks y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulu a su libtero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Gin&a.

litho in United Nations. New York

00300

8241202-October

1983-2.200
