S/PV.9382

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9382

nd meeting
Friday, 21 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Manrique
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Diaba
Ms. Osei
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Kumanga
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21463 (E)
*2321463*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Romania, Türkiye and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
Three other Member States also expressed interest
in participating in today’s meeting, namely Estonia,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Poland. They
will submit their statements for publication in letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be circulated.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and, as requested
by the Russian Federation, Mr. Mikhail Khazin, an
independent macroeconomist.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On Monday, when speaking to the
Council (see S/PV.9380), I reiterated the SecretaryGeneral’s deep regret regarding the decision by the
Russian Federation to terminate its participation in the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, including the withdrawal
of Russian security guarantees for navigation in the
north-western part of the Black Sea. As a result, food
prices are rising around the globe, adding to existing
agricultural, energy and financial crises that are already
severely affecting the world’s most vulnerable people.
We have now witnessed a further blow to global
food security, as Russia, for the fourth consecutive
day, struck Ukraine’s Black Sea ports in Odesa,
2/22

21/07/2023

Chernomorsk and Mykolayiv with missiles and drones,
destroying critical port infrastructure, facilities and
grain supplies. Those attacks have also resulted in
civilian casualties. Yesterday in Odesa, one person
was reportedly killed, and at least eight others were
injured. In Mykolayiv, Russia’s attack reportedly killed
two, while 19 more were injured. We strongly condemn
those attacks and urge Russia to stop them immediately.
As the Secretary-General stated yesterday, the
bombardment of the Black Sea ports in Ukraine
contradicts Russia’s commitments under the
memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations, which states that:
“the Russian Federation will facilitate the
unimpeded export of food, sunflower oil and
fertilizers from Ukrainian controlled Black
Sea ports”.
The new wave of attacks on Ukrainian ports risks
having a far-reaching impact on global food security,
in particular in developing countries. Furthermore,
as we have repeatedly stated, attacks on civilian
infrastructure may constitute a violation of international
humanitarian law.
Threats involving the potential targeting of civilian
vessels navigating in Black Sea waters are unacceptable.
We are also concerned about reports of mines laid in the
Black Sea, endangering civilian navigation. We strongly
urge refraining from any further rhetoric or action that
could worsen an already dangerous situation. Any risk
of conflict spillover as a result of a military incident in
the Black Sea, whether intentional or accidental, must
be avoided at all costs, as it could result in potentially
catastrophic consequences for us all.
Attacks on civilians and critical civilian
infrastructure are not a new trend in the conflict in
Ukraine but rather its tragic pattern. The World Health
Organization has documented damage to more than
1,000 health-care facilities, resulting in 101 deaths
and 139 injuries. Since the start of Russia’s full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, UNESCO has verified damage
to 270 cultural sites, including 116 religious sites, 27
museums, 95 buildings of historical significance, 19
monuments, 12 libraries and one archive. Moreover,
3,467 educational institutions have suffered from
bombing and shelling, with 335 of them completely
destroyed. According to UNESCO, 12 journalists and
media workers have been killed since the start of the war.
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Children in Ukraine also continue to be
disproportionately affected by the appalling high level
of grave violations in the conflict. Children are being
killed and maimed by explosive weapons with wide-area
impact in populated areas. Millions of Ukrainians,
including nearly two thirds of Ukrainian children, have
been forced to leave their homes. For those who remain,
the damage and destruction of critical infrastructure
continue to cause hardships, as access to basic services
are disrupted.
The destruction of the Kakhovka dam on 6 June and
the subsequent flooding are having far-reaching and longterm environmental and humanitarian consequences.
According to Ukraine’s Ministry of Agrarian Policy
and Food, almost 600,000 hectares of farmland no
longer have access to irrigation water following the
destruction of the dam. That has compounded the
existing challenges that Ukrainian farmers are facing,
in addition to mines and unexploded ordnance. The
floods have also worsened the already volatile situation
at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Experts from
the International Atomic Energy Agency continue to
closely monitor the availability of cooling water for the
plant. Ensuring its safety and security remains of utmost
importance not just to Ukraine but to the broader region.
Landmines will continue to pose dangers to civilians
for years to come, as almost one third of the country has
reportedly been contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
mines and cluster munitions. We are working with the
Government of Ukraine and other partners to tackle the
threat of unexploded ordnance. So far, our mine-action
efforts have reached almost 3.5 million people. But those
figures are not the whole story. The war is having effects
that are harder to measure. A generation of Ukrainian
children has been traumatized, and the war’s impact on
their mental health and that of adults will be long-lasting.
When I briefed the Council on Ukraine earlier this
week (see S/PV.9380), I did not foresee that I would be
returning to this Chamber again today. The events of
the past week are only the latest developments in the
Russian Federation’s senseless war on its neighbour — a
war with consequences that can be felt around the world.
Russia’s termination of its participation in the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, coupled with its bombardment
of crucial ports, will further compound the crisis. The
Secretary-General has been clear. We will not cease our
efforts to facilitate unimpeded access to global markets
for food and fertilizers from both Ukraine and the
Russian Federation.

S/PV.9382

In conclusion, let me stress that the only way to halt
the catastrophe unfolding in Ukraine is to forge an end
to the war based on international law and the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and in
line with the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As we have discussed in this
Chamber before and on many occasions, and as UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo has just outlined, the war
in Ukraine has had a significant impact on the world,
far beyond the country’s borders — a world already
reeling from an accumulation of shocks of which we
are all well aware. The scale of global humanitarian
needs under those circumstances is vastly outpacing
the resources we have available. Just as a reminder, in
my function as Emergency Relief Coordinator, I am
responsible for the relationship and the representation
of the humanitarian community to the now 362 million
people in 69 countries who need humanitarian aid.
Nothing anywhere near that number has ever been
reached before, and an unprecedented $55 billion is
required to meet the priorities within their needs. Many
humanitarian plans, as we have discussed, including
this week, remain severely underfunded. For millions
of people around the world already, the margins are
fine and their capacity to withstand further shocks
is limited.
Almost exactly a year ago to the day, we celebrated
the signing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
memorandum of understanding on Russian food and
fertilizer exports. Those agreements were a decisive
international response to spiralling food prices that
were undermining food security around the world.
Their signing also represented something more. It was a
demonstration that together, with goodwill and in good
faith, we could achieve innovative, daring solutions that
put humanity above politics, even in the most extreme
of circumstances — in this case, an agreement between
the two warring parties.
In the space of the 12 months since that day in
Istanbul, the Black Sea Grain Initiative has enabled
the safe export of close to 33 million metric tons of
food from Ukrainian Black Sea ports to 45 countries,
aboard more than 1,000 outbound vessels. I think that
is an achievement that even on that day in Istanbul
we could not have imagined. It was achieved thanks
to the cooperation between the signatories to that

23-214633/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

historic agreement in war. It has allowed the World
Food Programme to transport more than 725,000
metric tons of wheat in support of food assistance
operations in Afghanistan, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Somalia, the Sudan and Yemen, the countries that are
now impacted by recent decisions. As the SecretaryGeneral highlighted earlier this week, the memorandum
of understanding has also delivered concrete results
over the past year, supporting the ability of increased
volumes of Russian agricultural products to reach global
markets. Together, the Istanbul agreements of 22 July
2022 contributed to sustained and essential reductions
in global food prices, which by last month — before
the current situation — were more than 23 per cent
below the record highs reached in March last year.
Monday’s confirmation that the Russian Federation
was withdrawing from the Black Sea Grain Initiative
was therefore immensely disappointing to all of us,
including many far beyond this Chamber.
The developments in the four days since, as
Ms. DiCarlo has said, have been alarming. The Russian
strikes on port facilities in Odesa and other Ukrainian
ports that she also referred to are reported to have
injured civilians and damaged infrastructure essential
to the export of food. Before Monday, the facilities in
those ports were protected installations, owing to their
alignment with the export of food and other relevant
products. As we can imagine, Ukrainian farmers are
watching that nightly assault with great anxiety as
they now harvest the crops — crops that had a future
because of the Black Sea Grain Initiative — that they
nurtured and protected in the shadow of war in spite
of risks from landmines and unexploded ordnance, as
Ms. DiCarlo mentioned, as well as the damage to the
Kakhovka dam and the consequent flooding, to storage
facilities, as we saw this week, and to infrastructure.
Now the food they are harvesting may no longer be able
to reach the global markets that so desperately need it.
As I think we all know, global grain prices have
spiked this week, threatening to undo the hardwon progress achieved over the past year, and that
potentially threatens hunger — and worse — for
millions of people. As of Wednesday, according to the
World Food Programme, wheat and corn futures have
risen by almost 9 per cent and 8 per cent, respectively,
in the largest single-day increase in wheat prices
since the full-scale invasion began. And that is not
surprising. It was predicted, and it happened. Much
of the world relies on those staples being affordable,
4/22

21/07/2023

and that is under threat yet again. Of course, the
higher prices will be most acutely felt by families in
developing countries, who are already at risk and who
tend to spend a much higher share of their household
income on food, something that we have discussed in
the context of many places in humanitarian need.
Escalatory rhetoric also threatens to further
undermine the safe transportation of food through the
Black Sea more broadly. And with no access to ports or
world markets, farmers may have no choice but to stop
farming. In addition to the global effects, that would
have an immediate impact on domestic food prices and
the economic stability of Ukraine. That in turn would
affect food security inside Ukraine and in the region.
The humanitarian catastrophe that continues to unfold
in Ukraine, which we have discussed before and will
again, therefore continues to reverberate around the
world, and that must end. As has so often been said,
civilians and civilian infrastructure must be respected.
And as the Secretary-General said yesterday, the
destruction of civilian infrastructure in Ukrainian
ports — and we have both referred to this — may also
constitute a violation of international humanitarian law.
The bottom line is very simple. Food and fertilizer
exports from Ukraine and the Russian Federation
remain of crucial importance to global food security
today, despite the events of recent days. The United
Nations will therefore continue its engagement with
all involved to ensure that Russian and Ukrainian food
and fertilizer can continue to reach global markets.
United international support — including, I hope, from
the Security Council — is essential if those efforts
of advocacy and diplomacy are to be successful. And
of course I want to reiterate our appreciation for the
extraordinary efforts of the Government of Türkiye in
supporting, hosting and overseeing so many aspects of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Let me conclude with a final and perhaps personal
impression. We have all been so deep in the weeds in
this project for so long, and this week has therefore been
a week of sadness and disappointment. But for many of
those 362 million people, it is not a matter of sadness or
disappointment. It is a matter of a threat to their future
and the future of their children and families. They are
not sad. They are angry, worried and concerned. Some
will go hungry, some will starve and many may die
as a result of these decisions. We implore the Council
and the world beyond it to help to make every effort to
restore the spirit — what the Secretary-General at the
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

time referred to as a beacon of hope — that those two
agreements represented for all of us in a world of such
difficulty and tragedy.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the briefer requested by the
Russian Federation, Mr. Khazin.
Mr. Khazin (spoke in Russian): As an economist, I
will try give a more or less objective economic picture
of all the agreements on the grain deal.
First of all, it should be said that at the moment
there are no objective criteria for assessing market
price changes in connection with the deal. Yes, when it
was made, there was a sharp drop in prices, but that was
because last year there had been a unique combination
of unfavourable circumstances. We also have to take
into account the fact that the start of the deal coincided
with the forecasts for future harvests, which were
favourable, so a decline in prices was expected, and
there was nothing surprising about that.
If we look at the total amount of grain supplied
by Ukraine, we should note that most of it is corn
and barley, which in fact are not generally shipped to
poor countries or used by food programmes. If we are
talking about wheat alone, of the total 30 million tons
shipped, Ukraine supplied a comparable volume for
export through other channels, and we should take into
account that this grain was commercial. It belonged
to private individuals and was already contracted for.
That means that its impact on the market last year was
due to the fact that it had already been accounted for in
the current fiscal year.
If we look at the situation from a perspective of
one or two years ago, the picture would be different.
In particular, for example, grain exports from Russia
have increased over the past year, and Russia has
significantly increased its wheat exports, from 35 to
58 million tons. It is likely to ship approximately the
same amount next year, because the drop in the harvest
this year in Russia is insignificant, somewhere between
4 and 5 per cent. We should take that into account
because since those grain shipments were not intended
for humanitarian purposes but commercial ones, their
impact on shipments to poor countries is trivial. Only
3 per cent went to the poorest countries. In that regard,
a qualitative assessment of the impact of the grain deal
in terms of the supplies of Ukrainian grain to global
markets suggests that it is not very significant.

S/PV.9382

As I have said, it has been almost impossible to
make precise assessments because in the past few years
the markets have been exceedingly unbalanced. Simply
in order to understand how difficult the situation in the
markets is now, we should note that in the United States,
inflation in the industry was above 20 per cent a year
ago, and today, one year later, it is at minus-9 per cent.
In other words, we are seeing a process of deflation.
That makes it impossible to establish any kind of stable
forecast of the situation or the market’s response to
various factors. That most likely represents the market’s
reaction to the pandemic in 2019 and 2020. But in the
next few years there should be a very strong reaction.
Turning to the second part of the grain deal, Russia
accounts for approximately one third of the grain
exports. That is approximately 60 million tons in a
total market of 160 million to 180 million tons. And for
that reason, the withdrawal of Russian grain from that
market will definitely result in collapse. The problem is
that the effect of the sanctions policies on the financial
situation and logistics is rendering Russia’s production
of grain for export unprofitable. We have not seen that
problem yet, but next year, as a result of those policies,
we could see a significant drop in Russian grain exports,
which would be a real disaster for the markets, with
huge price rises. An additional factor is the supply of
Russian fertilizer. Russia represents more than 15 per
cent of the global fertilizer market and a significant
share of the market for fertilizer components, especially
ammonia. Fertilizers represent future harvests. If less
fertilizer goes into the ground this year, there will be
a significant decline in harvests worldwide. In other
words, there are decisions being made today that de
facto restrict the Russian Federation — and the reason
I say “de facto” is because formally, both the United
Nations and the United States have repeatedly said that
food is not a restricted category, but the pressure on
economic actors is so great that many have refused to
cooperate with the Russian Federation regarding the
transportation of food and fertilizers. The inevitable
result will be dire problems and huge shortages of grain
on global markets a year or two from now.
We are not in a position today to say what the price
increase will be, because the markets are so unbalanced.
It is possible that the central global food markets will
see a collapse into some collection of regional groups,
something that is already being much discussed, which
is extremely dangerous where the effectiveness of food
supplies is concerned, especially on the humanitarian

23-214635/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

front. In that regard, and in conclusion, I want to say
that unfortunately there are indeed problems related
to implementation of both the first deal, on Ukraine’s
participation, and the second, on Russia’s participation.
However, in terms of the impact, both on general global
markets and on the humanitarian front, the limitations
for Russia are far more dangerous than for Ukrainian
exports. I just want to say one more thing, which is
that the deal on Russia’s participation will have far
greater consequences for food market prices and the
humanitarian situation than the deal with Ukraine. I
think we need a greater focus on it in the discussion for
it to be implemented.
The President: I take note of Mr. Khazin’s briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Human Mobility of Ecuador.
Mr. Manrique (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I am grateful to you for convening
this meeting at the request of France and Ecuador. I
also appreciate the briefings by Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and Peacebuilding. I also listened
carefully to Mr. Khazin.
Tomorrow, 22 July, marks the first anniversary of
the signing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
the Secretary-General described as a beacon of hope.
It is unfortunate that rather than fanning that flame,
actions are being taken that may extinguish it. I deplore
the Russian Federation’s announcement that it will
terminate its participation in the Initiative, which has
been central to alleviating the global consequences of
the food insecurity that has been exacerbated by the
military aggression against Ukraine. Since the invasion
began the Secretary-General has been warning about
the global consequences that the conflict would have,
with its harshest impact being on people with fewer
resources, owing to the disruptions of the supply chain,
bringing the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) Food Price Index to its highest
level in history.
In March 2022, a few weeks after the war began,
Ecuador hosted the FAO Regional Conference for Latin
America and the Caribbean. Since then the regional and
global consequences have become a major concern for
6/22

21/07/2023

Latin America and the Caribbean. While cereal exports
are not food aid operations in and of themselves,
they continue to play a vital role in alleviating food
insecurity and therefore in the global humanitarian
situation. The implementation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative has saved millions of lives from hunger,
particularly in the most vulnerable areas, as has been
repeatedly confirmed by the FAO and even the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
To that we must add the impact that the suspension
will have on the operations of the World Food
Programme, which has benefited thousands of children
in Afghanistan, Yemen and the Horn of Africa, to
mention just a few examples. What worse way could
there be to implement resolution 2417 (2018), in which
the Council urged all parties five years ago to ensure
the proper functioning of food systems and markets
in situations of armed conflict? And what worse way
could there be to accompany the decision to suspend
the Grain Initiative than by bombing Ukraine’s port
cities and grain-loading infrastructure, specifically in
Odesa? Not to mention that any threat or attack against
civilian vessels in the Black Sea would be unacceptable.
Ecuador stresses the importance of respecting food
and water supply systems and reminds everyone of
the existing prohibition on attacking, destroying,
removing or rendering useless objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population, including
agricultural and arable goods. We are also distressed
by the growing impact of the invasion on agriculture
and rural livelihoods in Ukraine, with households
sustaining tens of billions in losses and huge destruction
of machinery and equipment, storage facilities, crops,
inputs and 600,000 hectares of agricultural land, as we
were just informed.
The attacks on humanitarian responders and their
headquarters, including Odesa and Mykolayiv, must
be stopped, and we urge the Russian Federation to
allow humanitarian access to areas temporarily under
its control. We insist on the need for the parties to
respect without restrictions their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution.
We are concerned about contamination by mines
and explosive remnants. We call on the parties to
refrain from using cluster munitions given the collateral
damage they cause in the immediate, medium and long
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

term. Ecuador, as a State party to the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, insists that those weapons must
be banned.
Finally, we strongly urge the Security Council
to reiterate its support for the work of the SecretaryGeneral as it did in May 2022. That work will remain
indispensable both on the humanitarian front and in
efforts to bring us closer to a just and lasting peace based
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Griffiths for
their briefings.
France, along with Ecuador, called for today’s
meeting because Russia crossed this week a new line
in terms of cynicism and irresponsibility. We have all
heard it claim over the past few months that it was very
concerned about the situation of the poorest countries.
After jeopardizing global food security and nutrition
by attacking Ukraine, a few days ago it put an end to
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The Secretary-General
stressed the serious impact that would have on the most
vulnerable countries.
Since then, it has been bombing the ports of Odesa,
Chernomorsk and Mykolayiv and their grain terminals,
which are civilian infrastructure. As the SecretaryGeneral reminded us yesterday, the destruction of
civilian infrastructure is a violation of international
humanitarian law.
At a time when millions of people are suffering from
hunger, Russia is thought to have already destroyed
more than 60,000 tons of grain. It also announced,
via its Ministry of Defence, that all vessels bound for
Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea will be considered,
as of midnight on 20 July, to be potentially carrying
military goods or equipment. With those actions,
Russia is committing yet more war crimes and once
again using hunger as a weapon. In so doing, Russia is
making a strategic mistake.
France condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s
decision to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
With that decision, Russia is assuming responsibility
for global food insecurity and malnutrition. In the space
of a year, that Initiative had enabled the export of nearly
33 million tons of grain, more than half of which went
to low- and middle-income countries, and had resulted
in a 23 per cent decrease in agricultural commodity
prices. The World Food Programme had been able to

S/PV.9382

export 725,000 tons of grain from Ukrainian ports to the
countries most affected by hunger, notably Afghanistan,
Yemen and the Horn of Africa. The closing of the Black
Sea will increase the cost of humanitarian operations
at a time when resources are already sorely lacking.
Above all, it is likely to lead to inflationary effects,
which will primarily affect the agricultural and food
sectors, producers and poor households in the most
vulnerable countries.
Why has Russia made this choice? By blocking
exports from Ukrainian ports and driving up
agricultural and food prices, Russia is increasing the
profits from its own exports. It increases its revenues
to finance its war of aggression against Ukraine. That
is the reality. Russia is seeking to play the victim
and is claiming to have been cheated by the Istanbul
agreements. However, as the Secretary-General pointed
out in his statement of 17 July, Russian grain exports
have reached particularly high levels since last summer
and its fertilizer exports are almost back to where they
were before the invasion of 24 February 2022.
France commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and Türkiye, which tried and continue to try,
to save the Initiative. The United Nations has worked
tirelessly to propose solutions. However, Russia has not
even deigned to respond to their proposals.
For its part, France will continue, together with its
partners, to step up its efforts to reduce the risks of food
insecurity. It has provided assistance for food security,
nutrition and sustainable agricultural development in
the amount of €840 million in 2022. Yesterday, the
Council of the European Union decided to reinforce the
export capacities of the European Union’s solidarity
corridors, which play a crucial role and have made it
possible to transport 41 million tons of grain out of
Ukraine since March 2022.
Russia’s decision to terminate the Black Sea Grain
Initiative is amplifying the negative consequences of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. Let me repeat:
none of this would be happening if Russia had not
invaded Ukraine in the first place. We therefore call on
Russia once again to cease its aggression and withdraw
its troops from Ukrainian territory.
Ms. Osei (Ghana): I thank France and Ecuador
for calling for this meeting, and the briefers for
their perspectives.

23-214637/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

As Ghana understands it, until there is a fundamental
shift in the position of the Russian Federation, the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which was terminated on 17 July,
has no further hope of implementation. As diplomats,
however, we possess, through dialogue and diplomacy,
the capacity to bring hope where hope has been lost
and new life when arrangements we have developed
to serve our common interests are struggling to meet
our expectations.
Therefore, as deeply disappointed as we were
with the non-renewal of the Initiative, we encourage
additional efforts by the United Nations and all
countries that have had a role to play in the Initiative to
help address the concerns that have consistently been
expressed with regards to the ancillary memorandum
of understanding, especially relating to the export of
Russian ammonia to global markets and the export of
agricultural products and fertilizers.
We believe that, despite any limitations that
the Initiative may have had, it has played a role in
the stabilization of the global food prices since July
2022, through the export of more than 32 million
tons of food commodities from Ukraine, including
the transportation of over 725,000 tons of wheat to
countries that desperately needed food stocks under the
Word Food Programme. The Initiative was also a test
of how we could create resilience in food supply chains
during times of major crises. While we can learn from
the present lessons, its termination would not serve
the wider international interest and the cause of global
food security.

21/07/2023

Under-Secretary Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings
and the information they provided. We have also listened
carefully to Mr. Mikhail Khazin’s statement.
Ecuador and France proposed the convening of this
meeting following the suspension of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. That agreement, signed in July 2022, had
inspired great hope that there would be a certain degree
calm, in particular in terms of food security.
The armed conflict in Ukraine, which we have been
following with great attention and apprehension for
months, is about to take another turn as dangerous as
the previous one. The quadripartite agreement between
Russia and Ukraine, under the auspices of the United
Nations and Türkiye, has guaranteed the safe export
of grain via the Black Sea for a whole year, and this
has made it possible to avoid, if only slightly, soaring
grain prices and the risk of food insecurity in certain
regions, such as the Horn of Africa, which suffers from
recurrent drought.
Today, with the global economic context deeply
affected by the multiplicity of crises, particularly
humanitarian crises, the cost of instability could become
even heavier. We therefore urge the parties to invest their
efforts in dialogue to find a diplomatic and economic
solution that will benefit everyone. We also urge the
Secretary-General to continue his exchanges with the
parties so as to break the current deadlock.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their briefings.

We, however, hold that to sustainably address the
knock-on effects that the termination of the Initiative
could create, we need to double our efforts in finding
a path of peace that is acceptable to both parties in
the conflict. As we have stated before, the further
militarization of the conflict is not likely to significantly
change the dynamics on the ground. It would prolong
the suffering on both sides and the misery of the world.

Before the special military aggression, Ukraine, one
of the bread baskets of the world, accounted for 12 per
cent of the world’s corn exports and approximately 10 per
cent of its wheat exports. It produced enough food to
feed 400 million people per year, mainly in countries
in Africa and the Middle East. Since 24 February 2022,
those millions needed to have Russia’s permission to get
their usual food.

We therefore reiterate our call on Ukraine and the
Russian Federation to cease hostilities and embrace
dialogue and diplomacy if they have an interest in longterm peace. We believe that, as neighbours, they have
no choice but to find a way they can peacefully adjust
their differences. To consider the possibility of other
options may not be a realistic choice.

Last year, with the beginning of the unjustified
war in Ukraine, the world went through tremor shocks
because of the sudden sharp increase in food prices.
Food insecurity disrupted global markets, punished
households and terrified Governments. Russia scrambled
to promote its narrative to a disbelieving world that it
was the consequence of the sanctions imposed on it. That
story made some noise but failed to convince anyone,
just as almost everything related to its war has done.

Mr. Diaba (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
8/22

23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Then came the Black Sea Grain Initiative, one of
the few pieces of positive news and achievements on the
diplomatic front, thanks to sincere the efforts of Türkiye and the Secretary-General. The Initiative suddenly eased the markets, stabilized prices and calmed the
world. It was a beacon of reason in an ocean of despair.
The narrative of the sanctions disappeared and the
world, especially the global South, breathed a sigh of
relief. Indeed, approximately 61 per cent of the nearly
33 million tons of exported grain out of Ukraine has
shipped to low- and middle-income countries, 65 per
cent of which was wheat.
That was the case until the 27 July, when Russia
decided it was time to gamble again. To be fair, this did
not come as a surprise. Russia had long been nervous
and unhappy with the deal, which it did not hide. In
October last year, 10 ships were inspected per day,
then 7 in November, coming down to 2 in May, while
the real capacity for inspection was 40 ships a day. In
contrast, Russian food exports — which are not under
any sanction, it must be highlighted — have increased
in the last year, and the country is exporting plenty of
grain and fertilizers out of Novorossiysk.
So, what is wrong? In the course of these long
months of war, we have learned that in order to
understand the reality, one should not rely on what
Russia says, but rather on what it omits. The Kremlin is
now using any future participation in the grain deal as a
bargaining chip to get European Union sanctions relief.
Russian agriculture producers have been
complaining about prices in global markets for these
commodities. They want to make more money, and for
that they need to increase prices. In the world that we
have built, by which I refer to the international rulesbased order, this is done by fair competition, not brutal
imposition. But this is what the Russians are trying
to do with their oil, it is what they did with their gas,
and now they are doing it again with food. In a war
that the Russians are not winning, everything must be
used as a weapon. Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian ports
has, since the very first day, been a deliberate effort to
strangle Ukraine’s economy. After more than 500 days
of a disastrous war, the goal remains the same, as it
continues to destroy Ukrainian infrastructure, kill its
people and abduct its children.
Now, as mentioned by Under-Secretary-General
and other colleagues, Russia’s daily attacks are intended
to destroy Ukraine’s ports, including in Odesa, a city

S/PV.9382

inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List. But
Russia is not punishing Ukraine alone. Ending the deal
would destabilize global food prices and jeopardize the
most food-insecure countries and populations at a time
when climate change, conflict, political instability and
other factors have already caused rising levels of food
insecurity. According to the United Nations Comtrade
Database, imports from Ukraine account for 75 per
cent of Lebanon’s total wheat imports, 59 per cent of
Pakistan’s, 49 per cent of Libya’s and 45 per cent of
Ethiopia’s, to mention just a few on a long list of countries.
If the loaf of bread costs more or is just missing
from the usual shelves in dozens of countries, people
must know who to blame, because killing the deal is
tantamount to playing Russian roulette with the food
of the poor and the needs of the hungry. Maybe not
everyone can immediately understand that one man is
ready to starve people around the world for his own
political survival, to justify his terrible mistakes and
excuse his horribly wrong judgment, but it is just a
matter of time before everyone realizes that by trying
to mimic strength at the expense of the hungry, he is
only showing his weakness and his cynicism.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin not only by thanking UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings,
but also, on behalf of my country, Switzerland, but also
by expressing our deep appreciation for their tireless
work to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population.
Once again, we have come to the end of a week
of grim news in connection with Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine: more attacks, more civilian
casualties and destruction, and more uncertainty for
the people of Ukraine and of the world. According to
credible reports, in Mykolayiv, near Odesa, an air strike
hit houses and a nursery yesterday. These attacks are as
cruel as they are unacceptable. Switzerland is extremely
concerned by this apparent escalation, which is once
again affecting civilians and civilian infrastructure in
southern Ukraine.
We recall that international humanitarian law
prohibits attacks against the civilian population and
infrastructure, as well as reprisals, particularly against
protected persons and property. It is imperative that the
rules governing the conduct of hostilities be respected.
We also join in the condemnation of the Russian strikes
against the port facilities of Odesa and other Ukrainian
Black Sea ports.

23-214639/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Those, like Russia’s decision on the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, have repercussions far beyond the
Ukraine. The agreements signed in Istanbul a year
ago have proved essential for food security worldwide,
as we have heard today. The Initiative has enabled
more than 32 million tons of food to be exported from
Ukraine to 45 countries on three continents, helped to
reduce global food prices and made it possible for the
World Food Programme to ship more than 725,000 tons
of wheat to support humanitarian operations.
We reiterate our deep regret at Russia’s decision not
to extend this initiative. We fear that this decision will
exacerbate situations of distress and particularly affect
the poorest people. We are also concerned about the
risk of destabilization that food insecurity represents in
many parts of the world.
Switzerland is convinced that it is in the interests
of global food security for the Initiative to be renewed.
We are concerned by the military escalation and the
rhetoric since the Russian decision and call on all parties
to refrain from any prejudicial action, particularly with
regard to civilian shipping.
We welcome the tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as those of Türkiye and all the actors
involved, to facilitate rapid and unhindered access to
world markets for food products and fertilizers from
Ukraine and Russia. We continue to stand ready to support these efforts, particularly in our role as a host State.
As others have said, the signing of the agreements
in Istanbul a year ago was one of the few moments
of hope after the start of Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine. It proved that even in the darkest hours,
diplomatic solutions can be found in the interests of a
wider goal, which is a reminder that humanity and regard
for the most vulnerable must — and can — prevail.
This week’s events run counter to what we have
been calling for since February 2022. The escalatory
trend must stop. The longer the military aggression
continues, the greater its repercussions will be. We
therefore once again call on Russia — and will do so
for as long as it takes — to de-escalate the situation,
end its combat operations and withdraw its troops from
Ukrainian territory.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to Mr. Khazin’s remarks.
10/22

21/07/2023

The Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding on Russia’s food and fertilizer exports
are very important to ensuring global food supplies
and stabilizing the global food market. Both should be
implemented in a balanced, comprehensive and effective
manner, and the reasonable concerns of the parties
involved should be addressed. In the past few days the
Russian Federation has said repeatedly that it is willing
to consider resuming its participation in the Initiative
if substantive progress is made in removing obstacles
to its export of grain and fertilizers. Secretary-General
Guterres has also said that he will continue to make
efforts to ensure that Ukraine and Russia’s grain and
fertilizers reach the global market.
China hopes that the parties concerned will act
in the interests of maintaining international food
security and alleviating the food crisis in developing
countries in particular, by working with the relevant
United Nations agencies to strengthen dialogue and
consultations, meeting each other halfway and striving
to reach a balanced solution to the legitimate concerns
of all parties, so as to resume Russia and Ukraine’s
export of grain and fertilizers as soon as possible.
The situation in Ukraine has continued to escalate for
some time and has shown an ever-expanding trend,
with many attacks on important civilian infrastructure.
China calls on the parties to let calm prevail, exercise
restraint, strictly abide by international humanitarian
law and the principles of necessity, distinction and
proportionality, refrain from attacking civilians and
civilian infrastructure and make every effort to prevent
the conflict from expanding so as to avert a larger
humanitarian crisis.
The real way to solve the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine lies in reaching a political settlement of the
Ukrainian issue. China once again calls on the parties
to the conflict to resume peace talks as soon as possible,
and calls on the international community to create the
necessary conditions to that end. With regard to the
issue of Ukraine, China has always advocated that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be safeguarded. The purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations should be respected,
and the reasonable security concerns of all parties
should be taken seriously. Every effort that could help
to peacefully resolve the crisis should be supported.
China will continue to advocate for peace and dialogue
and to work tirelessly with the international community
to promote a political solution to the issue of Ukraine.
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretaries-General Griffiths
and DiCarlo for their sobering briefings. I also want
to express our appreciation to Ecuador and France for
calling for this important meeting.
It seems that every single week, Russia stoops to
a new low. Last week, Russia unilaterally blocked the
compromise draft resolution (S/2023/506) that would
have extended cross-border assistance to Syrians in dire
need. And this week Russia suspended its participation
in the Black Sea Grain Initiative, an arrangement that
has helped feed the world’s most vulnerable, particularly
people in the Middle East and Africa. We heard from
one of our briefers that that is trivial. But we should
ask the people who are receiving that aid if they think
it is trivial. On Wednesday the Kremlin unleashed
missiles and drones on Ukrainian ports, killing and
wounding civilians and destroying 60,000 tons of
grain — 60,000 tons — which, according to the World
Food Programme, is enough to feed more than 270,000
people for a year. This week, Russia also announced
that all ships proceeding to Ukrainian ports in Black
Sea waters will be considered potential carriers of
military cargo, which could have been avoided with the
inspections that were provided for under the Initiative.
And reports indicate that just last night Russia carried
out yet another round of attacks in the Odesa region.
Russia is waging war on the world’s food supply. It
is waging war on the poor at a time when needs are so
dire. As we have heard, people are angry. And people
will die. The United States has information that the
Russian military may expand its targeting of Ukrainian
grain facilities to include attacks on civilian shipping
in the Black Sea. Our information also indicates that
Russia has laid additional sea mines in the approaches
to Ukrainian ports. We believe that is a coordinated
effort to justify any attacks on civilian ships in the
Black Sea and blame Ukraine for them.
After more than 500 days of President Putin’s fullscale invasion of Ukraine, it is easy to become numb
to Russia’s campaign of cruelty. But we cannot become
numb. This is not normal. It is not the behaviour of
a responsible country and a Permanent Member of
the Security Council. The Council is charged with
maintaining international peace and security. But
Russia has upended peace and security around the
world. Its actions fly in the face of everything that
the Council stands for. From the earliest days of
its unprovoked illegal war against Ukraine, Russia

S/PV.9382

has weaponized food. Russian forces have turned
Ukraine’s rolling wheat fields into battlefields. They
have spoiled fields with mines and bombs, and they
have stolen and destroyed vital agricultural equipment
and infrastructure. Moscow must cease its attacks on
Ukraine’s agricultural land and infrastructure. Even
when Russia was party to the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
it refused to fully implement the arrangement and often
obstructed ships full of food from leaving port. But
despite that, the Initiative was making a real difference.
It was helping to feed the world. That is not trivial, as
some may try to make us believe. The arrangement
has brought stability to global food markets and
lowered food prices for all. It has bolstered the World
Food Programme’s humanitarian work in places like
Afghanistan, Somalia and Yemen. And it has facilitated
the export of 32 million metric tons of Ukrainian grain
and foodstuffs, which is the equivalent of 18 billion
loaves of bread.
We also know that more than two thirds of the food
exports through the arrangement went to developing
countries. The first ship that left the Black Sea under
the arrangement brought grain to Lebanon, and since
then, thanks to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, ships
have brought food into ports across Africa and the
Middle East, from the Sudan to Ethiopia and Libya. But
the very day that Russia suspended its participation in
the Initiative, global grain prices rose sharply. Russian
exporters are already benefiting, while millions who
cannot afford higher-priced grains are suffering,
especially in the Middle East and Africa. Let us be
clear. Russia has zero legitimate reasons to suspend
its participation in the arrangement. It would have us
believe that sanctions have blocked its exports. That
could not be further from the truth. It was exporting
more grain than ever before and at higher prices. Russia
is simply using the Black Sea as blackmail. It is playing
political games and holding humankind hostage.
The United Nations and Türkiye have said publicly
that they want the arrangement to continue. Ukraine
has said publicly that it wants the arrangement to
continue. The world clearly wants the arrangement to
continue. The eyes of the world are now on Russia. It
is not too late for Moscow to reverse its decision and
extend, expand and fully implement the Black Sea
Grain Initiative.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations and Türkiye for all they have done to try to keep
this arrangement alive. The Council and all Member

23-2146311/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

States must come together and urge Russia to resume
negotiations in good faith and end this atrocious war in
Ukraine for the good of the world’s most hungry and for
the good of humankind.
Mr. Kumanga (Mozambique): I wish to express
Mozambique’s gratitude to the presidency for convening
this important meeting. I also wish to thank the briefers.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative was a life-sustaining
arrangement, brokered by the Secretary-General. We
praise that Initiative, which enabled nearly 32 million
tons of Ukrainian grain to reach global markets, thereby
mitigating the needs of people around the globe.
The Secretary-General rightly lauded the Initiative
as a beacon of hope in a troubled world. Its suspension
is certain to amplify global socioeconomic stresses in a
world already grappling with a perfect storm of conflict,
climate change and a dwindling confidence in our
collective ability to negotiate and adhere to multilateral
solutions. We are told that global food indexes are
already showing sharp increases. Humanitarian
agencies are preparing for potential food shortages and
increased hunger in conflict-affected areas.

21/07/2023

briefings, and we listened carefully to Mr. Mikhail
Khazin. I also welcome the participation of Ukraine in
this meeting.
Earlier this week, the Council convened shortly
after the news that the Black Sea Grain Initiative would
not be extended (see S/PV.9380). In the short time
since, wheat futures have continued to rise, portending
further difficulties for developing countries in securing
necessary staples. If nothing is done, this will lead to
heightened hunger and food insecurity.
After a year of respite, during which the Black
Sea Grain Initiative contributed to a fall in prices, the
world now faces the threat of destabilized markets and
food shortages — yet again for the most vulnerable.
The Initiative and the memorandum of understanding
on the export of Russian fertilizers and food products
have indeed had a significant impact on global food
security. Those agreements were not perfect by any
means, yet they resulted in over 32 million metric tons
of Ukrainian grain and foodstuffs being shipped to the
world. As such, they fast became a lifeline for those
who needed them most.

We acknowledge the concerns regarding the
implementation of the twin memorandum that
facilitates the export of grain and agricultural products.
According to United Nations data, around 3 per cent
of exports under the Black Sea deal has gone to lowincome countries, with around 44 per cent going to
high-income countries and the rest to middle-income
States. Mozambique therefore urges all parties and
guarantors of the Black Sea Grain Initiative to follow
the example set by the Secretary-General, who
reaffirmed his unwavering commitment to facilitating
the transport of food products and fertilizers from both
Ukraine and Russia to international markets.

The United Arab Emirates deeply regrets that the
Initiative has not been extended. That said, we commend
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations to facilitate the continued transport of
food products and fertilizers from both Ukraine and
Russia to international markets.

We urge all parties to set aside their differences,
bearing in mind the hardship that will likely result
from the suspension of this arrangement. Once again,
we are in the presence of yet one more lesson that
bears testimony to the fact that humanitarian problems
require a political solution. In that regard, Mozambique
reiterates its call for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the resumption of direct negotiations between
the parties, in full compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

This conflict is not the sole reason for the food
insecurity crisis we face. The World Food Programme’s
increasingly dire warnings about rising food prices
precede the war, but the events of the past year and a
half have significantly exacerbated that trend. Most
Member States continue to call for an end to this
war — a war that has visited immense suffering upon
Ukrainians, compounded hardships for hundreds of
millions of people around the world and strained the
multilateral system.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Under-Secretary Griffiths for their informative

While it is vital that Ukrainian and Russian food
and fertilizer return to global markets, we must not let
that issue obscure the wider context. Ultimately, only

12/22

The Black Sea Grain Initiative was born out of
extensive diplomatic efforts and dialogue, one of very
few positive developments amid the shadow of war in
Ukraine throughout the past 18 months. Now is not the
time to walk away. On the contrary, it is time to build
on any positive steps to secure a new way forward.

23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

peace, just and sustainable, will help rectify the turmoil
we are seeing both within and beyond Ukraine. That
is what the overwhelming majority of States Members
of the United Nations have called for — a peace that
is in line with the Charter of the United Nations and
respects Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral
DiCarlo
and
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings.
Malta strongly condemns Russia’s unilateral
decision to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We
see that decision for what it is — yet another regrettable
example of the politicization of humanitarian needs that
will only exacerbate the global food security crisis. It
is evident to all that the onus of this development lies
squarely on the Russian Federation.
The weaponization of food is completely
unacceptable and unconscionable. It is essential to
restore the Black Sea Grain Initiative, rebalance the
global food market and contribute to Ukraine’s export
of grains to the countries that need it the most.
Since its creation, the Black Sea Grain Initiative
played a vital role in facilitating Ukraine’s grain export
to international markets. Since its implementation, the
Initiative ensured the safe passage of over 32 million
metric tons of food commodities from Ukrainian ports.
The Initiative also enabled the shipment of a significant
quantity of grain through vessels chartered by the
World Food Programme, providing essential support
to its humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan, Ethiopia,
Kenya, the Sudan, Somalia and Yemen.
Despite the Russian Federation’s claims to the
contrary, over half of the grain and two thirds of the
wheat from the Initiative went to developing countries,
including some of the most food-insecure regions of the
globe like the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, Yemen and
Afghanistan. The Initiative helped lower food prices
by almost a quarter since March 2022. Every shipment
contributed to reducing hardship in the world’s poorest
countries, since bringing grain to world markets lowers
food prices for all.
Malta strongly condemns the recent Russian attacks
on the southern Ukrainian port of Chernomorsk, which
destroyed 60,000 tons of wheat destined for China, as
well as grain export infrastructure. We also condemn
the continued night-time bombings in and around the

S/PV.9382

ports of Odesa and Mykolayiv. Those deplorable acts are
designed to degrade the functioning of infrastructure
essential to Ukrainian exports. We are also deeply
concerned about official Russian statements indicating
that all ships sailing to the Ukrainian Black Sea ports
will be seen as potential military targets. Russia must
cease illegally blocking Ukrainian seaports and allow
freedom of navigation on the Black Sea. Closing the
Black Sea humanitarian corridor will affect crops for
the upcoming season, because farmers in Ukraine will
be reluctant to plant if there is no viable way to get
their crops to market. That will be felt by the most
vulnerable populations, who will have no choice but to
pay higher prices for food. In that regard, I can confirm
that the European Union’s solidarity lanes will continue
to assist Ukraine in various ways to facilitate the export
of its agricultural goods worldwide.
Food security all over the globe is now at great
risk. By persisting in its instrumentalization of food
resources, Russia is responsible for widespread
disturbances in global grain shipments and for
exacerbating inflation in food prices on an international
scale. Reduced food supplies will have knock-on
effects on the lives of millions, hitting them hard in
the areas of health, education and social cohesion.
Malta urges Russia to change course on its decision and
immediately resume its implementation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. Cooperation and stability where
food products and fertilizer are concerned are vital to
ensuring food security and alleviating the suffering of
vulnerable populations in regions heavily reliant on
those supplies.
Today’s meeting once again illustrates the farreaching consequences of this senseless, illegal and
unprovoked war. It is another stark reminder of its
devastating repercussions not just on the region but
the rest of the world as well. We can only reiterate
in the strongest possible terms the need for Russia to
end its aggression and to immediately and completely
withdraw all its forces and military equipment from the
entire territory of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Mr. Griffiths,
Ms. DiCarlo and the civil-society briefer for
their statements.
The global food supply, already compromised
by various factors, has been further exacerbated by
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine for more than 500

23-2146313/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

days now. Sadly, the situation has just deteriorated
even further, following Russia’s decision on 17 July
to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Japan
condemns Russia’s deplorable action and notes that
Russia had already been a significant impediment to the
proper functioning of the Initiative for several months.
Since it was launched last year, the Initiative has
played a pivotal role in ensuring global food security.
Through it more than 32 million tons of grain and
other commodities have been transported from
Ukrainian ports. Furthermore, more than 725,000
tons of grain have been distributed through the World
Food Programme, aiding humanitarian operations in
some of the most severely impacted areas of the world,
such as Afghanistan, Yemen and the Horn of Africa.
Remarkably, despite the significant challenges posed by
conflict, climate change and escalating energy prices,
the Initiative has led to a drop in food prices of more
than 23 per cent since March of last year.
Japan is gravely concerned about the adverse
effects that Russia’s decision could have on global food
supplies, particularly for vulnerable people. Indeed, it
has been alarming to witness higher volatility in global
wheat prices immediately following Russia’s various
actions, starting with its termination of the Initiative.
Russia is also threatening to treat civilian vessels
bound for Ukrainian ports as potential military targets.
It is Russia alone that must take responsibility for all
the repercussions resulting from its decision. Japan
categorically condemns Russia’s attacks on Ukrainian
port areas on the Black Sea, which have resulted
in numerous civilian casualties and the reported
destruction of at least 60,000 tons of essential grains
destined for export. It is crucial to remember that the
attacks on civilian infrastructure may constitute a
violation of international humanitarian law.
We commend the painstaking efforts of the
United Nations and the Government of Türkiye in the
extension and implementation of the Initiative. I would
also like to remind the Council of the Hiroshima Action
Statement for Resilient Global Food Security, issued in
May, which advocated for the maximum and continued
implementation of the Initiative. Japan strongly urges
Russia to cease its weaponization of food, which will
never help to legitimize its heinous act of violence, and
to return immediately to the international framework to
resume grain exports.
14/22

21/07/2023

Our collective commitment to mitigating global
hunger and maintaining stable food prices worldwide
must not falter. In that context, Japan supports the
European Union’s solidarity lanes initiative for
transporting Ukrainian grain and food by land. For its
part, Japan has committed more than $250 million to
facilitate Ukraine’s grain exports and provide foodrelated assistance to vulnerable people in regions such
as the Middle East and Africa. We have also backed
the restoration of Ukraine’s agricultural production
capacity, which has been so severely compromised by
Russia’s aggression. Earlier this year, in March, Japan
supplied sunflower and corn seeds to 400 smallholding
farmers in Kharkiv — with a particular focus on women
and young farmers — where war has significantly
reduced agricultural productivity and income.
Japan will continue its efforts to secure the global
food supply, thereby contributing to the stabilization
of global markets in partnership with the international
community. Today we have heard some so-called
objective analysis and arguments aimed at minimizing
the importance of the Initiative. But we also heard voices
of concern around the Council table, especially from
countries that could be directly affected, and we are
witnessing actions that obstruct Ukrainian agricultural
exports and production. The truth is simple. All of these
concerns and hardships have been unnecessarily caused
or at least hugely exacerbated by the unprovoked war.
The most effective and straightforward solution to all
of them would be Russia’s immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of its forces from Ukraine to end the war.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Madam President, for inviting
the briefer we proposed and for your rational approach
to the number of delegations that were allowed to
participate in today’s meeting under rule 37.
We listened carefully to our colleagues’ statements
and are once again struck by the degree of cynicism
on the part of the Western members of the Security
Council and by their desire to conceal the truth and
engage in wishful thinking rather than with reality. To
one degree or another, most of them have expressed
concern about the termination of the so-called Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which allowed Ukrainian grain
to be supplied to world markets. I have a question for
them. What did they expect? Almost from the very
beginning, we drew everyone’s attention to the fact
that the Initiative no longer reflected the initial goal
and was becoming overtly commercial in nature. The
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

fact is that developed countries took the lead as food
buyers from Ukraine from the very beginning, and yet
no steps were taken to correct that trend. During the
period that the Black Sea Grain Initiative functioned,
a total of 32.8 million tons of goods were exported, of
which more than 70 per cent went to high- and uppermiddle-income countries, including European Union
(EU) members. The poorest countries, in particular
Ethiopia, Yemen, Afghanistan, the Sudan and Somalia,
accounted for less than 3 per cent.
The geography and commercialization of
an originally humanitarian initiative becomes
understandable if we take into account the fact that
the owners of significant areas of Ukrainian arable
land — more than 17 million hectares — were the
Western corporations Cargill, DuPont and Monsanto.
They bought up Ukrainian land after Kyiv lifted a
20-year moratorium on its sale at the request of the
International Monetary Fund and became the main
beneficiaries of Ukrainian grain exports. Meanwhile,
Europeans have been buying Ukrainian food at fire-sale
prices, processing it domestically and reselling it as
finished goods with at a high added value. In other
words, they make money on it twice over. Tell me, what
does that have to do with the task of providing food
for the poorest countries, which we heard about yet
again today?
If we are really going to talk about the saturation
of the global food market and about global food
security, the focus should be on Russia, not Ukraine.
If we compare Russia and Ukraine’s grain production
figures for last year, Ukraine produced approximately
55 million tons of grain, of which 47 million tons were
exported. However, of that, only 17 million tons was
wheat. Russia harvested 156 million tons of grain
was harvested, of which we exported 60 million tons,
including 48 million tons of wheat. And I should
point out immediately that they were exported not
thanks to the Black Sea Grain Initiative but in spite of
the obstacles created to hinder us. Simple arithmetic
therefore clearly shows that Russia is producing 20 per
cent of wheat on the world market versus Ukraine’s less
than 5 per cent. So who is playing the bigger role in
global food security?
Add to the wheat the fertilizers that Russia
produces, and the picture becomes even clearer. And
the experts understand that perfectly well. That is why
the memorandum of understanding between Russia
and the United Nations on Russia’s agricultural and

S/PV.9382

fertilizer exports became an integral part of the deal,
but in practice none of its provisions were implemented
in the past year. Given Russia’s indisputable role among
the world’s leading grain exporters, it was clear that in
agreeing to the package deal and heeding the calls for
uniting our efforts in support of global food security,
we expected to be exempt from the Western States’
discriminatory approach to us through their imposition
of unprecedented sanctions that in effect were an
attempt to organize a blockade of our producers. That
was important not for our own interests but for those of
the poor States in need around the world. The fact that
the sanctions imposed by the United States, London and
the EU do not formally extend to food and fertilizers
means nothing in practice. We are talking about major
barriers to our export activities, which no one had any
intention of removing or at least proposing working
exemptions for. As a result of those barriers, Russia
has lost as customers a number of countries that could
not adapt their banking systems to the new realities.
However, we now have new markets where we have
been able to resolve our logistical and payment issues,
which has been done by our suppliers, unfortunately
without the assistance of the United Nations.
The Russia-United Nations memorandum of
understanding, which was supposed to help us,
has not actually worked. One of our key demands,
the reintegration of the Russian Agricultural Bank
into the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunication (SWIFT) system — has been
officially rejected by the EU and the United States.
One-off transactions with the permission of Washington
or Brussels cannot ensure uninterrupted crossborder transactions or enable long-term planning for
agricultural supplies, while notions of establishing
subsidiaries of the bank are not feasible.
None of the people lamenting and claiming today
that Russia is starving the entire world have lifted a
finger to even help Russia provide supplies of its mineral
fertilizers free of charge — free of charge — under
the auspices of the United Nations. Since that purely
humanitarian initiative to supply 262,000 tons was
announced in September 2022 and blocked in Latvia,
Estonia, Belgium and the Netherlands, only two
shipments have been delivered, and with great
difficulty — 20,000 tons to Malawi and 34,000 tons to
Kenya. And we just heard about the role that fertilizer
plays in ensuring food security from Mr. Khazin.

23-2146315/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The importation of parts and equipment for
agricultural production and fertilizers into Russia is
banned because they are so-called dual-use goods.
Our entire territory has been declared a war-risk
zone, with insurance rates ranging from unaffordable
to prohibitive, while foreign ports are closed to our
ships and cargoes. The foreign accounts of domestic
agricultural companies have been frozen. Partially
unblocked funds have been transferred to the pockets
of those same Westerners for loan repayments and
the free delivery of our fertilizers. We nonetheless
patiently awaited the fulfilment of our agreement with
the United Nations. We twice agreed to extending the
deal despite the outrageous problems created by the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. We waited for an entire year
without results, and for that year our food and fertilizer
producers and exporters were frankly operating at a
loss. Russian farmers sustained losses of $1.2 billion
thanks to a 30 to 40 per cent drop in the value of our
grain on world markets. Thanks to the cargo shipping
issues and the cost of international transactions, the
profits from shipments were halved. The cost to our
farmers of importing agricultural equipment and parts
has gone up by 40 per cent and the fees for financial
transactions by 10 per cent. Our fertilizer producers are
experiencing similar problems, with losses now in the
region of $1.6 billion.
For months we were fed promises about a restoration
of the functioning of the Togliatti-Odessa ammonia
pipeline. In its attempts to bargain for additional
benefits under the Black Sea Grain Initiative, Kyiv
has simply blocked it for almost a year, despite the fact
that ammonia supplies are stipulated in both Istanbul
agreements and should have begun concurrently with
Ukraine’s food exports. I want to make it clear that the
ammonia exports had significant economic benefits,
including for Kyiv. The pluses on the humanitarian
front speak for themselves. Consider that the pipeline
annually supplied approximately 2 million tons of
raw materials for fertilizer production, enough to feed
45 million people. However, on 5 June, the Kyiv regime
simply blew it up. We are now facing a situation in which
world ammonia exports are down 70 per cent. Why is
no one, including at the United Nations, condemning
this crime or sounding the alarm about these wasted
opportunities and the long-term consequences of the
Kyiv regime’s irresponsible actions? On top of all
that, we have also encountered situations in which the
Zelenskyy regime and its Western sponsors, despite
the agreements they have made, have not hesitated to
16/22

21/07/2023

use humanitarian corridors to attack Russian military
and civilian targets, actions that have not received due
attention from the United Nations or the countries of
the West. Are we supposed to tolerate that?
Considering these facts, I do not think anyone
should have been surprised by our decision to terminate
the Black Sea Grain Initiative after 17 July and to close
the maritime humanitarian corridor as of midnight,
Moscow time, on 20 July. We will now consider all
vessels sailing in Black Sea waters to Ukrainian ports
to be potential carriers of military cargo. Consequently,
the flag States of such vessels will be considered to
be involved in the Ukrainian conflict on the side of
the Kyiv regime. In addition, a number of maritime
areas in the north-western and south-eastern parts
of the Black Sea’s international waters have been
declared temporarily dangerous for navigation. The
relevant information alerts on the withdrawal of safety
guarantees for seafarers have been issued in accordance
with the established procedure.
We should also point out that during the year in
which the deal was in force, the Kyiv regime has used it
as cover to accumulate significant military-industrial,
fuel and storage capacities around its Black Sea ports.
Large numbers of human resources of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine and foreign mercenaries have also
been stationed there. With the termination of the deal,
we have an opportunity to correct that situation, and we
consider Ukraine’s entire Black Sea port infrastructure
to be a site for the deployment and restocking of the
Armed Forces of Ukraine with Western weapons, which
Kyiv is using against Russia. As of 19 July, Russian
Federation armed forces have been conducting multiple
high-precision sea- and air-based strikes on military
industry facilities, fuel infrastructure and munitions
depots of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Odesa
area, on production and storage facilities for uncrewed
boats in the Odesa and Chornomorsk areas and on fuel
infrastructure facilities and munitions storage depots
in the Mykolayiv area. All of those objects are being
successfully hit.
Against that backdrop, we have familiarized
ourselves with yesterday’s reaction of the SecretaryGeneral to our military actions. In that connection,
we would like to ask only one question: where can we
read a similar condemnation by Mr. António Guterres
of Kyiv’s sabotage bombing of the Togliatti-Odesa
ammonia pipeline, the potential of which for global
food security we already mentioned today?
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Nevertheless, we pay tribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his team, who sincerely sought
to fulfil all the promises made by the West, but failed
to achieve anything. Our former so-called partners
in the West, however, spared no effort to disrupt the
agreements and derail the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Besides, we all remember very well how the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and France
blocked attempts to adopt a Security Council document
mentioning the United Nations-Russia memorandum of
understanding in July and November of last year. Now
we all know why: they never intended to implement the
United Nations-Russia memorandum, nor were they
ever going to implement the Minsk agreements. They
demanded the unconditional implementation of the
Istanbul agreements only from us, and to our detriment.
And today they are deceitfully trying to blame Russia
for derailing the grain deal and, in general, for almost all
the misfortunes of the populations of Africa and other
countries — the very countries from which the West
itself, in the past, squeezed all the juices and resources,
the countries that it pushed into the abyss of wars,
hunger and poverty, and now continues to shamelessly
rob within the framework of its neocolonial system.
Moreover, today some of the European countries
that pay lip service to the need to give Ukraine
the opportunity to export agricultural products are
themselves prohibiting the import of Ukrainian grain
into their territory, prioritizing the interests of their
own commodity producers, thus stooping to new lows
of cynicism and hypocrisy.
I would like to emphasize that we are not against the
grain deal as such, especially given its importance for the
global food market and for many countries of the world,
and we are ready to consider the possibility of returning
to it, but only on one condition: that all the previously
agreed principles of Russia’s participation in the deal
be fully taken into account and, most importantly,
implemented. For the Council’s convenience, let me
remind members what we are talking about.
The first is the principle of the real — and not
theoretical — lifting of sanctions on the supply of
Russian grain and fertilizers to world markets.
Second, all obstacles should be removed for
Russian banks and financial institutions that service
the deliveries of food and fertilizer, including by
immediately reconnecting them to the SWIFT

S/PV.9382

international banking system. We will not be satisfied
with any new promises or ideas in that regard. We need
only for these conditions to be met.
Third, deliveries to Russia of spare parts and
components for agricultural machinery and the
fertilizer industry must be resumed. The cost of
imported spare parts for equipment and machinery
for our producers has increased on average by 40 per
cent. The costs of financial transactions have increased
by approximately 10 per cent. The total losses have
amounted to approximately $1.6 billion.
Fourth, all issues related to freight charges and the
insurance of Russian food exports must be resolved,
and all logistics of food supplies must be ensured. The
increase in the cost of sea vessels for cargo transportation
and of international financial transactions and other
transactions has led to a two-fold drop in profitability.
Fifth, all obstacles must be lifted for the expanded
provision of Russian fertilizers and the raw materials
for their production, including the restoration of the
functioning of the Togliatti-Odesa ammonia pipeline.
Sixth, Russian assets related to the agricultural
sector must be unfrozen.
Seventh and finally, the grain deal should be
restored to its original humanitarian nature. It should
work for the benefit of the countries in need, and not to
make wealthy countries even wealthier.
As soon as all those conditions are met, we will
return to the grain deal immediately. The fulfilment
of those conditions will represent Western States’
contribution to ensuring international food security.
For now, everything that we have seen and heard is
merely demagoguery and hypocrisy.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Ecuador and
France for their initiative to convene this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for their updates on the
situation on the ground and Mr. Khazin for his briefing.
Brazil has watched with great concern the attacks
of recent days against facilities on the Black Sea
coast. The destruction of civilian infrastructure is
against international humanitarian law and should
not be used as a tool by any party to conflict. While
we deeply regret the discontinuation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, we encourage the parties involved in
that particular negotiation process to continue to seek

23-2146317/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

mutually beneficial solutions that could prevent the
further aggravation of food insecurity in the world.
The conflict in Ukraine has caused considerable
human suffering, not only in the fighting zone but also
in distant regions. Since it began, we have warned of
its impact on developing countries, which are more
vulnerable to rising food, fertilizer and energy prices.
Throughout the dozens of meetings already held by
the Security Council since the start of the hostilities, we
have heard repeated demands for developing countries
to take a position on one side of the war. However,
those who make those demands do not seem to listen
carefully to the positions that have been presented here
and elsewhere on the complex causes and worldwide
consequences of the conflict. Earlier this week, during
the General Assembly debate on the situation in Ukraine
(see A/77/PV.88 and A/77/PV.89), the representative of
a Member State rightly observed that the voices of the
global South must be heard. Amid the diversity of views
among the Member States of our Organization, there is
a message consistently being repeated: it is high time to
put an end to the war and limit as much as possible its
collateral effects.
We encourage all the parties to resume negotiations
on the Black Sea Grain Initiative and urge those parties
to refrain from actions that could disrupt the unimpeded
flow of food and fertilizers. Brazil expresses its sincere
appreciation and support for the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Government of Türkiye and
hopes that the parties will show the necessary flexibility
to revive the spirit of the Istanbul agreements. We
reiterate our call for the de-escalation of hostilities and
the opening of peace negotiations based on respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and the
recognition of the legitimate security concerns of all.
Achieving that goal is our common responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their briefings.
My Foreign Secretary said on Monday in the
Chamber (see S/PV.9380) that Russia’s termination
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative was taking food out
of the mouths of the poorest people across the world.
A total of 64 per cent of the 34 million tons of grain
exported under the deal went to low- and middle-income
countries. Unsurprisingly, Kenya called Russia’s
18/22

21/07/2023

withdrawal a stab in the back to countries in the Horn
of Africa already affected by drought. Russian missile
attacks on Odesa, Chernomorsk and Mykolayiv have
destroyed more than 60,000 tons of grain. That is enough
to feed 270,000 people for a year or to double the World
Food Programme shipments under the Black Sea Grain
Initiative to the Sudan and Somalia. Russia has destroyed
dock equipment, making it harder to load grain on ships.
And now Russia has gone further, burning food at the
dockside and making threats to murder civilian sailors.
There is no possible justification for those punitive acts.
Moreover, Russia has benefited from the deal.
Russian food exports are significantly above pre-war
levels. Russian food and fertilizer exports have never
been subjected to sanctions. The United Kingdom
has worked with its banking and insurance sectors
to facilitate transactions, and the United Nations has
worked tirelessly to address Russian concerns. We
know that Russia’s so-called reasons for ending the deal
are nonsense.
Ukraine has made no demands. As Foreign Minister
Kuleba said in this room, Ukraine wants nothing more
than to make its food available to the world. Up to
24 million tons of Ukrainian food may now not reach
world markets because of Russia. Russia’s actions
have already raised prices, with immediate impact on
the world’s poorest and hungriest people, and Russia’s
latest demands are tantamount to holding the world’s
starving hostage. We thank Türkiye, the United Nations
and Ukraine for their efforts to protect the deal. We call
on Russia to rejoin it and to end the war. Food is not
a weapon.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their insightful and comprehensive briefings. I
would also like to express my particular gratitude to
the delegation of Ecuador for the personal participation
in this meeting of His Excellency Foreign Minister
Gustavo Manrique and for his principled statement.
I also recognize the representative of the person on
the International Criminal Court’s wanted list in the
permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
The first days following the undermining of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative have unequivocally testified
to the Russian rationale behind that insidious step.
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Not bothering to fabricate any plausible explanation,
Russia has proceeded to deliberately destroy Ukrainian
capabilities for grain export. Since Monday, the barrage
of Russian missile and drone strikes has mainly targeted
the infrastructure and storage facilities of Ukrainian
ports. From 18 to 20 July alone, Russia attacked Ukraine
with 56 cruise missiles and 87 drones of Iranian origin.
The list of missiles included Kalibr, Onyx, Kh-22,
Iskander and Kh-59 missiles. In the port of Chernomorsk
alone, Russian strikes destroyed 60,000 tons of grain.
For a long time, that cargo was intended to be loaded
onto a large-tonnage vessel. The vessel, however, spent
over 60 days in the queue of the grain corridor owing
to inspections being sabotaged by Russia. The missile
attacks also destroyed grain terminals, reservoirs and
berths of the ports of Odesa and Chernomorsk. Last
night, Russia continued its missile terror, targeting
grain warehouses. As a result of the strike by Kalibr
missiles, 100 tons of peas and 20 tons of barley were
destroyed, as reported by Odesa regional authorities.
Putin’s envoy has tried to invent arguments as
to why Russia is so persistently undermining global
food security by destroying Ukrainian grain and other
foodstuffs. The sly purpose, however, was revealed by
Russia itself at the beginning of June at the so-called
Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum. The
head of the infamous Russia Today state propaganda
factory, Margarita Simonyan, in the presence of Putin,
openly stated:
“All our hope is for the famine — here is what it
means. It means that the famine will start now, and
they will lift the sanctions and be friends with us,
because they will realize it is necessary”.
In fact, since Russia has already brought to this
Chamber many oddballs, allow me to play back the
original in Russian.
I am sorry for the technical difficulties. I will send
the original video to the Council later on.
As for the intervention of a certain self-proclaimed
microeconomist, Mr. Khazin, I would like to refer him
to the famous lecture of Professor Harry Frankfurt on
humbug: “He does not reject the authority of the truth,
as the liar does [...] He pays no attention to it at all”. By
virtue of this, Mr. Khazin’s statement is a greater enemy
of the truth than lies are.
The current actions of Russia only serve to confirm
that Ms. Simonyan was indeed heard.

S/PV.9382

According to expert assessments, further attacks on
Ukrainian ports, increased risk to industrial complexes
and the inability to export grains by sea routes will lead
to further increases in corn and wheat prices in the short
run. There is also a risk of the suspension of operations
at several Ukrainian oilseed processing plants and a
reduction in the processing pace of sunflower seeds
and rapeseed, which will have a significantly impact on
global prices for sunflower oil.
The terrorist nature of the shelling is aggravated by
the fact that missiles such as the Onyx and Kh-22 are
designed as anti-ship missiles to be launched from the
Bastion-P ground-based coastal defence system. They
have low precision against ground targets. At the same
time, it is difficult for Ukrainian air defence to detect
and shoot down such missiles, as they approach targets
at high speed and low altitude. The low accuracy of
anti-ship missiles leads to tragedies such as the one that
occurred on 20 July in Mykolayiv, in which a Russian
missile hit a residential building, killing a married couple
in their apartment and wounding another 19 civilians,
including five children. Fatalities among civilians were
also recorded in Odesa, which sustained heavy missile
shelling in recent days.
On 19 July 2023, the ministry of war of Russia
declared that the Russian Federation would attack
all merchant vessels in Black Sea waters headed to
Ukrainian ports. In fact, the representative of Putin’s
regime has already repeated the same statement here
at today’s meeting. Russia’s threats to use force against
civilian vessels, regardless of their flag, merits strong
condemnation. Those threats are an attack on freedom
of navigation throughout the world. Russia’s intention
to consider foreign vessels as military targets grossly
violates its obligations under international law towards
all States that conduct peaceful navigation in the
Black Sea.
According to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, merchant vessels of States not involved
in an armed conflict have the right to free and peaceful
navigation, which is not considered an act of aggression.
Norms of international humanitarian law prohibit any
attacks against vessels of neutral States if they do not
engage in belligerent acts or do not support military
efforts. There is no basis to believe that merchant vessels
of foreign nations are supporting military efforts simply
by exporting grain to other countries that need it in order
to avert the threat of hunger.

23-2146319/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russia’s actions cannot be justified by any norms
of international law, including the belligerent’s right to
blockade. Russia’s declaration has no legitimate direct
military objective. Instead, it is intended to intimidate
neutral States. Russia’s declaration covers the entire
Black Sea, not just an area immediately around Ukrainian
ports, and moreover, does not make exceptions for
medical and other humanitarian considerations, as is
required by the laws of naval warfare.
Lacking any credible argument to justify what
could not be justified, its attacks on the right to food
of people throughout the world, Russia continues to
cynically claim that the Black Sea Grain Initiative was a
commercial endeavour, not a humanitarian one. I am not
going to focus on the moral aspects of such claims from
a State that increases its revenues by stealing Ukrainian
grain from the occupied territories, which then ends up
on the global markets. At the same time, I will remind
the Council of the figures mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his statement of 17 July. The Initiative has
ensured the safe passage of over 32 million tons of food
commodities from Ukrainian ports and helped to reduce
food prices by over 23 per cent since March last year. The
World Food Programme has shipped more than 725,000
tons to support humanitarian operations, relieving hunger
in Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and Yemen. Russia’s
withdrawal from the Grain Initiative and its constant
cynical attacks on Ukrainian port infrastructure, means
of navigation and grain terminals are nothing but its
attempts to eliminate a market competitor, deliberately
raise world food prices and profit at the expense of
millions of people around the world.
We call on our partners to fully support Ukraine’s
initiative to establish a humanitarian maritime corridor
in the Black Sea. The humanitarian corridor will restore
vital food supply routes to the regions that need them
the most.
We call on the international community to condemn
Russia’s actions and take appropriate measures to ensure
the safety of navigation in the Black Sea as a guarantee
of food security around the world.
In the words of my President,
“Russian terrorists want to become exemplary in the
way they destroy life. We will become exemplary
in the way we protect life and in the way life then
responds — justly and inevitably — to every blow
inflicted on every terrorist.”
20/22

21/07/2023

Before I conclude, I would like to use this opportunity
to make a formal request to the representatives of the
Secretary-General present in this Chamber. I ask them
to draw the attention of the relevant United Nations
officials, in particular the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
to the public confession of the officials of the Belarus
Red Cross, in which they admit to their involvement
in the illegal mass removal by force of children from
the occupied territories of Ukraine. I also ask them to
properly monitor and report on that shocking situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this meeting, and we also thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for their briefings.
In addition to the loss of thousands of civilian lives,
millions of displaced people and billions of dollars
in material damage, the ongoing war in Ukraine also
continues to have negative repercussions on energy
prices, supply chain disruptions and global food
insecurity. The Black Sea Grain Initiative has had a
stabilizing effect on the prices of grain and contributed to
global food security for almost one year. That Initiative
has allowed more than 32.8 million tons of various grain
products to reach world markets since 22 August 2022.
It has helped avert a major food shortage and eased the
lowest income countries’ access to food products. The
World Food Programme also has benefited from the
reduced prices in its operations.
Therefore, the resumption of the Black Sea Initiative
remains crucial as part of our common endeavours to
fight global hunger and ensure stable food prices for
consumers everywhere.
The permanent termination of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative will be harmful to the global food market. The
countries that depend on the price stability provided by
the Initiative will suffer the most.
Both the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
memorandum of understanding between the United
Nations and the Russian Federation are crucial for
vulnerable people around the world. That is why we
need to combine our efforts and find a way to implement
the two components of the deal simultaneously. To that
end, we commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to facilitate the export of Russian food and fertilizer
products. We recognize that there is still room for
23-21463

21/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9382

improvement. This also requires further steps from
all relevant stakeholders. We must be mindful that the
world’s most vulnerable communities are depending on
us to devise a compromise to revive the Initiative.

Sea Grain Initiative, the total amount that left from the
Black Sea shores and was exported to the world is over
50 million tons of grain. That means a choice was made
to uphold trust, solidarity and universality.

We hope that the current suspension will be temporary and that the operations will be resumed as soon as
possible by addressing the needs and expectations of all
stakeholders. We will continue our efforts in coordination with the United Nations and the two sides. In the
meantime, we urge all sides to remain calm, exercise restraint and avoid taking any unilateral steps that might
jeopardize prospects for the resumption of the Initiative.

My country will continue to uphold its promise to the
world and to make its own contribution in mitigating the
risks of a global food crisis, both in its national capacity
as a direct neighbour of Ukraine and as a member of the
European Union.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Ms. Mocanu (Romania): I would like to thank
France and Ecuador for calling for this meeting, UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings, as well as the United
Kingdom presidency for allowing my delegation to take
the floor.
Yesterday, Secretary-General António Guterres
spoke about trust, solidarity and universality when
launching his policy brief on the New Agenda for Peace.
In his policy brief, he also mentions that the war is
a choice.
A year and a half since its invasion of Ukraine, Russia
is still waging a war of choice. Defying in a similar way
the needs of developing countries, Russia’s decision
to denounce the Black Sea Grain Initiative is a matter
of choice. But Russia’s decision has multidimensional
effects around the world. We have yet to anticipate them
all. But we will stand in solidarity with those in need.
Romania joins previous speakers in commending
the efforts of the United Nations and others, in particular
Türkiye, on being constructive with a view to alleviating
the tensions on the food market. We also call on Russia
to reconsider its decision and make the right choice in
returning to the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative remains a good
example of multilateralism at work. But all players need
to be constructive and abide by the rules — the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law.
Out of the 41 million tons of grain from Ukraine that
were exported through the European Union solidarity
lanes, over 20 million transited Romania. Together
with the 32 million tons of grain exported via the Black

Together with the United Nations, the European
Union did everything in its power to deal with the
challenges posed by an actor that had undermined
international law. The pragmatic choice was favoured,
one that made every effort so that developing countries
could benefit from the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
grain exported through it.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is a win for all those
participating in it and for all those benefiting from it. The
Initiative is a clear expression of leaving no one behind.
It is imperative that it be restored.
We continue to be appalled by the high number of
attacks targeting schools and hospitals in Ukraine. Again,
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure are
strictly prohibited under international law and must
cease immediately. This includes the ongoing missile
and drone strikes against the Ukrainian ports of Odesa,
Chernomorsk and Mykolayiv.
Upholding international law and the principles of
the United Nations Charter is paramount. Otherwise, we
become an accessory to impunity. That is not the image
of ourselves we want to project for future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank Under-Secretaries-General
DiCarlo and Griffiths for their briefings and for their
relentless efforts under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral over the last year or so.
A permanent member of the Security Council is
threatening to attack any ship, regardless of its cargo
or its flag, that enters part of the Black Sea. So now
we are all potential targets of the Russian aggression.
It is bombing grain warehouses and infrastructure in
Ukrainian ports key to food security globally, and it
has torpedoed the Black Sea Grain Initiative. And yet it
claims to care about global food security.
The European Union (EU) condemns Russia’s
choice to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative. It
further aggravates the global food crisis and causes price

23-2146321/22

S/PV.9382

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

increases for foodstuffs globally. Hundreds of millions
of already vulnerable people, in particular in Africa, will
pay the price.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations and
Türkiye to continue engaging in a constructive dialogue,
and we call on Russia to reconsider its withdrawal. Any
arrangements have to include Ukraine.
Since withdrawing, Russia has bombed port
infrastructure in Odesa, Chernomorsk and Mykolayiv,
causing civilian casualties, including children. According
to reports, more than 60,000 tons of grain destined
for export were destroyed on Wednesday. Russia has
threatened to attack grain shipments passing through the
Black Sea. This is completely unacceptable.
The inconvenient truth that Russia wishes to hide
is that it is benefiting from higher global food prices.
Publicly available data demonstrate that Russian grain
exports have reached record volumes. From 1 July
2022 to 30 June 2023, Russia’s wheat exports reached
44.7 million tons, more than 10 per cent higher than
the average in previous years. Its fertilizer exports are
nearing full recovery.
Contrary to claims by Russian disinformation, the
Black Sea Grain Initiative benefited all food importing
countries by contributing to lower global prices. The
export of almost 33 million tons of grain and foodstuffs
from Ukraine to 45 different countries reduced prices
by over 23 per cent since Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Half of the grain, including two thirds of the
wheat, went to developing countries. Half of the total
World Food Programme (WFP) grain procurement,
in support of its humanitarian operations in the most
food-insecure countries, comes from Ukraine. Without
the Black Sea route, the WFP will have to source its
assistance elsewhere at a higher cost.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is a major deliverable
of effective multilateralism and, in the words of the
Secretary-General, a beacon of hope in a world that
desperately needs it. Since Russia’s withdrawal, prices
on wheat and corn have surged. The simple truth is
that Russia has made a cynical calculation: by blocking
exports from Ukraine, it will make higher profits on its
own exports.
The Secretary-General clearly demonstrated that
Russia gained important benefits from the memorandum
of understanding on food and fertilizer exports. The
United Nations has worked relentlessly to unblock

22/22

21/07/2023

assets, facilitate regulatory frameworks and engage
with the private sector to find dedicated solutions across
the banking and insurance sectors. These efforts were
conducted in close collaboration with the EU.
While Russia spreads disinformation and maintains
its own export restrictions on food and fertilizer to
drive up prices, the EU has spared no effort to prevent
our sanctions from affecting the food security of third
countries. We provided extensive guidance to economic
operators on the implementation of sanctions, clarifying
that the transfer of Russian food and fertilizers to third
countries by EU operators on our territory is permitted.
We introduced a legislative derogation in December
authorizing transactions with sanctioned individuals to
facilitate such trade. We have worked with the United
Nations to build a bespoke payments mechanism for the
Russian Agricultural Bank through JP Morgan outside of
SWIFT, to allow food- and fertilizer-related payments.
And we are working closely with the United Nations
and partners to address any specific bottlenecks and
facilitate the access of food and fertilizers originating
from Russia. Russia knows all this.
The EU and its member States remain committed
to addressing the needs of countries vulnerable to food
insecurity. The Food Systems Summit in Rome next
week will call for accelerated action in this regard. In
addition to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the EU’s
solidarity lanes have allowed the export of more than
41 million tons of Ukraine’s food and agricultural
goods. We are also providing €18 billion to address foodsecurity needs, focusing on the most vulnerable regions,
and we reiterate our call on all countries to step up their
own humanitarian assistance in this regard.
We call on Russia to stop using food as a weapon
and rejoin the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The EU will
continue to act to fight food insecurity. Food cannot be
used as a political tool. We remain open to exploring
solutions with the United Nations that would contribute
to the resumption of the grain deal.
In conclusion, I remind the Security Council that
the Black Sea Grain Initiative would not have been
necessary if Russia had not waged a war of aggression
against its neighbour and blocked Ukrainian ports for
exporting grain. And I reiterate the EU’s unwavering
support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders and its inherent right to self-defence.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-21463
