A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/258 B
21 July 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 121
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/691/Add.2)]
54/258. Review of resource requirements for the high-level international
intergovernmental event on financing for development and the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
B*
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the review of resource requirements for the highlevel international intergovernmental event on financing for development and the Third United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries1 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2
I
1. Welcomes the fact that voluntary contributions for the financing of activities related to the first
session of the Intergovernmental Preparatory Committee for the Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries have been pledged;

*
1
2

Consequently, resolution 54/258 of 7 April 2000 becomes resolution 54/258 A.
A/C.5/54/58.
A/54/7/Add.14. For the final text, see Official Records of the Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 7A.

00 53947

/...

A/RES/54/258 B
Page 2
2. Expresses appreciation for the contributions and pledges received and, noting the current level of
the resources in the Trust Fund for Least Developed Countries: Core Project, looks forward to the rapid
disbursement of the funds being pledged;
3. Decides, as a precautionary measure, that should sufficient extrabudgetary resources not be
immediately available for the financing of the first session of the Preparatory Committee, use would be made,
on a provisional basis, of the contingency fund, on the understanding that the contingency fund would be
replenished by those extrabudgetary resources as soon as they were available;
4. Decides also to revert to the question of the financing of the second session of the Preparatory
Committee and the Conference itself at the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
II
1. Welcomes the establishment of a Trust Fund for the Preparatory Committee for the high-level
international intergovernmental event on financing for development;
2. Decides that the expenses related to the travel and subsistence of the members of the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee in relation to the consultations mandated in General Assembly resolution 54/279 of
15 June 2000 shall be met through the transfer, to the Trust Fund for the Preparatory Committee, of the
balance available in the Trust Fund for the Participation of Least Developed Countries in Intergovernmental
Meetings;
3.

Encourages members of the Bureau to finance their own travel and subsistence where possible.
98th plenary meeting
15 June 2000
