S/2002/1111

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2002
English
Original: French

Letter dated 2 October 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In implementation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the
honour to transmit to you herewith the report on the international security force in
Kosovo during the period from 1 to 31 August 2002.
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-61951 (E)

041002

*0261951*

041002

S/2002/1111

Annex
[Original: English]

Monthly report to the United Nations on operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 August 2002), there were just over 32,600
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.

The overall situation in Kosovo during August remained generally stable.

Security
3.
During August, there were no direct attacks on KFOR personnel. On 2 August,
a grenade was thrown into a nightclub in Urosevac, injuring two people.
4.
The number of demonstrations by Kosovar Albanians in the province
increased, with numerous protests against actions taken by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in relation to former leaders of
the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK), Rustem Mustafaa and the Haradinaj brothers.
As a result of the growing number of demonstrations, KFOR riot control forces
stood ready to support UNMIK police and, on 14 August, were deployed in Decane.
5.
KFOR continued to carry out Kosovo-wide search operations in its campaign
against weapons smuggling and any activity of ethnic Albanian armed groups.
Weapons and ammunition were seized on a daily basis. Items confiscated for the
month included 170 weapons, 7,412 grenades and mines; and 17,276 rounds of
ammunition. A significant amount of the ammunition was discovered in a cache of
some 800 grenades found near Bitinja in the Kacanik municipality, a major logistics
route for operations of the National Liberation Army (NLA) in Kumanovo during
2001, and in another cache of more than 6,000 grenades discovered near the village
of Goles, south-west of Pristina.
6.
On 8 August, KFOR carried out an operation in a number of settlements in
eastern Kosovo b in search of suspected members of ethnic Albanian armed groups.
Nineteen people were arrested. On 12 August, an operation was carried out near
Pristina leading to the arrest and detention of individuals with potential links to the
so-called “Republican Army of llyrida” (ARI).
Border/boundary security
7.
The number of illegal border crossing incidents increased in August. Fifty-one
people were arrested, and were handed over to UNMIK police. Over one half of
those arrested were Albanian nationals attempting to cross into Kosovo.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), there were 22 cases of
non-compliance reported during the period under review, involving 28 KPC
members. Although most of the cases involved minor offences in contravention of
the KPC disciplinary code, two zone commanders, including Rustem Mustafa, are
under investigation for offences against UNMIK and the police services. At the end
of August, 77 cases of non-compliance remained open.

2

S/2002/1111

9.
KFOR continues to provide training courses for KPC units and 14 such courses
were completed during the reporting period.
10. The number of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction programme
during the reporting period was 7,568.
11. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continue to remain in
compliance with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. KFOR continues to provide assistance, on request, to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations working throughout Kosovo, and
to provide security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
13. Within the framework of the KFOR/UNMIK transitional strategy, KFOR
handed over responsibility for railway passenger safety to UNMIK. The Kosovo
Police Service (KPS) is now responsible for security on board the trains, and
UNMIK police provide security at train stations. KFOR will provide support if
requested, but within available means and capabilities.
14. On 28 August, KFOR provided support to UNMIK police in a search for a
prisoner who had escaped from the Dubrava prison. During the operation, the
prisoner fired at DFOR soldiers near Stimlje (south-west of Pristina).
15. KFOR also provided support to a KPS patrol and three Kosovar Serbs who
came under fire in the Gorazdvac Kosovar Serb enclave. A KFOR quick reaction
force was deployed to the area and was able to extract safely the KPS patrol and the
three Kosovar Serbs. In a follow-up operation, a Kosovar Albanian was detained and
handed over to UNMIK police.
16. KFOR will provide support in the framework of the municipal elections during
the period 10 September to 24 October 2002, by providing officers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) with updated threat
assessment information; detaching liaison officers to regional joint election
operations centres; providing escorts for political party representatives and
observers when deemed necessary; and participating in the political violence group
and in the joint OSCE/UNMIK police/KFOR tally assessments.
17. Following the agreement reached on 7 August between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Michael Steiner, and Nebojsa Covicc to
integrate 150 Kosovar Serbs into the Kosovo Police Service School, the first group
of former “bridge watchers” whose applications were successful was due to begin a
15-week training course at the beginning of September.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
18. On 14 August, the return implementation group decided to continue the
planned return of 42 families to the villages of Bica, Grabac and Drenovcic (north of
Klina), despite fears expressed in the neighbouring Kosovar Albanian communities
about the possible return of suspected criminals to Kosovo. So far, 1,462 displaced
persons have returned to Kosovo since the beginning of 2002.
Outlook
19.

The security situation in Kosovo is expected to continue to be stable.

3

S/2002/1111

Notes

4

a

Rustem Mustafa (a former regional commander of UCK) was commander of regional task group
6 in Gnjilane until his suspension from the Kosovo Protection Corps in July 2001. He was
arrested on 11 August, and remains in detention.

b

Balance, Rakaj, Deneral Jankovic, Dimca, Dramnjak, Dardani, Zlatare, Gnjilane, Drobes,
Goden, Zegra and Uglare.

c

Chief of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo, and Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia.
