75

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Sixth Committee
" (a) By a signatory which has not yet ratified?
" ( b) By a State entitled to sign or accede but which
has not yet done so?";
2. Invites the International Law Commission:
(a) In the course of its work on the codification of
the law of treaties, to study the question of reservations
to multilateral conventions both from the point of view
of codification and from that of the progressive development of international law; to give priority to this study
and to report thereon, especially as regards multilateral
conventions of which the Secretarv-General is the
depositary, this report to be consider~d by the General
Assembly at its sixth session;
( b) In connexion with this study, to take account of
all the views expressed during the fifth session of the
General Assembly, and particularly in the Sixth Committee;
3. Instructs the Secretary-General, pending the rendering of the advisory opinion by the International Court
of Justice, the receipt of a report from the International
Law Commission and further action by the General
Assembly, to follow his prior practice with respect to
the receipt of reservations to conventions and with
respect to the notification and solicitation of approvals
thereof, all without prejudice to the legal effect of
objections to reservations to conventions as it may be
:-ecommended by the General Assembly at its sixth
sesston.

Determine who shall be invited;
( ,/) Make recommendations for financing, subject
to the applicable regulations, rules and resolutions of the
General Assembly ;
( c) Make such other arrangements in connexion
with the conference as it sees fit.
( c)

2. In applying rule 2, sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 1, the Economic and Social Council shall, when it
decicks to invite non-governmental organizations, have
regard to the terms of Article 71 of the Charter. National organizations without consultative status may be
invited only after consultation with the Member of the
United ;-,; ations concerned.

3. The Council may decide to entrust the SecretaryCeneral with any of the tasks mentioned in sub-paragraphs ( /J), ( d) and ( e) of paragraph 1. It may also
authorize him to make such modifications as circumstances may require in carrying out any decision of the
l otmcil made pursuant to sub-paragraphs ( b), ( d)
and i e).
Rule 3
The Secretary-General shall notify all Members of
the United Nations of the conference and shall send
them copies of the provisional agenda. He shall also
inform each Member State of the invitations issued.

320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
479 (V). Rules for the calling of non-governmental conferences by the Economic and
Social Council

The General Assembly,
Having considered the draft rules 7 for the calling of
non-governmental conferences by the Economic and
Social Council, which were submitted by the SecretaryGeneral after consultation with the Council,
Approves the following rules for the calling of nongovernmental conferences by the Economic and Social
Council:

Rule 1
The Economic and Social Council, after consultation
with the Secretary-General, may at any time decide to
call a non-governmental conference on any matter within its competence.

Rule 2
1. When the Council has decided to call a conference, as provided for in rule 1, it shall:
(a) Prescribe the terms of reference ;
( b) Fix the date, the place and the appropriate
duration of the conference and prepare its provisional
agenda;
1
. See. Official Re~ords of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Si%th Committee, Anne%es, Agenda item 53 document
A/1333.
'

480 (V). Designation of non-member State!- to
which a certified copy of the Revised General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes shall he communicated by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of
accession to this Act
Fhe 1;encra! .·lsscmbly
f),,cidcs to defer until its sixth session co11sidcratiou of the question of the designation of non-member
States to which a certified copy of the Revised General
Act" for the Pacific Settlement of international Disputes shall be communicated by the Secrctary-Gener:i.l
for the purpose of accession to this Act.

320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
481 (V). Regulations to give effect to article III,
section 8, of the Headquarters Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of article III, section
8, of the Ag-recment between the United Nations and
the l.rnited States of America regarding the Headtiuartcrs of the United Nations, approved by General
Assembly resolution 169 (II) of 31 October 1947,
8

See resolution 268 A (III).

76

General Assembly-Fifth Session

Jl aving considered the report" of the Secretary-General on the regulations to give effect to section 8 of the
Headquarters Agreement,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to present to !he
General Assembly for approval any draft regulation
within the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement
which may in his opinion be necessary for the full
execution of the functions of the United Nations;
2. Decides that, if in the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral it is necessary to give immediate effect to any
regulation within the provisions of the Headquarters
Agreement, he shall have authority to make such
regulation. The Secretary-General shall report any
action so taken to the General Assembly as soon as
possible.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.

482 (V).

Registration and publication of treatieF!
and international agreements

/'he Gcnrra! Assembl,•,
I I avinr; considered the report 111 of the SecretaryGeneral on the registration and publication of trt"aties
and international agreements and the observations 11 in
this regard of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
1. Notes with satisfaction the progress acl1in•ed in
regard to the registration and publication of treaties;
2. Invites M.ernber and non-member States parties to
treaties or international agreements subject to publication under article 12 of the regulations to give effect to
Article 102 of the Charter of tlw United Nations, to
provide the Secretary-General, where feasible, with
translations in English or French or both as may he
needed for the purposes of such publication;
3. Amends article 7 of the regulations to give effect
to Artide 102 of the Charter of the United Nations
to read:
"A certificate of registration signed by the Secretary-General or his representative shall be issued
to the registering party or agency and also, upon
request, to any party to the treaty or international
agreement registered";
4. Amends the first sentence of paragraph I of
article 8 of the regulations to give effect to Article 102
of the Charter of the United Nations to read·
"1. The register shall he kept in the English and
French languages" ;

5. Requests the Secretary-General, when acting under
article 12 of the regulations to give effect to Article 102
of the Charter of the United Nations, to continue, as
economically as practicable, without undue delay and
without sacrifice of uniformity in style and record
permanence, to publish all treaties and international
agreements in their full and unabridged form, including

all annexes, provided however that, in the reproduction
of annexes, he may in his discretion employ less
expensive methods of reproduction;
6. Rc1Ji.rsts the Secretary-General regularly to rev_iew
ilw free mailing list with a view to its possible reduct10n.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.

:t83 (V). Provision of a United Nations distinuuishing rihhon or other insi~nia for per•
-,o:ncl which has participatetl in Korea in
the defence of the Prim·iples of tlw Charter
of the llnift'd Natiom,
Fh,· c;,•ncra!. /.,s<'m/ 1/y.
/),-sinn,J to ~y111holizc the \·alour ancl ~acritices of
the 111t·11 ;;ml \\'Ollll'n who ha\·e served on behalf of the
\ 'nitcd l\"ations in repelling aggression in Korea,
!-:Crallinr1 it:- resolution ()2 ( I ) on the official seal
;1nd cmhh'.m of the l'nited Nations, its resolution
I (J7 ( If) 011 the l 'nited Nations flag, and the resolution'" of the Security Council of 7 ] uly 1950 authorizing the l 'ni!tt d Command to use the United Nations
0

Aag,

N.-.wh·cs that the Secretary-Ceneral be requested to
make arrangements with the Unified Command, establislwd p11r~uant to the Security Cnu1Kil resolution of
7 I ulv ]<)SO, ior the de~ign ;111d :l\\·ard, t11!(kr ,mch
rq;u1:;tinns as the Secrctar~·-General shall pre~nilw, of
;t distinguishing· rilJhon or ·other insignia for personnel
11 hich h.t~ participated in Korea in the defence of the
l-'ri11cipl<", of the Charter of the 1 'nitcd l\'ations.
320th ffrnar_y mel'finy.
72 /)crcmber 1950.

184 ( V). Review by the International Law Commission of i.ts Statute with the object of reconnnendin~ revisions thereof to the General
Ai-semhly
'/ lie (;c11cra! Assembly,

( 0J1S1</cri11y that it is of the greatest importance that
the m1rk of the International Law Commission should
\)(' r;1rrinl on in the conditions most likely to enable
t]I(' Commission to achieve rapid and positive results 1
I! a1·i11y regard to certain doubts which have been
expressed whether such conditions exist at the present
tillll'.
!1'n1ucsts the International Law Commission to revie1Y its Statutcl:! with the object of making recommendations to the Ceneral Assemblv at its sixth session concerning rt"visions of the Statute which may
:qipcar de,irable, in the light of experience, for the
promotion of the Commission's work.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.

9

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Sixth Committee, Annexes, Agenda item SS, document
A/1409.
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Sixth Committee, Annexes, Agenda item 54, document
A/1408.

[bid., Supplement No. 7, paragraphs 329-332.
See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year.
No. 18.
13 See resolution 174 (II), Annex.
11

12
