S/PRST/2006/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 February 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5371st meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 February 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning Iraq”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Independent Electoral Commission
of Iraq announcement of 10 February of the certified election results for the
Iraqi Council of Representatives. The Council is particularly encouraged that
political parties representing all of Iraq’s communities participated in the
election, demonstrated by the high voter turnout across Iraq. The Council
commends and congratulates the people of Iraq for demonstrating their
commitment to a peaceful, democratic political process, and for having braved
difficult conditions and the threat of violence to cast their votes.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of inclusiveness, national
dialogue and unity as Iraq’s political development moves forward. The
Council calls on Iraq’s political leaders to work with resolve towards the
formation of a fully inclusive Government, which will strive to build a
peaceful, prosperous, democratic and united Iraq. The Council urges all Iraqis
participate in the peaceful political process and calls upon those who continue
to use violence to lay down their arms. The Security Council unanimously
condemns acts of terrorism in Iraq. Such acts should not be allowed to disrupt
Iraq’s political and economic progress.
“The Security Council gives special recognition to the Independent
Electoral Commission of Iraq for its role in organizing and administering the
elections. The Council also commends the Secretary-General and the United
Nations in successfully assisting election preparations, and notes in particular
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The
Security Council also appreciates the assistance given by other international
actors, including EU electoral experts and the International Mission for Iraqi
Elections (IMIE).
“The Security Council underlines the need for continued and enhanced
international support from all States and relevant international organizations to
assist Iraq’s wide-ranging political, economic and social development. The
Council calls on the United Nations to play the fullest possible role in Iraq. It
also calls on all other international actors, particularly Iraq’s neighbours, to
conform to relevant Security Council resolutions and consider also how they
06-24270 (E) 140206

*0624270*

S/PRST/2006/8

can reinforce their contribution at this important time. In this context, the
Council also looks forward to the continued efforts of the League of Arab
States in support of the political process endorsed in Security Council
resolutions 1546 and 1637.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for a federal, democratic,
pluralist and unified Iraq, in which there is full respect for human rights.”

2
