S/PV.8251

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8251st meeting

Wednesday, 9 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Córdova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alfassam
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14051 (E)
*1814051*

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

we are making to be more effective and improve the
performance of our missions.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant General Leonard
Ngondi, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; Major General
Jean-Paul Deconinck, Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali; and Lieutenant General Frank Mushyo
Kamanzi, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan.
Lieutenant General Kamanzi is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: It is my pleasure to open the
Security Council meeting ahead of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations Force Commanders
and Heads of Military Components Conference in
New York. I will be very brief because this meeting
is essentially about hearing the voices of the Force
Commanders who are deployed in the field. They are
the ones who head the military components of our
peacekeeping missions, and they are really best placed
to tell us how the mandates negotiated and adopted by
the Council are implemented on the ground and about
the challenges they face in doing so.
(spoke in French)
I would just like to say that the programme that
we have organized for the Force Commanders this
week will allow them to keep abreast of the important
decisions being taken here at Headquarters on
peacekeeping in the context of the Security Council,
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
the Fifth Committee and in our various interactions
with Member States. We will also keep them informed
of the way in which we perceive progress in the efforts
2/29

09/05/2018

The Force Commanders this week will participate
in working sessions on the major current priorities,
including the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and our initiatives to improve
protection for our colleagues on the ground — our
peacekeeping troops — which are initiatives that relate
more broadly to issues of performance, as well as the
carrying out of the strategic review and other topics
linked to the improvement of peacekeeping effectiveness.
(spoke in English)
Before I conclude, I would like to thank the Force
Commanders for their dedication. On behalf of all
our colleagues at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to express my high
appreciation not only for the way in which the Force
Commanders are contributing to the implementation
of their mandates, but also, more specifically, for
their very strong engagement in helping us implement
our action plan in the field, which is aimed not only
at reducing the number of fatalities in peacekeeping,
but, more broadly, at improving the performance of
peacekeeping. Since we started the action plan, there
have been some encouraging developments in the field
over the past couple of months. I am very grateful for
that. There is still a long way to go, but I am confident
that, with the strong support of the Council and the
strong engagement of our Force Commanders, we
will be able to make a difference in terms of how
peacekeeping performs and protects. I look forward to
hearing from the Force Commanders.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Ngondi.
Lieutenant General Ngondi: With regard to the
impact of the security and operational environment on
mandate implementation by peacekeeping missions,
the environment for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is shaped by
five main aspects.
The first aspect is the fact that the Government of
the Sudan is robust in exercising its sovereign authority
in its territory, and that keeps the armed groups in
check. However, while the relationship between the
mission and the Government is cordial, the latter
often restricts UNAMID’s freedom of movement and
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the inflow of resources and services, contrary to the
provisions of the status of forces agreement.
Secondly, the existence of armed groups, inside
and outside the territory, that are non-signatories to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur also shape the
environment. The leadership of those groups needs to
be persuaded to embrace dialogue.
Thirdly, the intercommunal conflicts over natural
resources, mainly between herders and farming
communities, are another aspect. Land ownership
remains at the heart of the Darfur conflict, and a durable
solution for peaceful coexistence among different
communities can be found only through embracing
dialogue as the first step.
Fourthly, banditry and criminality exist owing
to poverty, underdevelopment and the absence or
inadequacy of law-and-order enforcement capacity. The
remedy lies in capacity-building for public institutions
and humanitarian and civil society organizations in
order to deliver basic services.
Lastly, the proliferation of weapons exacerbates
banditry and criminal activities. The ongoing armscollection campaign by the Government has reduced
banditry and criminal activities remarkably. However,
the exercise is perceived to be discriminatory.
UNAMID encourages the Government to collect illegal
arms uniformly.
I will now address specific concerns raised in
the concept note of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Force Commanders and Heads of Military
Components Conference.
The first is whether the mandate is robust
enough. It is opined that the mandate of UNAMID,
being a peacekeeping mission, is sufficiently robust
to achieve its objectives. The mission has all the
relevant components and uses an integrated approach
in its conduct of operations, in addition to religiously
implementing the action plan proposed in the Santos
Cruz report.
The second is whether the mandate is
understandable and implementable. The mandate of
UNAMID is anchored on four main pillars: namely,
the protection of civilians, the delivery of humanitarian
aid, mediation between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and, lastly, assistance in community resolution
mechanisms. Those pillars are simple, understandable

S/PV. 8251

and implementable, as long as there is commitment and
political will on the part of all parties to the conflict,
including the interest groups.
That last concerns the support needed from the
Security Council to help the mission fulfil its mandate.
First, it is recommended that a transition strategy
be embedded in the mandate renewal. Lessons learned
from missions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire show that
a good transition guarantees that gains made are not
made in vain.
Secondly, the Government of the Sudan may be
persuaded to adhere to the provisions of the status
of force agreement and allow UNAMID freedom
of movement and unhindered flights in the area
of operations.
Lastly, the leadership of the armed groups needs to
be persuaded to embrace dialogue.
In conclusion, peacekeeping missions remain
important political tools for finding durable solutions
to conflicts. Challenges, hazards and security threats
emerging in the security and operational environment
should be mitigated in order to allow the fulfilment
of the mandates, as intimated in Santos Cruz report.
UNAMID remains grateful for the support accorded
by the Council, to Headquarters and other partners
in its endeavour to implement its mandate in Darfur,
the Sudan.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Ngondi
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Deconinck.
Major General Deconinck: I would have liked
to be in Kidal this week to officially and proudly
initiate the build-up of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism unit. I was in the famous capital of Kidal
exactly one year ago. That is just to say that time is
passing, but we must be patient.
I am also proud to be at this meeting today and
to interact with the Security Council on Mali and
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The
Mission in Mali is made up of peacekeepers with
great dedication and a commitment to bring peace
and stability to the people of Mali. Nevertheless, we
are extremely aware that our peacekeepers are making
the highest sacrifice to bring lasting peace to Mali. To
the many troop-contributing countries from around the

18-140513/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

world, I would like to express a sincere debt of gratitude
for their commitment, and I call for their continued
support to peace and stability in Mali.
With that in mind, I believe the way that
peacekeeping operations are conducted is shifting.
The Santos Cruz report compellingly defines the
environment in which we now operate. We owe it to our
peacekeepers, both civilian and military, to implement
the Action for Peacekeeping, to change our mindsets and to adapt how we lead at all levels to the new
challenges we face. Allow me to share my perspective
on the security context.
The capture of the central region town of Kona
marked the southernmost advance of the jihadist groups
in Mali during the rebellion of 2012-2013. In that
connection, the inner Niger delta, to the west of Kona,
served as a fortunate natural obstacle to further jihadist
movement southward. Last month, a MINUSMA force
operation to Kona aimed to deliver security and stability
in the face of the insurgent activities of Jama‘at Nusrat
al-Islam wal-Muslimin terrorist armed groups
Other than by geography, those two events are
not directly related — there has not been an enduring
jihadist or terrorist presence in Kona since 2013. From
2015, however, terrorist armed groups have steadily
re-established themselves in Kona and across the
central region, particularly since the founding of the
Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin organization, at
the start of 2017.
I perceive that as an example of a changing security
and operational environment. Perhaps more important,
I believe we have to recognize the significance of the
central region in relation to the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which is at the heart
of MINUSMA’s mandate.
From the perspective of peacekeeping in a
changing security and operational environment, how
we understand the current security situation in Mali
is as important as what the situation currently is. In a
contested security environment, where the force and the
civil population are targeted, the attitude of the force and
of MINUSMA towards terrorist and insurgent armed
groups is put to the test. Understanding the character of
the conflict between those groups and the strategy they
are waging against us is key to determining what our
response should be — within our mandate and our rules
of engagement. We have to adapt to the circumstances
that define the current challenges.
4/29

09/05/2018

The north is sparsely populated. There the force
remains fully committed to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement and to achieving stability in the
regions as well as the restoration and deployment of
the Malian State. In key population centres, the force,
in coordination with the Malian Defence and Security
Forces and armed groups compliant with the Peace
Agreement, provides security to the local population
and to the good offices of the MINUSMA Mission.
The force also plays a key role in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process to establish
inclusive and representative Malian Defence and
Security Forces in the north.
Nevertheless, the north is also the seat of the
Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin terrorist
organization and its many subordinate groups, which
actively seek to undermine MINUSMA’s efforts
to bring about peace and stability. Those groups
frequently conduct complex attacks on the force
involving improvised explosive devices and indirect
fire, giving MINUSMA its reputation as the most
dangerous peacekeeping mission in the world. Jama‘at
Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin attacks on MINUSMA’s
bases, such as the one last month in Timbuktu, have
targeted civilian and military peacekeepers alike. The
criminal trafficking networks sustain the activities of
the Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin groups in
the north of Mali, but their regional influence is also
evident in the attacks in Ouagadougou earlier this
year. The regional dimensions of such attacks call for
a regional approach to the crisis in Mali. We also see
activity by the Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin
in Mali’s central region as exemplifying a changing
security and operational environment, which calls for
a robust approach to peacekeeping.
Rightly, MINUSMA has invested in understanding
the changing character of the conflict in Mali and
the Sahel, but now we have to adapt to that changing
security and operational environment in order to
support the people and to support peace, stability and
the fulfilment of our mandate, pursuant to resolution
2364 (2017). It is in that sense that robust peacekeeping
is required. A commitment from the Security Council
to Mali must be supported by a number of measures to
deliver this new, more robust approach and to provide
the necessary means to support the Government of Mali.
As outlined in the Santos Cruz report, we have
to change our mindset. The force requires competent
leaders and commanders with the right knowledge,
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

skills and experience to lead in a complex security
environment. In return, we must decentralize some of
our decision-making processes in order to enable them
to deliver what we ask of them, in particular the means
to ensure a lasting effect on operations.
In complex conflict environments, intelligence
analysts must support our commanders with the ability
and the means to collect and process all forms of
intelligence. We also need to guard more effectively
against intelligence collected on our force elements.
We must invest in improving the training standards for
our military peacekeepers both before and during their
missions. We know the challenges they will face and
we must ensure they come prepared. Within the force
headquarters we have adapted our structure to provide
more support to training, and we now need to create
mobile training teams to support our contingents and
troop-contributing countries.
We must insist on appropriate and universal
standards of first-line medical equipment, in
conjunction with a mandatory combat casualty care
course for all troops. In addition, current United Nations
procedures for casualty and medical evacuation need to
be reviewed.
In Mali, as in many other peacekeeping missions,
airborne intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
platforms, helicopters and aircraft are essential force
multipliers. MINUSMA’s access to the population,
for both civilian and military peacekeepers, is greatly
constrained by the shortfall in aviation assets.
Furthermore, a robust approach also calls for
military components to take greater ownership of their
operational logistics — to be able to set priorities, to
control military transport assets and to determine
convoy composition. In MINUSMA, every convoy has
to be considered as a military operation of its own.
Finally, the added value of a multidimensional
and integrated mission cannot be overstated. Complex
conflict environments call for such missions to
confront the multitude of factors needed to address the
crisis in Mali, and nowhere more so than in the central
region. A multidimensional mission must also include a
regional approach to addressing the crisis from all the
dimensions, in all countries of the Sahel region. The
force is committed to facilitating several missions and
to further developing and implementing such effective
multidimensional policies to generate the conditions

S/PV. 8251

for sustainable peace and security in Mali and for the
Malian people.
The President: I thank Major General Deconinck
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Kamanzi.
Lieutenant General Kamanzi: Like my
colleagues, I have been asked to provide a perspective
on the impact of the changing security and operational
environment on United Nations missions and mandates.
I would like to start by reviewing the evolution of the
conflict in South Sudan. I will then talk about the
operating environment and associated challenges,
drawing on our experience, before then turning to
how we are addressing those challenges in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The start of the conflict in December 2013 was
due to a split of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) and the formation of the SPLA-in Opposition.
At that time, fighting mostly took place in the Upper
Nile, Jonglei and Unity states. The Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, signed on 17 August 2015, collapsed in July
2016, and the conflict resumed.
Since then, fighting has spread to other parts of
the country, including the Equatorias, a critical foodgrowing area, where a multitude of new actors are
currently involved. At the same time, long-standing
communal conflicts, fuelled by competition for land
and water resources, have persisted and, in most cases,
have became more violent and destructive due to the
widespread availability of automatic weapons.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Developmentled process known as the High-level Revitalization
Forum resulted in the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement on 21 December2017. However, fighting
among the SPLA, the SPLA-in Opposition affiliated
with Riek Machar, the SPLA-in Opposition affiliated
with General Tabang Deng, and other armed groups has
continued in violation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The
fighting often increases each time we approach another
round of talks as parties jostle for prominence, as we
are currently witnessing.
The security and operational environment in South
Sudan has become increasingly complex. We have
moved from a conflict that involves only two parties to
one in which the Transitional Government of National
Unity has the upper hand but faces political and military

18-140515/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

opposition from multiple actors. The Government
has increasingly gained control in central states, the
capital, Juba, and in other population centres. However,
opposition groups continue to operate in several
outlying areas, in particular in the north, east and south
near international borders, where they enjoy support
and seek to retain control or gain tactical advantage.
The protection of civilians remains our priority.
We continue to provide physical protection to more
than 209,000 internally displaced persons, United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors who
live and work within the five protection-of-civilian
sites throughout the country. In addition, our presence
in Bung reassures and supports the 15 humanitarian
agencies that assist 13,000 refugees at the refugee site
and the 11 humanitarian agencies that work with 54,000
refugees at the Jamjang refugee sites in Upper Nile and
Unity states, respectively.
While that population is a small fraction of the
estimated 1.69 million internally displaced persons
within South Sudan, it requires more than 40 per cent
of the force to accomplish that task. We are therefore
working to free up more forces for mobile and outreach
operations by introducing surveillance systems and
other technologies to enable the protection of those
sites with fewer troops and to improve our operational
efficiency. More mobile operations will provide an
increased security presence and create the confidence
that allows people to return to their homes from
protection-of-civilian sites and neighbouring countries.
The terrain and climatic conditions in South Sudan
are particularly demanding. During the rainy season,
from May to October, most of the unsealed roads that
link states and major population centres are impassable.
Our ability to be mobile for nearly half of the year is
therefore highly constrained. As a result, we have had
to disperse forces in order to maximize our ability
to reach out to and support humanitarian actors. To
achieve that, we operate from 17 bases, seven of which
are occupied by a single company, each with a maximum
of 150 troops. Our forces must travel more than several
hundred kilometres between bases, along single-track
roads or by the limited number of helicopters we have.
That presents additional challenges for resupply and
force security.
To address those issues and challenges, we are
taking the opportunity afforded by the recent induction
of the first elements of the Regional Protection Force
6/29

09/05/2018

(RPF) into the Mission, by reinforcing our operating
bases in Yambio and Torit and establishing a new one
in Yei, in the south of the country. At the same time,
UNMISS military engineers have been repairing roads
and operating in remote locations to enable us to be
more flexible when responding to new requests for
assistance. Those operations also improve security
along the main supply routes that link the seaport at
Mombasa to South Sudan through Kenya and Uganda.
In the course of carrying out our mandate, we
face obstruction, access denials and violations of the
status of forces agreement. Sometimes those tactics
are employed by Government forces as well as by
opposition parties to try to prevent us from gaining
access to areas where fighting is taking place. At
other times the fragmentation of opposition groups
leads to commanders acting independently and not
effectively responding to orders or direction from
their higher headquarters. In other cases criminals and
opportunistic armed groups have inhibited the work of
humanitarian actors, at times detaining them for several
days in order to demonstrate that they control particular
areas. Maintaining a relationship with the Government
and opposition groups is vital, while realizing that all
parties are responsible for violating the cessation of
hostilities agreement and the associated destruction
and atrocities against civilians.
Employing patience, good communications with
all parties and a robust posture are therefore important
to our approach. Our patrols have demonstrated
unwillingness to be turned back or otherwise inhibited,
even if we have to negotiate for several hours or
escalate the issue for resolution at headquarters level
before proceeding with our work. We also endeavour
to be agile and proactive, where necessary positioning
troops where we believe conflict might break out.
That has often calmed situations and lessened or
prevented violence.
We continue to improve the security and
performance of our force peacekeepers. A review of
each of our operating bases and protection-of-civilian
sites has been completed and action points, including
the maintenance of perimeter fencing, security lighting
and the provision of closed-circuit security systems, are
now being addressed. We are undertaking a detailed
review of casualty evacuation procedures and have
established a force-protection advisory team, whose
responsibilities include identifying risks to the force
and sharing best practices to mitigate them.
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Resolution 2406 (2018) authorizes a troop ceiling
of 17,000 peacekeepers, which includes the Regional
Protection Force. We currently have more than 13,700
personnel; we expect the remainder of the Ethiopian
battalion of the Regional Protection Force to arrive
next month, bringing us closer to 15,000 personnel.
In addition to enabling us to deploy more forces in the
strategically important Equatorias, the deployment
of the first elements of the RPF allows us to provide
more security in Juba, protect civilians and assist other
United Nations agencies and partners. We also work
closely with the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to enable it to
monitor ceasefire violations and to understand what
transitional security arrangements may be necessary
in future.
In conclusion, encouraging all parties to reach a
political solution is imperative. That will in turn improve
the Mission’s prospects of achieving its mandate. For
our part, we continue to work to deter violence against
civilians through proactive deployment, while working
closely with humanitarian actors, monitoring and
investigating human rights abuses and working with
all stakeholders to build durable peace. At the same
time, we are working to improve the organization,
capabilities and employment of the force, along with
the required enablers in order to effectively support the
Mission mandate and protect our force.
We are grateful for, and continue to count on, the
Council’s support.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General
Kamanzi for his briefing.
I remind all colleagues that the concept for this
briefing aims to keep it as interactive as possible — the
main added value being the question-and-answer segment
with the Force Commanders. Therefore, so as to take
advantage of this opportunity and hear more from
our guests, I encourage Council members to keep
their statements brief and focus on the question-andanswer segment.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the Polish presidency for organizing this meeting with
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Force Commanders
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

S/PV. 8251

in Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. I thank them for their
informative briefings, which have provided us with
additional insight concerning the many obstacles that
must be overcome in order to restore peace and security
in countries affected by deadly conflicts.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of the thousands of men and women deployed
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. My delegation pays
tribute to those peacekeepers who have lost their lives
in the service of the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations. Their sacrifices compel us — regardless of
our differences on certain aspects of peacekeeping — to
step up cooperation in our work to make the hope for
peace and security of millions of people throughout the
world a reality.
Given the information provided to us by the various
briefers, my delegation would like to make several
observations concerning the host State’s consent and
the mandates and resources of peacekeeping operations.
Undeniably, peacekeeping operations are not
intended to replace, but rather to support, the
authorities of the host State within the framework
of a crisis-exit strategy based on an inclusive and
credible political process. Wherever United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the authorities of host States
and all stakeholders in a crisis — as in Sierra Leone,
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia — succeeded in committing
to dynamic cooperation based on mutual trust and
achieving realistic and consensual goals, they were
able to create the conditions necessary for a successful
transition, thereby paving the way forward for postcrisis reconstruction and national reconciliation. We
therefore believe that quality relations among the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Force Commanders and all stakeholders involved in the
process of exiting a crisis, including local populations,
are key, given that they create the conditions necessary
for acceptance and firm national ownership of United
Nations action.
Clearly, the emergence of non-State actors with
political and territorial claims, who are sometimes
responsible for actions that run counter to the goals
of peace and stability, is one of the major challenges

18-140517/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

facing the implementation of the principles on which
peacekeeping is based — namely, the consent of the
host State, impartiality and limiting the use of force to
situations involving self-defence. Those new challenges
call for us to develop sustainable multidimensional
responses and to ensure — despite the constantly
changing nature of operational environments — support
for the political process aimed at ending the crisis, which
remains the cornerstone of peacekeeping operations.
The difficulties brought up by the Force
Commanders give us reason to believe that the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations depends upon
defining clear mandates and setting achievable goals
based on a thorough assessment of the environment and
the operational limitations specific to every individual
mission. Unspeakable acts of violence carried out, in
particular by armed groups, against Blue Helmets,
humanitarian workers and civilians are a recurring
challenge that compel us to develop mandates, the
robustness of which must be commensurate with the
complexity and asymmetrical nature of the environment
in which any given peacekeeping mission is deployed.
Those mandates must provide United Nations forces
with the agility, flexibility and mobility necessary to
move into areas in which violence or warning signs of
violence directed against the civilian population exist.
It is also important to note that mandates must
not only be flexible but also sequenced so as to enable
missions’ priorities to adapt progressively to changes
related to the host country’s sociopolitical and security
environment. For example, the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, which was initially
centred on security needs, subsequently shifted its
focus on support for maintaining and sustaining peace,
thereby enabling better planning for the definitive
withdrawal of the mission. Of equal importance to the
flexibility and realistic goals of mandates, providing
adequate human, financial and material resources is
essential to ensuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. With regard to human resources in
particular, we believe that the Santos Cruz report offers
a realistic approach to needed adequate troop training
prior to deployment and an assessment framework,
which enables filling the gaps observed in theatres of
operations through capacity-building.
Moreover, the issue of financing peacekeeping
operations, which my country would like to see
predictable and sustainable, is as important as
providing equipment that meets the requirements of
8/29

09/05/2018

peacekeeping in asymmetrical environments through
triangular partnerships.
United Nations missions are made up of a mosaic
of contingents and staff members who, although
inspired by their common search for peace and
stability in countries in conflict, hail from diverse
countries and cultures, which necessarily affect their
perception of their obligations related to peacekeeping
in challenging environments.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the work
done by the members of United Nations peacekeeping
forces, whose merits are reflected above all in their
daily efforts to maintain the cohesion and unity of
action of peacekeeping missions so that, despite many
challenges, they can continue to be the most effective
United Nations instrument in the service of the
peace continuum.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for providing this opportunity for
a candid and constructive discussion with our Force
Commanders, whom I thank for their briefings earlier
and whom I am putting on notice that I intend to ask
them many questions. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for everything that he has had to say,
as well as for his leadership on those issues. I think it
is very important that our Force Commanders are able
to be here in the Security Council to speak truth to us
and to be as clear as they need to be. I hope they will
be candid.
Before I go into some of those questions, though,
I would like to recall the visit that some of us on the
Council made to Mali in November 2017. We had the
great honour of participating in the dedication of a
memorial to all who lost their lives serving in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. I think it is important that we take a
moment to pay tribute to all the peacekeepers who have
given their lives in service of the United Nations, and
to all the brave women and men who are serving now in
support of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I would like to offer the United Kingdom’s thanks for
their service and for the service and leadership of the
Force Commanders who are here today.
Peacekeeping is one of our Organization’s greatest
achievements. It is an integral part of what our peoples
around the world think of when they think of the United
Nations, and this year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping. As we
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

strive for reform in the wider United Nations system,
so we must work to make peacekeeping more effective
and efficient through better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and capabilities and stronger mission
performance. We therefore welcome the report on
improving peacekeepers’ safety and security by the
former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, the United
Nations action plan and the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative that has resulted from that.
We see three key priorities. First, the Security Council
should take a longer-term view of conflicts and set
more strategic and sequenced mandates. Secondly,
peacekeeping should be better coordinated with other
United Nations activities, such as peacebuilding and
development. Thirdly, peacekeeping performance
should be improved, including accountability where
performance is not up to standards.
Here is my first question for our Force Commanders.
How is the action plan being implemented in their
missions? Major General Deconinck mentioned
the importance of intelligence in peacekeeping and
situational awareness, that is, sending our peacekeepers
out with knowledge of what is going on around them.
What improvements have been made in the use of
peacekeeping intelligence and how can we in New York
further support those efforts? In the context of efforts
to further improve peacekeepers’ performance, I know
that the Secretariat has been tasked with developing an
integrative performance policy framework. What is the
Force Commanders’ view of what such a performance
framework should contain? How can we incentivize
better performance in missions?
I have a few specific questions on some of the
missions. I appreciated what the Force Commander of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur had to say about the reconfiguration work.
I would like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi what he
thinks the next step in the Mission’s reconfiguration
should be. In particular, are any challenges being
faced in delivering changes alongside the mandate to
protect civilians?
Again, I thought that the statement on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) was very helpful. We
know, of course, that MINUSMA is working in the
same space as the Joint Task Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. How well are the military actors
working together to ensure that they are contributing

S/PV. 8251

to the common objective in their defined ways? How
is the link with development and humanitarian work
doing? Is there a coordinated plan that brings together
the various military actors, and the development actors
behind them, to make the most of all the tools we have
at our disposal in Mali?
Finally, regarding the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan — and this is something we talked about
yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.8249) — I would
like to say how impressed we have been by some of the
swift and decisive action taken recently in response to
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. That is obviously
still a big problem in some missions. It would be helpful
to have some examples of best practices used in South
Sudan that might help other missions learn and respond
effectively if that happens to them. I will conclude
there, in the spirit of interactiveness, and would like to
reiterate my sincere gratitude to all of those serving in
blue for the good of all of us.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his assessment of the
current state of United Nations peacekeeping. We also
thank the Force Commanders of the military components
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Darfur, Mali and South Sudan for the updated briefings
on the state of affairs in their missions. We greatly
value the efforts of peacekeepers working in difficult
conditions and we would like to pay tribute to all who
have given their lives for peace and stability.
The security of peacekeeping contingents is an
extremely important issue that we should focus on
not only during the preparation of peacekeeping
operations but throughout the work of the United
Nations presence in a country. The type and nature
of the problems in contemporary crises are constantly
changing. Peacekeeping operations are more often
encountering terrorist attacks on civilian populations
and peacekeepers and dealing with the effects of
organized crime and the illegal trade in arms and
drugs. The situations in the countries where missions
are deployed and every theatre of operations have their
own characteristics. The proliferation of such threats
naturally causes experts and scientists to think seriously
about the very concept of the work of the Blue Helmets,
and the logic of their actions when it is impossible to
distinguish civilians from militants or, for example,
when a host country is unable to adequately protect
civilians from new threats. That way of thinking often

18-140519/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

gives rise to the same call, urging that all peacekeepers
be given so-called robust mandates and additional
intelligence-gathering and use-of-force capacities.
We have already heard echoes of that thinking today.
For our part, we believe, on the contrary, that in such
circumstances peacekeepers should act extremely
cautiously. After all, peacekeeping operations
embody the ideals of the United Nations. Any mistake
can have tragic consequences and undermine the
Organization’s authority.
The Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and host States need an objective assessment of the
extent to which expanded mandates for the use of force
enable real breakthroughs to be made in fulfilling
mandates, and that is especially urgent in the light of
the increase in casualties among peacekeepers in the
worst trouble spots. Let us be blunt. The experience
of missions with robust mandates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali is not very convincing
so far. It has also raised a number of serious legal,
technical, logistical and staffing issues that should
be resolved in an intergovernmental format by the
specialized agencies of the United Nations and with the
direct participation of troop contributors.
We have to be realistic about this. An inability to
find a workable response to the root causes of conflicts
and the threat of terrorism should not automatically
lead to strengthening peacekeepers’ mandates on
the pretext that there are no other options. There are
options. First, our approach to planning the mandates
and peacekeepers’ operational work should be more
intelligent and painstaking. We should not burden
missions with irrelevant tasks that should be handled
by specialized United Nations structures. They should
focus on the priority issues — supporting the political
process, strengthening host countries’ national capacity
and ensuring security. I would like to hear about how
that planning is being done in current conditions.
Furthermore, when preparing and conducting
operations, it is important to take into account the
views of troop-contributing countries and not to neglect
the views and preferences of the local population,
some of whom may be supporting armed groups, as
in fact happened in the Central African Republic. We
should not forget that such cases threaten the security
of peacekeepers, civilians, humanitarian workers
and country-team staff. Another important factor is
ensuring that Blue Helmets are properly trained and
have the appropriate equipment. It is unforgivable to
10/29

09/05/2018

create a situation for which there is a robust mandate
but where it takes too long to create the conditions in
which it can be fulfilled.
At this point I would like to touch on the active
security of contingents and the collection and analysis
of intelligence, which my British colleague spoke about.
We believe that this kind of activity can be carried
out only within the limits that have been agreed to by
States — in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, with the consent of the host Government, and
only for the specific purpose of ensuring the security
of peacekeepers and the civilian population. We cannot
permit the use of intelligence-gathering means for
any other purpose, including achieving the so-called
political aims of the mandate.
I want to particularly emphasize the importance
of strict adherence to the basic principles of
peacekeeping — the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force except in self-defence and in
implementing the mandate of the Security Council. If
these are not upheld in robust efforts or, especially, in
preventive responses to virtual threats, peacekeepers
could become directly drawn into conflicts. We noted in
particular that some of today’s briefers made references
to the Cruz report. As far as I remember, Member States
discussed it in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in March, but it was not approved. Some
of its positions are contentious and arguable, and we
see no reason to implement its recommendations. We
hope that Mr. Lacroix shares that point of view, and we
would be grateful if he could clarify the situation.
We also consider unacceptable the attempts by
various countries to promote initiatives for United
Nations peacekeeping that a small group of States have
agreed on outside the United Nations. The non-United
Nations Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which permit the use of force against a host Government,
are one such initiative. That would immediately make
Blue Helmets a party to a conflict. One condition for the
success of any peacekeeping operation is constructive
and effective cooperation with the host country, which
bears the primary responsibility both for the political
process and for addressing the root causes of conflict,
as well as for ensuring the security of its population,
including protecting it from terrorist attacks.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Lacroix, the
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the three United Nations peacekeeping mission
Force Commanders for their briefings. I want to pay
tribute to the Commanders and the more than 90,000
peacekeepers currently deployed all over the world
in peacekeeping missions, and to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
The environment in which United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed and the mandates
they are supposed to implement are increasingly
complex. Both the security risks for peacekeepers,
and casualties among them, are on the rise. There is
a mismatch between the ever-increasing demands
of mandates and the limited resources available for
them. In accordance with its mandates, the Security
Council should play a part in helping United Nations
peacekeeping missions cope better with new challenges
when meeting the responsibilities they are assigned
by the Security Council. First, it is important to be
proactive in facilitating the political settlement process
of regional hotspot issues. Some protracted hotspot
issues have resulted in the continuing deterioration of
the security situation in the region and its surrounding
areas, with serious effects on the performance of
other peacekeeping operations in the same region.
The international community should step up efforts
to settle regional hotspot issues in the region, while
the peacekeeping operations should be responsive to
efforts to create the conditions conducive to the political
settlement of hotspot issues.
Secondly, peacekeeping missions need clear,
feasible and focused mandates. They should be able to
focus on the central task of peacekeeping and to abide
by peacekeeping’s three main principles, while taking
into full consideration such factors as the situation on
the ground, existing resources and troop-contributing
countries’ capacities to help host countries strengthen
their own security capacity. The work of adjusting to
priority tasks and work priorities during each stage
should be dynamic, according to the changes in the
situation on the ground. Furthermore, when conditions
permit and when the countries concerned request it, it
is essential to formulate a practical and feasible exit
strategy in a timely manner. When mandates are being
designed or readjusted, troop-contributing countries
should be given more opportunities to participate
in discussions.

S/PV. 8251

Thirdly, the Secretariat should be guided to
strengthen support for peacekeeping operations. The
Secretariat and missions should pay attention to the
security and safety of peacekeepers, develop security
rules for peacekeepers and enhance early-warning and
internal information sharing against security threats.
They should ensure the availability of life-saving and
life-sustaining services and medical evacuation in
high-risk environments. The report on improving the
security of United Nations peacekeepers proposed
several recommendations, and we hope that the
Secretariat will discuss them with Member States and
implement them.
China is a major contributor of troops to
peacekeeping operations and the second largest
contributor to the peacekeeping budget. At present, 2,500
Chinese peacekeepers are on active duty in 10 missions.
China is actively implementing various commitments
announced by President Xi Jinping in further support
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we are
ready to work with the general membership to improve
the United Nations peacekeeping system in a joint
effort to maintain international peace and security.
Lastly, I would like to ask what the main factors are
affecting peacekeeping operations’ ability to respond
to security threats. Are inadequate equipment and
resources the main difficulty?
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his valuable briefing on his mandate. I would also
like to thank Lieutenant General Leonard Ngondi,
Force Commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID); Major General
Jean-Paul Deconinck, Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali; and Lieutenant General Frank Mushyo
Kamanzi of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for briefing us on the situations of their
peacekeeping missions.
Equatorial Guinea expresses its gratitude for the
work being done in these difficult missions. They
represent the true essence of this Organization and the
operationalization of its ideals. We would like to pay
tribute to all those who risk their lives every day on
behalf of the Organization in various parts of the world
but, above all, on the African continent.

18-1405111/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In the spirit of this meeting, we would like to put
forward the following questions.
With regard to UNAMID, for its success, what
challenges does the mission face in fulfilling its
mandate? What should the Security Council do to
ensure that mandates are fully implemented without
amending them?
Concerning the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, what is lacking for the tasks to be carried out
correctly? In order to fully implement its mandate, what
needs to be improved both, on the ground and in terms
of the materials used and developed during operations?
With regard to UNMISS, what should be changed,
improved or abandoned in order to ensure that mandates
are correctly and properly implemented? On whom
does the success of a peacekeeping operation depend?
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to convey our gratitude for the convening of
this meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Force Commanders of three
important peacekeeping operations for their briefings.
As a troop-contributing country, Peru believes
that peacekeeping operations are essential tools of the
United Nations collective security system and that it
is the responsibility of the Security Council to provide
them with the mandates and to ensure that they have the
necessary capacities to deal with the conflict situations
in which they operate. Unfortunately, the Organization’s
activities in Darfur, Mali and South Sudan frequently
face situations that determine the likelihood of
peacekeeping operations achieving the objectives for
which they were designed. I refer to situations in which
the proliferation of internal and external actors hinders
the viability of a political process.
In the light of that problem, we would like to
highlight three central elements to be considered when
establishing the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
on which we have some questions for today’s briefers.
The first question concerns the cooperation of the
host country and the support of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations. In that regard, we
would like to ask the Force Commanders present what
additional measures could be deployed to promote
greater support from national and regional actors for
the respective peacekeeping operations?
12/29

09/05/2018

The second question concerns realistic and flexible
mandates that are adaptable to evolving situations. That
implies having adequate capacities, including, inter
alia, training, equipment, modern technology, medical
services and transport. In that regard, we would like to
ask our guests about the best ways to bridge the gaps
between the difficulties facing them in their tasks and
their available capacities.
The third issue is the need to establish appropriate
exit strategies with a view to building a sustainable peace.
On that point, we would like to know the views of our
guests about the possibility of peacekeeping operations
establishing a relationship with the United Nations
country team and the synergies that can be generated in
the transition towards a post-conflict situation.
Furthermore, we believe that independent reviews
of peacekeeping operations can help to better identify
the priority elements to improve those operations in
order to meet the needs observed on the ground. It would
therefore be interesting to know the views of our guests
about the usefulness and relevance of such reports.
Peru strongly supports the priority given by the
Organization and its Secretary-General to the security
of the Blue Helmets, and highlights the rapid reaction
of the Secretariat to adopt measures to deal with such a
situation as part of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Finally, we believe that it is necessary to approach
in parallel the work of peacekeeping operations and the
root causes of conflicts, such as human vulnerability,
corruption and organized crime, among others.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank the Polish presidency for
having organized this important debate on a topic
to which, as the Security Council knows, France is
resolutely, consistently and deeply committed. I would
also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders for their particularly
enlightening briefings.
Allow me to thank the Force Commanders for
their service, their professionalism and their daily
commitment to executing their mandates. I would like
also to pay tribute to all their military and civilian
personnel, of whose deep commitment all of us here are
aware. France would like once again to pay tribute to
the memory of all those who have sacrificed their lives
in their commitment to serving the United Nations. The
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Force Commanders should know that their officers,
non-commissioned officers, airmen, sailors and
soldiers and, in particular, they themselves have our
full confidence.
As the Secretary-General recalled at the launch
of his Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
France fully supports, peacekeeping is a particularly
complex, difficult, sometimes frustrating but crucial
and irreplaceable undertaking (see S/PV.8218). While
peacekeeping must above all be part of the political goal
of peacemaking, our ambition to protect civilians who
are victims of conflict, violence and massive violations
of human rights also demands that, together, we be
more effective and more able to make a real difference
on the ground.
Our collective ambition must therefore be that
our operations — the United Nations operations — be
conducted and implemented in optimal conditions. We
must therefore provide Force Commanders with the
necessary means and resources to execute their mandate
smoothly and effectively. As members knows, France
will continue to spare no efforts to that end.
It is therefore necessary that the troops that we
entrust to United Nations peacekeeping operations
be fully operational and effective. In particular, that
requires complete and high-quality predeployment
training. France is fully committed to supporting such
operations by training nearly 30,000 French-speaking
African soldiers each year, who themselves serve as
strong troops for peacekeeping operations.
The requirement for fully operational and effective
troops also implies better equipment that is adapted to
the terrain and the threat, as well as a better operational
posture. We fully believe that better operational
performance will reduce the number of Blue Helmets
killed or injured in operations, which is still far too high.
In that regard, we fully support the recommendations
of the Santos Cruz report.
Finally, we are convinced that effective
peacekeeping entails bolstering relations between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular by strengthening African
peace operations. That is a key priority for us at the
highest political level. We would therefore be interested
in the opinions of our briefers on that issue.
In conclusion, my question today is addressed to
the three Force Commanders and focuses primarily the

S/PV. 8251

deployment and use of new technology to better protect
their assets and their soldiers, while we are aware that
such technology will never replace the central role of the
men and women whom they command. Peacekeeping
forces are all too often targeted by armed groups with
indirect fire or improvised explosive devices, which,
as we all know, still cause too many casualties in
their ranks and prevent them from carrying out their
primary mission of protecting civilians. My questions
are therefore very simple and straightforward: How
can we help them better? What do they need to better
anticipate threats and indirect fire? What early-warning
and protection technology do they require?
On behalf of France, I would like to thank the
Force Commanders once again for their exemplary
commitment, with all our due respect.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank
the President for organizing today’s important
dialogue between the Security Council and the Force
Commanders. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the three
Force Commanders present for their clear and concise
briefings. We think it is very useful for the Council to
speak to the military staff who have to implement in
dangerous circumstances what we in the Council agree
around this safe table.
We have witnessed an alarming increase in hostile
attacks against peacekeepers over the last few years.
The Force Commanders of today’s missions face
numerous challenges and threats to the security of
their forces — we have just heard three of them speak
about this.
Too many peacekeepers are killed on mission. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands pays tribute to all United
Nations peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the
cause of peace. Our hearts reach out to the families and
loved ones they left behind.
The changed operational environment of
peacekeeping operations calls for action by the Security
Council, by the United Nations and by its Member
States. We therefore see today’s debate as being closely
linked to the open debate on organizing peacekeeping
operations of 28 March 2018, which was presided over
by my Prime Minister, Mr. Mark Rutte (see S/PV.8218).
Thanks to the leadership of Secretary-General Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, we are all giving
a quality push to peacekeeping this year.

18-1405113/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In that context, we think it is also important that the
Council show leadership and take up its responsibility.
We look forward to the high-level seminar on
peacekeeping intelligence in July and to the high-level
event on peacekeeping in September. We pay tribute to
the important work done by Côte d’Ivoire as Chair of
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, and we look forward to its presidency in
December in this context.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We applaud the tangible progress made in the
implementation of the action plan based on the Santos
Cruz report, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers.
Working together, we must change the way we
do business. As Major General Deconinck said, we
must change our mindsets. And we must become
more capable to act decisively. Working together, we
must make peacekeeping more effective. To protect
peacekeepers and support them in implementing the
mandates they are given by the Security Council,
peacekeeping operations have to become more robust.
I will focus on three issues relating to making
peacekeeping more effective, and with each issue I will
have a number of questions for the Force Commanders:
fisst, mission performance reviews; secondly, the
importance of an integrated approach; and, thirdly,
improving actionable intelligence.
With respect to my first point, on mission
performance reviews, since 2017, peacekeeping
operations have been reviewed comprehensively
since 2017. We especially focus in our discussions
in the Security Council on such issues as resource
constraints, performance and the cost-effectiveness
of mission components. In our opinion, those reviews
provide an important opportunity for stock-taking and
can provide the basis for much-needed adjustments to
mission mandates.
When we review a mission, however, we must also
focus on the operational needs on the ground. Mission
success depends, on the one hand, on the availability
of appropriate resources, and, on the other hand, on
having realistic expectations. In that regard, in our view,
proper force generation remains essential and needs our
continued attention. We welcome the rotation-scheme
system that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is developing. In that regard, my questions to the Force
14/29

09/05/2018

Commanders are as follows: Are their operational
needs currently fulfilled? Can they plan ahead when
it comes to the military they work with? And are the
troops Force Commanders receive well trained when
they are deployed under their command?
As to my second point, the need for an integrated
approach, we feel very strongly that we need an
integrated approach that combines three elements,
namely, diplomacy, defence and development.
Diplomacy serves to get a political solution, defence
serves to achieve security and development serves to
provide hope for a better future for civilians. Only if
those three dimensions come together can peacekeeping
operations be effective, which also means that the
pillars of the United Nations must work better together.
We are therefore a strong proponent of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform of the peace and security architecture.
My questions to the Force Commanders are as follows:
Do they have the impression that the development pillar
of the United Nations is working closely enough with
them? What could be improved? If they see a need for
a quick-impact project — for instance, with regard
to water supply — do they call a colleague from the
United Nations Development Programme to do that and
make it happen?
As to my third point, situational awareness,
we see a clear need in missions for integrated and
systematic information- and intelligence-gathering
and information- and intelligence-sharing among the
various actors on the ground. Missions should improve
their understanding of the local environment and of the
threats that the mission and civilians face. Actionable
peacekeeping intelligence is the key to success in
the complex environments in which today’s missions
operate. It is also key for the protection of civilians.
Peacekeepers need eyes and ears on the ground to
build and maintain situational awareness. I would like
to be blunt: better peacekeeping intelligence helps to
save lives, in our opinion, which brings me to my last
questions: Do the Force Commanders currently have
enough early-warning capacity when it comes to the
asymmetrical threats they face? Could the Commanders
share the key challenges in their missions? How
could the Security Council help them to overcome
those challenges?
We look forward
Force Commanders.

to

the

answers

of

the

18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and all the Force
Commanders for their respective briefings on the main
challenges in today’s peacekeeping operations. I wish
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the brave men
and women who are serving in different peacekeeping
missions around the world.
I want to focus on the unprecedented challenges
peacekeeping missions are facing today, as the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur have already explained to us.
Peacekeepers are increasingly being deployed
to protect civilians and support complex political
processes amid ongoing fighting and high-risk situations
characterized by asymmetrical threats. Targeted attacks
against peacekeepers and innocent civilians are not
only on the rise, but they have increasingly continued to
become the norm rather than the exception. This point
has already been highlighted by my colleagues, but it
needs to be repeated because of the magnitude of the
challenge we are facing.
The recent attacks that led to the deaths of
peacekeepers in Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are a clear
indication that such threats are growing in scale,
frequency and complexity. It is therefore imperative
that peacekeeping missions undertake reforms and
adapt to the changing security dynamics. In that regard,
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
review has certainly made important recommendations,
and their timely implementation will certainly go a long
way in making United Nations peace operations fit for
purpose. That, at least, is our view of the matter.
Devising the right political strategies and
operational approach has also never been at critical as
it is today. In that regard, I would like to suggest the
following suggestions, and will be pleased to hear the
comments of the Force Commanders. I subscribe to
the view expressed by the representative of the United
Kingdom on the need to be frank in this exchange
of views.
My first suggestion has to do with what has been
reiterated by many on numerous occasions, that is, the
need for pragmatic and flexible interpretation of the
basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping. The

S/PV. 8251

traditional peacekeeping versus peace enforcement
debate should, at a minimum, be looked at in a more
nuanced manner. Peacekeepers cannot, and should not,
remain indifferent in the face of significant threats to
themselves or to innocent civilians, whom they are
supposed to protect.
The Force Commander of MINUSMA referred to
the robust use of force. How much flexibility do United
Nations peacekeeping principles allow for resorting
to the robust use of force? In our view, peacekeepers
should have a robust mandate with a clear concept
of operations and rules of engagement based on a
thorough situational analysis, threat assessment and
planning. That will allow them to have a robust posture
in defending themselves and protecting civilians in
the face of mortal danger. However, having a clear
mandate, concept of operations and rules of engagement
is not enough.
Therefore, the third point is that peacekeepers need
to have the necessary capability that is credible enough
to deter spoilers who threaten the mission’s mandate
and civilians, as well as the peacekeepers themselves.
Being adequately equipped also has a deterrence value
that is rarely taken into account. We would welcome
comments from the Force Commanders on this point.
We need to ensure that peacekeepers have adequate
equipment, including force enablers and multipliers to
be able to counter hostilities and fulfil their mandate
effectively in an asymmetrical environment. That has
already been mentioned by the Force Commanders,
and emphasized in particular by the MINUSMA Force
Commander. Peacekeepers must also receive adequate
training and acquire the necessary skills to operate in
volatile security situations.
Fourthly, although the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO)
(see S/2015/446) recommended that United Nations
peacekeepers should not undertake counter-terrorism
operations, it did not rule out such a possibility by
capable regional forces and/or ad hoc coalitions
authorized by the Security Council. For instance, the
African Union (AU) and its regional mechanisms have
shown greater commitment and readiness to deploy
forces in asymmetrical environments. The African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is a case in point.
Hardly any other mission exemplifies the need for
greater partnership than AMISOM — a Mission that is
operating in one of the most hostile environments — and
let us not overlook the real meaning of what the Mission

18-1405115/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

does on behalf of the international community.
AMISOM peacekeepers are facing asymmetrical
attacks almost daily, and yet they are underfunded and
in a dire logistical predicament. Maybe that applies
to other missions as well. Of course, AMISOM is
not a United Nations peacekeeping force, but the
experience it has had is germane to our discussion here,
particularly with respect to counter-terrorism activities.
In that regard, it would be useful to hear the opinions
of the Force Commanders of how peacekeepers should
overcome the challenges posed by terrorism.
From our perspective, on the basis of the principles
of complementarity and division of labour, the United
Nations should be ready to share the burden with AUled peace support operations, among others, through
the provision of a financial and logistical package. In
that connection, the relevant recommendations made
in the HIPPO report are a step in the right direction.
It is absolutely necessary that they be translated into
concrete action.
We know that the points I have raised are easier
said than done. We have no illusions that the strategic
and operational challenges will be easily overcome.
But in the light of the seriousness of the matter, it is
imperative that they be addressed as promptly as
possible. Otherwise, the commitment to the protection
of civilians will remain mere words repeated ad
nauseam, with little meaning in the real world, where
so many need protection in practice, not theory.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Force Commanders for their
briefings and for their work to contribute to peace and
stability in Africa. We are grateful for what they and
the troops under their command are doing by way of
discharging their responsibilities. I look forward to
hearing their comments.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Polish
presidency for organizing this important interactive
discussion, including the very informative briefings
by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders. We express our appreciation for their
insights and commend them for their heroic service.
The Kazakh delegation will make general observations
and then ask specific questions with regard to
individual missions.
Just a few hours ago, many Member States
commemorated, together with the Secretary-General
and the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
16/29

09/05/2018

a very important occasion — the seventy-third
anniversary of the victory day in the Second World War
by attending an exhibition at Headquarters, organized
by nine countries from my region. As the SecretaryGeneral mentioned in the opening ceremony,
“Today’s commemoration has more meaning
than in any of the previous years. We see a world
in which conflict is proliferating. We see a world in
which so many wars are taking place. So, I believe
it is absolutely essential to remind us all of the
lessons of the Second World War.”
We also regret that so many conflicts and wars
are taking place today, especially in Africa and
particularly in Darfur, Mali and South Sudan, which
we are considering today. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council of the initiative led by my county to
elaborate a joint programme to stop all violent conflicts
by the United Nations centenary in 2045, which is
mentioned in the Council’s first presidential statement
adopted this year (S/PRST/2018/1).
Our peacekeeping forces remain a most valuable
tool. At the same time, the challenge is to use them to
create the necessary conditions for political solutions
and inclusive negotiations and to implement peace
agreements. Above all, we should foster strong and
effective cooperation among Governments and between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU),
especially the AU High-level Implementation Panel
and, wherever possible, bring in subregional groups,
like the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
or selective countries with influence. Other helpful
activities could include arm- collection campaigns and
the resettlement of large numbers of internally displaced
persons, without which there can be no durable peace.
We must also ensure security sector reform to
generally improve security situations and to bring
about an overall reduction in criminal activities.
The successful process of reconfiguring the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
should be an example for other missions too. The
challenge before us is to accelerate the peacebuilding
mandate, including taking a more proactive role in
capacity-building, strengthening governance and
improving quick-impact and community stabilization
measures, while also working closely with United
Nations country teams, primarily through planned
multi-year strategic frameworks.
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We also commend all the missions on implementing
their mandated tasks under very difficult circumstances.
We support the Secretary-General’s independent review
reports of the missions, his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative on the basis of the Santos Cruz report, and his
good offices. It is in that context that we would like to
ask the following questions.
First, how can we modify mandates to enable the
resumption of capacity-building and training in the
State’s armed forces and institutions through a longterm security sector reform programme? Secondly, what
must we do in order to stop the ongoing military actions
of armed groups and militias, and the widespread
violence, all of which lead to severe economic decline,
an escalation of the humanitarian crisis and severe food
insecurity for millions, the vast majority of whom are
also displaced? Thirdly, despite the Secretary-General’s
action plan, recommendations and best intentions, the
challenges seem insurmountable. Development takes
time, but how can we initiate comprehensive strategies
for economic development and building resilience from
the very beginning? Fourthly, how can we achieve
intercommunal reconciliation and build confidence
among local populations?
Finally, we all know how badly we need improved
predeployment and in-mission training, more efficient
strategies and better equipment and surveillance
capabilities. Last but not least, however, how do
we bridge the capability gap? Based on the Force
Commanders’ experience in the field, what are their
suggestions for possible and feasible ways of addressing
those gaps?
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
convening the Force Commanders here this week.
We think that it is an extremely valuable event when
Force Commanders have a chance to come together and
discuss the common challenges they face in today’s
environment. As missions deal with ever-greater
challenges, it is important for them to share experiences
and best practices. I also thank the Polish presidency
for convening today’s meeting, in which we were able
to hear briefings from three great Force Commanders.
Not only are their briefings very important, but I
would like them and their colleagues in the Chamber to
convey how much the Council, and the United States,
appreciates everything that the troops under their
command do, all the sacrifices they make and their
dedication to duty.

S/PV. 8251

As the challenges that we ask peacekeeping to
address have grown and the rate of peacekeeper fatalities
is on the rise, it is now more important than ever to
assess whether a peacekeeping mission is the right tool
at any given time for confronting specific challenges
to international peace and security. The United States
has expressed its strong support for seeing the United
Nations raise the bar for the performance of United
Nations peacekeeping by institutionalizing a culture
of performance, starting with the development and
implementation of a comprehensive performance policy
that identifies transparent standards for performance
and detailed measures to hold underperformers
accountable. But performance alone is not sufficient.
In April of last year, Ambassador Haley articulated
a set of principles to the Council (see S/PV.7918) to guide
our review of peacekeeping missions as their mandates
come up for renewal. I believe that those principles
are a good prism through which to review mandates,
as well as a reflection of our collective discussions in
the Council. Much of what I have heard from Council
members here today is also reflected in those principles,
which are that peacekeeping missions must support the
achievement of political solutions; missions must have
the cooperation of host countries; exit strategies must
be clearly articulated and mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Where such conditions are not present,
we must carefully consider whether or not the current
mandates continue to make sense, how the Council
should adjust them and whether there are alternative
and more appropriate conflict-resolution tools.
I have just a few questions for the Force Commanders
who briefed us today, keeping those principles in
mind and articulating a larger philosophical view of
peacekeeping and how their missions fit into that prism.
With regard to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, is its
mandate realistic and achievable? It has a particularly
difficult mission. If not, bearing in mind that the Force
Commander will endeavour to carry out whatever
tasks we entrust to him, which tasks does he feel are
really unachievable?
With regard to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, does the Force Commander believe
that the Mission’s peacekeepers are operationally
prepared to meet its requirements, particularly where
the protection of civilians is concerned? What does he
think the Mission would need to achieve operational
readiness? The question of operational readiness is one

18-1405117/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we could perhaps ask all missions. I welcome the Force
Commanders’ comments on what is needed to achieve
full operational readiness.
Lastly, does the security situation in Darfur require
a strong military force presence or could police, for
example, assume a more robust role?
I would once again like to thank the presidency for
convening today’s meeting.
Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. I would also like to thank the Force
Commanders of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali for their valuable briefings.
I would like to address the following four points:
threats, performance, exit strategies and agreement
among stakeholders. First, with regard to the threats
that peacekeeping forces face, over the past five years
there has been a regrettable increase in the number
of fatalities among peacekeepers. The Security
Council has supported the Secretariat in addressing
that serious issue. The dynamic nature of conflict
and the need to address more than one conflict at a
time, as well as the plethora of combatant parties,
make us greatly appreciate the major role played by
the military components of peacekeeping operations.
They should receive greater support from the Council
through realistic and flexible mandates. In that regard,
we would like to commend the effective role played
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Secretariat in
implementing the action plan outlined in the Santos
Cruz report with regard to the increase in the number
of fatalities among peacekeepers, whose sacrifices in
the cause of maintaining peace and protecting civilians
is recognized and appreciated.
Secondly, with regard to performance, we welcome
cooperation between peacekeeping missions and the
Secretariat to identify performance-measurement
criteria. We stress that such criteria must measure
tangible, concrete budget-related aspects as well as
measurable indices. However, peace remains a lofty,
priceless goal that cannot be measured in monetary
terms. The Council bears a great responsibility for
identifying the requirements of the mandates it designs
18/29

09/05/2018

in order to achieve and maintain peace and protect the
lives of civilians and peacekeepers while measuring
and improving performance. Discipline-related
issues, including the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, are of paramount importance.
The Council has repeatedly supported that policy and
expressed its appreciation for the troop-contributing
countries that have addressed incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse in a decisive, immediate and
responsible manner.
Thirdly, with regard to exit strategies, the role of
military components in peacekeeping missions is not
limited to situations where there is ongoing fighting or
where ceasefires must be maintained among warring
parties. It covers every stage of a mission, from
downsizing and reconfiguration to agreement on an
exit strategy that can ensure a smooth transition to postconflict peacebuilding. The peace continuum requires a
flexible and gradual transition from military functions
to tasks related to stabilization and peacebuilding,
as in the case of UNAMID. The role of the military
component is the linchpin that holds the mission’s other
components together. Moreover, continued cooperation
between the military and police components of a
mission ensures peacekeeping and support for capacitybuilding, as currently exemplified in the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
Fourthly, with regard to agreement among the
parties contributing to peacekeeping missions, during
our March open debate on peacekeeping operations
(see S/PV.8218), we spoke in depth about the role of
parties contributing to peacekeeping operations, and
stated that the military component is a key pillar for
cooperation among them. From the very beginning, the
host countries are our first partners in peacekeeping
operations, followed by the troop-contributing
countries, which play a crucial role in triangular
cooperation with the Secretariat and the Security
Council. After the troop-contributing countries come
regional and subregional organizations, which are
playing an increasingly important role, particularly in
Africa, as we heard earlier from the briefers. We stress
the need for consistent and concerted efforts among all
those parties. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has made available its annual draft report
(A/AC.121/2018/L.3), which covers the military
component, and this month it is discussing the financial
and administrative aspects of peacekeeping operations.
All the parties that I have mentioned are essential
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in reviewing both the mandates and the military
components of peacekeeping operations, and continued
cooperation among them is therefore urgently needed.
In conclusion, we are pleased that the Council
has heard briefings from the Force Commanders on
their missions, and we welcome continued interaction
with them under the auspices of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We would once again like to
acknowledge the sacrifices that peacekeepers make in
extremely dangerous environments, and to thank troopcontributing countries and all contributing parties, to
whom we express our gratitude for the sacrifices that
they have made to maintain peace.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking the three Force Commanders for their valuable
perspectives, Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing, and you, Madam President, for providing a
platform for today’s discussion.
We welcome the renewed efforts spearheaded by
the Secretary-General to strengthen peacekeeping and
move from words to action in making peace operations
fit for the twenty-first century. We, the members
of the Security Council, must play our part in that
process. That entails providing missions with realistic
mandates and adequate resources, but also putting
political pressure on all key actors and supporting
the broader United Nations system’s efforts. United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations must also be enhanced. From listening
to our three Force Commanders, it becomes clear that
immense challenges remain, and we know that the
peacekeeping environment today is more complex and
entails higher risks than ever before.
In our own experience from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), peacekeeping intelligence is vital
for making informed decisions and for operational
planning. It is crucial to ensure that missions are able
and ready to act on information received, and it is
also important to have thorough selection processes
for senior mission leadership and military and police
commanders The evaluation of leaders must improve,
and special attention should be given to a willingness
to act, take initiative and assume responsibility. In
addition, uniformed units must have the right training,
skills and equipment to be able to protect civilians and
themselves and to deliver on mandates. That requires

S/PV. 8251

support for capacity-building and better reporting
on underperformance.
We firmly support efforts to prevent and combat
sexual exploitation and abuse within the United
Nations system. Proper gender mainstreaming and the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda also requires adequate funding.
Let me conclude by focusing on the questions that
I have for our briefers. My first question is for all of
them. What do they think the Secretariat, the missions
and the troop-contributing countries should do to
increase the percentage of both uniformed and civilian
female personnel?
My second question is for Lieutenant General
Ngondi of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Given that the task of protecting
civilians is the biggest challenge that he faces as a
Commander in delivering on his mandate, how does
he address that? How are conditions affected by the
ongoing reconfiguration of the mission?
My third question is for Major General Deconinck.
I would like to ask him to elaborate on the current
challenges that MINUSMA is facing in terms of
protecting hospitals, health-care facilities and
personnel from attacks, and documenting and reporting
such attacks. Are the Mission’s mandate and resources
sufficient for those tasks?
My fourth question is for Lieutenant General
Kamanzi. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
like the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
has a more flexible and effective brigade unit. In
some regions, we have also seen regional reserves
that can be moved between missions on short notice.
What would he say are the pros and cons with regard
to those more flexible and robust units as brigades or
regional reserves?
Ms. Córdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks your presidency,
Madam, for convening this important meeting. We
are also grateful for the briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and by the Force Commanders of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the

18-1405119/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations Mission in South Sudan, via videoteleconference from Juba.
The international landscape is not static. It is
undergoing profound changes that in recent years have
been reflected in the constant threats posed by terrorist
groups and transnational crime. That complex reality
has shown how important it is to make structural
changes in peacekeeping missions in order to enable
them to adapt more effectively to their environments
and to repel such threats. In the Sahel, for example, both
the fighting capacity of armed and terrorist groups to
carry out asymmetric attacks, and their ability maintain
a strong ideological presence in order to win over
supporters, has increased. That has also led to growing
profitability from criminal activity, which has become
a modus vivendi for such groups. We would like the
Force Commander of MINUSMA to elaborate on that
issue and comment on the measures that he believes
should be adopted in the region.
Over the past almost 70 years, peacekeeping
missions have have helped to build peace in various
countries around the world by implementing their
mandates. Sadly, that has come at a very high human
as well as material cost, owing to the deaths of the
valuable military components, police officers and
civilian personnel who have fallen victim to attacks in
the discharge of their duties. Bolivia would like to pay
sincere tribute to each and every one of the members
of United Nations peacekeeping operations contingents
around the world, who stand firm in their efforts to do
their work despite some missions’ material constraints
and insufficient resources, the difficult conditions
on the ground and the fragile and volatile security
environments that they function in. We are also grateful
to the countries that contribute troops, police officers,
observers and civilian personnel for their generosity,
solidarity and commitment to the United Nations
system and to countries afflicted by armed conflict
and instability.
The continuing attacks on peacekeepers, which
recurred only a few days ago in a number of places,
have shown once again the urgent need to strengthen
key areas of missions, mainly those relating to
situational awareness in the field, units’ mobility and
reaction capacity and, above all, the strengthening
of defence and protection measures for camps and
the troops themselves. Peacekeeping missions also
need to see improvements in material and especially
technical areas if they are to implement their mandates
20/29

09/05/2018

more effectively. It should be noted that the proper
equipping and training of troops is the responsibility
not only of the troop-contributing countries but of our
Organization in general. Furthermore, providing the
sustainable, effective and adequate economic, human
and material resources that missions need requires
analysis that is technical and logistical but above all
realistic. In that regard, we emphasize the priority of
improving institutional agility for the deployment
of troops, as well as selecting those who are the best
trained and most specialized to respond effectively to
the asymmetrical contexts we have discussed.
As we said in the last open debate on peacekeeping
operations in March (see S/PV.8218), important insights
and tools for information and recommendations for
advocating for change and improving the performance
of missions on the ground, as well as optimizing the
various levels of decision-making and planning in the
system, are reflected in the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809)
and the recommendations in the 2015 report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446). Their overall content examines the various
options, mechanisms, tasks and challenges facing such
operations today.
We also welcome the report entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers by the former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, better known as the
Cruz report. It is a relevant tool that makes a significant
contribution to understanding peacekeeping missions’
security issues, as well as their structural aspects,
mainly with regard to the leadership, mentality,
equipment and training of troops. Bolivia believes
that it is essential to address those aspects in order to
achieve reasonable objectives.
In that regard, it would be helpful to hear firsthand from the Force Commanders here today about
the degree to which the parameters in the report are
being implemented. And if they are not, how could
they be applied in the context of each of their missions?
With regard to operational behaviours, the Cruz report
also emphasizes that every mission is unique and that
different situations require different action, depending
on the threat in any given area. However, what never
changes is that the interpretation of the mandates should
support taking action and not be used to justify inaction.
From that perspective, what other steps should the
Security Council take to prevent inaction from putting
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the lives of contingent troops at risk? A preventive
approach, within the framework of an in-depth,
case-by-case study of the context, is key to the proper
design and understanding of mandates, whatever their
nature, while respecting the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States, promoting national
ownership and without using that approach as a tool
for intervention.
In conclusion, we underscore the Security Council’s
efforts to achieve the objectives established in all its
current mandates. Unity among all actors is crucial to
strengthening the financial, tactical, operational and
strategic aspects on the ground in strict compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations. It goes without
saying that no peacekeeping mission can succeed
without the support of the host country. In that regard,
continued, smooth coordination, information exchange
and confidence-building mechanisms between missions
and local authorities are essential.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Force Commanders for
their comprehensive briefings, giving us the missions’
perspective on issues that are relevant to the Security
Council’s considerations of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. This year’s Heads of
Military Components Conference is very timely.
The subject of peacekeeping has been broadly
discussed over the past few months. The entire
international community has been alarmed by the
current state of the security of mission personnel and
consequently of the people they aim to protect. We
have not only seen dynamic changes in the security
environment but, more importantly, a significant
increase in threats and direct attacks on peacekeepers.
We should take every opportunity to condemn such
actions in the strongest possible terms. Needless to
say, the security of peacekeepers is of paramount
importance for all stakeholders involved in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, but we must not
forget that it is currently a decisive factor in missions’
effective implementation of their mandates.
One of the topics we are considering today is the
mandates themselves. The importance of re-evaluating
missions’ composition and mandates based on the
realities on the ground has already been discussed in
the Council. I would like to specifically focus on the

S/PV. 8251

situations on the ground, their relation to mandates
and their direct impact on missions. I would like to
ask several questions regarding the missions, but I
think this should also be an opportunity for the Force
Commanders to convey what they have to say to the
members of the Council. I will therefore proceed with
my questions.
From the perspective of the Force Commanders,
do the current mandates enable the missions and
Force Commanders to work actively and, if necessary,
proactively in order to fulfil their tasks? If the answer
is yes, I would appreciate it if they could prioritize
and name the key challenges, limitations or gaps still
hampering their missions’ effectiveness. If the answer
is no, I would encourage them to highlight the areas
that the Council should focus on to ensure support
for Force Commanders and troops on the ground in
implementing their mandates and bringing us closer to
the missions’ desired end stage.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to convey my most sincere appreciation to all the Force
Commanders present in the Chamber today, and to the
men and women they serve with around the clock, for
their dedication and commitment to international peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to draw the attention of the Force
Commanders to the questions directed to them.
Council members would appreciate comments from the
Force Commanders on the realities of their respective
field missions.
I now give the floor to Mr. LaCroix to respond to
the questions and comments.
Mr. Lacroix: I will be very brief because I think it
is very important that the Security Council listen to the
responses by the Force Commanders. I would like to
thank members for their support and their commitment
to our peacekeepers and for the tribute that was paid to
our colleagues in the field.
I would also like to reiterate the importance of
the continuous engagement of the Security Council in
support of the collective efforts aimed at improving
the effectiveness of peacekeeping. That is very much
the spirit of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
which is about candidly sharing the challenges that
peacekeeping faces, explaining what we are trying to

18-1405121/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

do to address those challenges and highlighting the
importance of strong support from Member States
to effectively address the challenges. We need the
support of Member States as political actors, as troopand police-contributing countries and as financial
contributors and partners.
Turning briefly to the action plan, let me say
that we are determined to continue very actively to
implement it. Although it does not take on board all of
the recommendations of the Santos Cruz report, it is
based thereon. I think it is important to highlight that the
action plan is not the overall strategy for peacekeeping,
because the overall strategy for peacekeeping places
primacy on politics. It is very important to highlight the
importance of Member State support to further advance
political solutions in the many situations where political
processes are not moving fast enough. The action plan
is essentially a set of very practical recommendations
and measures aimed at making the important tool of
peacekeeping more effective and more apt to address
the current challenges. The implementation of the plan
is a collective undertaking. I would again like to express
my gratitude to our colleagues in the field, particularly
the Force Commanders, for what they are doing.
As I said, we are very determined to move forward.
One of the key priorities of the plan is to make sure
that we implement our rules and procedures at every
level. Another priority is to place emphasis on training.
We have a specific plan of action for training, which
we have shared with Member States. We work on
performance assessment, for which we have a new
methodology that we are mainstreaming throughout
missions. We are also candidly sharing performance
issues with the troop- and police-contributing countries,
whenever appropriate, in a spirit of partnership and
with the goal of remedying these issues. We are also
working on other very important priorities, such as
identifying the key shortages in equipment and how to
use modern technologies, as well as the importance of
further improving the way in which we handle fatalities
and casualties.
Against that backdrop, I would like to underline
the key principles of peacekeeping, which have been
recalled by a number of Council members. Those
principles remain the cornerstone of our action. I think
it is absolutely critical to highlight the importance of
working in close partnership with host Governments
and to make sure that there is consent from them. I
think impartiality is also a key principle. Our mandates
22/29

09/05/2018

dictate that we support political solutions. The reality
is that in many situations we face forces that oppose
the advancement of political solutions, and that do
that quite often by going after peacekeepers and our
colleagues on the humanitarian and the development
side. The issue of the use of force is also very relevant
to that. Peacekeeping is not war. The use of force is
determined either by self-defence or by the importance
of defending the mandate. In some cases, defending the
mandate includes making good on our protection-ofcivilian mandate, but also making sure that we defend
ourselves and the mission against those who are in the
business of derailing a political solution.
Turning to the strategic review, I wish to say that
we will continue to conduct and to implement strategic
reviews. We need the support of the Security Council
for that. At the same time, it is probably too early to
assess what the impact of strategic reviews will be
on missions will be. It will be important for Member
States to take a look at the impact in order to judge for
themselves whether such reviews make a difference or
not. We intend to continue along those lines.
Let me conclude by saying that I agree with the
comments made on the issue of capability shortfalls. In
spite of the fact that we have more potential contributors
to peacekeeping and more pledges for our missions,
we still have a critical capacity shortfall in a number
of areas. It is important to further work on creative
solutions to remedy the situation. Smart pledges
represent an important avenue in that regard, whereby
pledges and contributions rotate on a yearly basis in
order to make sure that the contributors of critical
assets do not see their assets committed for too long to
a particular mission. It is equally important, as some
Member States recalled, to highlight the importance of
an integrated approach. Some of the Force Commanders
made that point very accurately.
Finally, on the issue of complementarity, it entails
making sure that we enable other organizations,
particularly regional and subregional organizations,
to respond to the situation with their own operations,
adequately supported with predictable and sustainable
support and funding.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for the
clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Ngondi
to respond to the questions and comments.
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Lieutenant General Ngondi: Before I respond
to the specific questions, I should like to make two
remarks. First, I am very thankful for the kind words
that Security Council members have expressed to us in
recognizing the hard work that peacekeepers are doing
in the field. Secondly, I appreciate the desire expressed
by members to support peacekeepers either as a Council
or as individual States.
Having listened to the debate, I want to suggest
the need to borrow from the military planning and
decision-making process. I think there is a gap in
our planning and in the formulation of mandates.
The military planning and decision-making process
requires expert examination in order to understand
the situation and to identify what needs to be done and
with what strategy. At the end of the day, therefore, they
come up with ends, ways and means and mobilize them
to undertake an attack. They have a very deliberate
strategic implementation mechanism. If our mandates
were arrived at through that process, I do not think
that we would be having problems. I know that violent
situations require rapid action. However, that does not
mean that we do not follow up to ensure that a complete
decision-making process has been followed from the
very start. That can still be followed up. Adequate
capability and strategies will therefore have been
provided to implement the ways, means and ends.
The second issue is robustness. As Force
Commanders, we have debated that at length We
know that every mission has its unique security and
operational challenges. Robustness does not necessarily
mean the use of force. The nearest definition of
robustness that we have is being vigorous in pursuit
of an objective. “Vigorous” does not necessarily mean
using weapons, machinery and so on, but using what
is available, depending on what has been configured.
Its second meaning is “capable of performing without
failure” — the determination to perform, whether by
fighting or pursuing other objectives. Robustness is
therefore not confined to the field alone. It cuts across
the board — from the Security Council to the field
and from the field up to Headquarters and Member
States. Everyone must ensure robustness and work out
what that they want to pursue. If a strategy exists, the
objective can be achieved. That is why I said, in answer
to the specific question from the concept note, that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) was sufficiently robust, because it
has the capabilities in terms of the various components

S/PV. 8251

put together. If it is sufficiently robust, it will achieve
its objective. Having said that, let me turn to the
specific questions.
First, to respond to the question from the
representative of the United Kingdom as to the next step
after reconfiguration and the challenges that have been
experienced in mandate implementation, it is an open
secret that UNAMID is on its way out, having done
what it was supposed to do. That process started a long
time ago, with the adoption of resolution 2363 (2017),
which indicated that direction. Unless something
changes, if all factors remain the same, that train is on
its way. What we have therefore said very clearly is that
what we need next is a very good, detailed transition
plan. The transition will try to ensure that the gains
that the United Nations has made in the field do not go
to waste but are handed over to someone. We pass the
baton to someone. That can be the Government, a United
Nations country team or civil-society organizations
that take on the role of providing basic services,
because our mandate is to ensure the protection of all
civilians, deliver humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
people, assist with community resolution mechanisms
and, of course, to support the political aspect, which
is mediation between the Government and the parties
that have not signed the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. That is presumed to be the answer, and it can
be given life only by the people who are discussing it.
The mission is on its way out. The answer is a smooth
transition to ensure that the gains that have been made
are not in vain.
Secondly, what are the challenges around those
four areas? There are a few. For example, where the
protection of civilians is concerned, the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who are registered
is more than 1.7 million. There are only a few of us, and
we cannot cover every individual. There are areas where
we cannot be and areas we must focus on, particularly
IDPs who have differences with the Government,
which we know can very easily cause a crisis. That is
where we need to use our limited capabilities. They
may be there not because of the conflict but because
of other problems, such as drought or intercommunal
conflict, which the Government can sort out as long as
it has the capability. At the moment we are present in
most areas because of a lack of capacity on the part of
the Government. However, the area we need to focus
on is where there are peacekeeping-related issues
and the presence of armed groups, which can attract

18-1405123/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Government hostility at any time. That is where we need
to be present. It is where people have run away from,
and if we are present, we will create a pull factor for the
IDPs to come from wherever they ran to, return to their
own area and start their normal lives again. In general,
that is what UNAMID sees, and that is the direction.
Where mediation is concerned, somebody has to
deal with it. I tend to think that at the ground level we
interact with the population. But the top leadership
of the groups that have not come to the table must be
persuaded to do so. They must be educated to see that
this is the only way to benefit the people whom they
profess to lead. Otherwise, they are likely to attract a
lot of hostility on the part of the Government, because
it will always try to exercise its sovereignty over
the territory.
With regard to major challenges in performance as
a whole, a mission must be integrated, bringing together
all competencies in terms of those in uniform as well
as civilians with various remits. We have observed
that such integration sometimes does not extend to all
levels. It exists within the mission headquarters, at the
sector level and at the team sites, where the activities
are. Not everyone is always at those sites — other
than those in uniform, the peacekeepers — although
civilian components should be there. The integration
therefore exists only at two levels, not at field level.
That is a question of resources, of what is available.
People sometimes do not understand that is where
action is needed and that the success of the mission is
measured by activities at the lowest tactical level. If, in
formulating the mandate and identifying the resources,
the ways and means, it can be ensured that all levels are
covered, that is good, and any mission will perform in
the way it is supposed to. We must therefore be robust in
formulating the mandate. We must pursue the process
of formulating it with vigour so that we come out with
an implementable mandate.
Next, I would like to respond to the question
from the representative of the United States. Does
the situation in Darfur require a military presence?
We have mapped out the area of operations. As I have
said before, we know where the military is necessary.
The military is necessary where there is a potential
for clashes between the Government and parties to the
conflict or among other parties in the country, as well
as some that are outside the country.
24/29

09/05/2018

Now, that is where we need to be. We are now there
as well as elsewhere, but we are only elsewhere because
those who are supposed to be there are not available.
That is the capacity gap in the Government that I have
been talking about, as well as in the humanitarian
bodies in the country, which do not have the capacity to
do what they are supposed to do, and which is why we
are there. If those capacities can be improved, we can
leave that area and focus on the small area where the
real crises are, so as to ensure that such crises do not
happen or, if they do happen, to mitigate them, so that
the population does not suffer a lot. We therefore have
a military presence in those specific areas in adequate
numbers, with relevant capabilities, in order to tackle
the challenges there in terms of coverage, footprint
and terrain. That is where we need to be. Until that is
sorted out — by the parties being brought to the table
or by declaring a cessation of violence between the
two — and until the debate, the negotiation, the dialogue
is undertaken and the mediation process gets under
way, only then will we see the mission pulling out.
The representative of Sweden asked again about
how the reconfiguration affects the protection of
civilians. As I said, it is a huge area to cover, with few
personnel, a small footprint. That is the issue. With the
reconfiguration, we are not everywhere. As soon as we
downsize, we leave some areas, reducing the footprint
of delivery to those who benefit from our services. We
cannot do everything everywhere. We can only do what
we can do with the capabilities that we have. Nobody
should think that the military can be under every tree.
No, priorities have to be set based on the intensity
of the conflict or danger and on the capability that
exists — and we must be where we are supposed to be,
even though there will be people who will not benefit
from our services. That is the danger. The protection-ofcivilians aspect is affected by reconfiguration because
we are downsizing while the capabilities of the
Government and the other humanitarian organizations
are not enough to take over for us. That is the effect of
reconfiguration. But we will never be there forever. We
will get out.
Lastly, with regard to the question posed by the
President in her capacity as the representative of Poland
as to whether our mandate is implementable, the answer
is that it is implementable because it is understandable.
Its components are very simple and understandable
and are therefore implementable. They have been
implemented. The only challenges are the places where
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we have some difficulties here and there, where there
are restrictions imposed on us — the terrain factor, and
the fact that we cannot act as fast as we would like to,
that sort of thing. But the mandate is implementable. It
has been implemented, including the task of reducing
or downsizing and handing over various areas. All
those tasks are also implementable because they are
well understood and because we have the will and the
capacity to fulfil the mandate and as soldiers to obey
the instructions we have been given.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Ngondi
for the clarifications he has provided. I now give the
floor to Major General Jean-Paul Deconinck to respond
to the questions.
Major General Deconinck: I thank you, Madam
President, and all members of the Security Council for
their support to the missions in the field and for their
tributes, which I will convey when I return to Bamako,
and to Mali, next week.
I would like to add something to what my colleague
from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur said. It is important to develop
our planning process, to study the equation between
the mandate and the means so that we can define the
ways and means and ends. But that is not enough. What
is missing is what we call in the military a restated
mission: did we understand what is expected of us and
what is expected of the mission? That is important.
In answer to the United States representative’s
question as to whether the mandate is achievable,
I cannot answer that. I would have to explain the
operation design of the whole Mission, the desired
end-state of the Mission, the military end-state and the
decisive points and objectives. After laying all that out,
I might be able to say whether it is achievable or not.
But I would first like to turn to effectiveness,
starting with my own Mission. As Force Commander,
my task is to support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, create or recreate a safe and
secure environment throughout Mali so that we can
redeploy the armed forces and security forces, so that
the national, regional and local authorities can be
redeployed, and so that basic services can be ensured.
As Force Commander, I also support the entire Mission
with a force in various domains in the field. I also have
to protect United Nations personnel and uphold the
United Nations mandate. In theory, I could say, “Yes,
I can achieve that mandate, of course.” But I have to

S/PV. 8251

bring safety, security and peace in an asymmetric
environment, and sometimes — indeed, more and
more often — in combat conditions. In answer to the
question as to whether the mandate is achievable, we
would therefore have to say perhaps not.
On the other hand, with respect to ways and means
and ends, I could say, as my predecessor did in 2016,
that I need — we need — more resources, capabilities,
people and so on. In 2016, we increased the personnel
ceiling by almost 2,000. At the moment we are still
working with a gap of 1,400. But the number 1,400 says
nothing. It is about capacities. We are still lacking some
capacity. Capacity is the product of people, equipment,
training and mindset — people, training, equipment and
mindset. So when we are talking about effectiveness, I
have to cope with that gap in capacities. I will live with
that gap until the end of my mandate at the end of this
year, and my successor will likely live with that gap
too. What we have to do is increase our effectiveness.
And that relates to the Santos Cruz report. I will not
enter into a debate about whether that report is or is not
endorsed or approved by the Council.
I will say that, in April or May of last year, I started
taking measures to increase effectiveness, because I
have to do that. It is about force generation, and I kept
pushing the force-generation button with the Council
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We definitely need that. It is about tasking: reducing
tasks with no added value. For instance, we must stop
guarding some small compounds, close them and
regroup units. It is about stopping guarding Operational
Coordination Mechanism compounds and mixed unit
compounds. But they have to be capable of doing that.
It is about simply receiving more force protection
units, which would mean I would be able to generate
additional units using my own resources. That is about
increasing effectiveness.
Of course, training and equipping soldiers and
advising are mentioned in the Santos Cruz report, as
is working on the mindset of the soldiers. It is about
counter-threat, which should not be confused with
counter-terror: “I have to live and I have to act under
threat continuously”. Counter-threat is also about
countering improvised explosive devices, countering
indirect fire and so on, which should not be done with
kinetic action alone. When it comes to countering
indirect fire, for instance, we have to address the whole
chain of command of the opponent, which we do in the
Mission as a whole. It is a whole-of-mission concept.

18-1405125/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We spoke about intelligence. Of course, there is a
crucial need to have current and actionable intelligence
to first understand the situation, not only for the force
but also primarily for the mission. Where and how
should effort be directed — in which domain and
location — in order to increase situational awareness.
Secondly, we need intelligence to prevent attacks.
Three weeks ago, in the aftermath of the attack in
Timbuktu, I told my intelligence people that they would
have to predict the next location, the next date and the
form of the next attack. There is a need for intelligence.
Presence, posture and profile have nothing to do with
kinetic action, but it is important to be present, have a
good posture and profile. It is also about being present
and maintaining credibility among populations and
deterring the opponent.
I will now move onto force protection.
(spoke in French)
The French delegation asked what technological
capacities we still need to strengthen protection. The
answer is straightforward: we need more early-warning
radars, as we only have a few and I need one in every
compound. I also need additional short-range and
medium-range drones and command systems.
(spoke in English)
On the performance of contingents, we are
continuously evaluating units. My Deputy Force
Commander is in Kidal this week to evaluate two
battalions. We do that not only evaluate, but also to
take action and to correct what is wrong. We are also
measuring the performance of our operations. When
it comes to operations, Madam President, you asked
how we could avoid inactivity and how our mandate
could be more active. We are of course working with
the whole Mission in that regard with all the means
at our disposal, every six to eight weeks. We conduct
such activity, first, for situational awareness, secondly,
to ensure the freedom of movement of the force and
of our partners and, thirdly, to counter the threat and
operate within the seven pillars. That allows us to
employ a bottom-up approach to integrate the Mission
at that level.
Command control is also on my wish list, as I cannot
change policy alone. To do that, I need the support of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
26/29

09/05/2018

Lessons learned from past errors are also essential,
so as to avoid future failure and to better act or react to
recurring incidents.
On effectiveness and coordination with military
actors. I am only the Force Commander; there are many
military actors active in Mali. I have sometimes heard
talk of a military traffic jam in Mali. That is certainly
not the case — I would be happy to have 10 more
battalions in any of my forces.
We coordinate on our main areas — operations,
logistics, support, intelligence and so on — with five
partners. The first of those partners is the Malian
armed forces. We also coordinate with the European
Union Training Mission in Mali, the Group of Five
for the Sahel and Operation Barkhane, as they are all
mutually reinforcing. I cannot perform any kinetic
action related to counter-terrorism; instead, I must rely
on our partners to do that. There is therefore a need
for coordination and better synchronization among the
partners, which we undertake every day.
I will mention one point about one of our partners,
the Malian Defence and Security Forces. I do not think
I mentioned the need for sound security sector reform
plan for the Malian Defence and Security Forces. Such a
plan is key because those forces are not only part of our
exit strategy, but they also represent part of the solution
for implementing the peace agreement. Security sector
reform is therefore key, not only for Mali but also for
the surrounding countries.
My last point will touch upon female personnel,
in response to the question from the representative of
Sweden on how to attract more female military personnel
within the force. First, I will say that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is the most dangerous mission in the world,
limiting its effectiveness. Secondly, we need women to
engage with the population. Again, it is about situational
awareness and so on. We need women. However, it is
the responsibility of troop-contributing countries to
engage more and to commit more female personnel.
On the question about the protection of
hospitals — which hospitals? The hospitals of the force
or the civilian hospitals in the country? That is not
my job. It is of course my job in the case of threats
or attacks against civilians and any body. When I say
body, I mean including hospitals and so on, on Malian
territory; of course it is my job. But the Malian Defence
18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and Security Forces are on the front line. I am there in
support in such cases.
The President: I thank Major General Deconinck
for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Kamanzi
to respond to the questions and comments.
Lieutenant General Kamanzi: Like my colleagues,
I would like to first make some general comments,
beginning with the issue of mandate implementation,
or the ability to achieve a mandate. The achievement
of a mission mandate is indeed a whole-of-mission
task comprising all the components that constitute the
mission: the civilian component and, most important,
the civilian leadership, and uniformed components,
namely, the police component, which, in our case, is
also composed of formed police units and individual
police officers, as well as the military component.
For us to achieve our mission, all the components
need to make their contribution. The contribution of
the military component, for the most part, is protecting
civilians but also — most important — as an enabler
and a platform if we want the other components to
achieve or make their contribution. In that regard, I
mean being able to protect and facilitate access — for
example in human rights, political affairs and other
components — so that they can do their work in the
various places.
We have the responsibility of ensuring the access
of humanitarian actors and delivery of humanitarian
aid for the recipients. We have the responsibility of
supporting the peace process and the peace agreement.
In particular, we are talking about support to the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM), which is supposed
to monitor and follow up on violations, which in the end
helps the force to move the peace process forward.
What I am saying here is that, in the achievement
of our mandate, the military component makes its
contribution and, in our case, if the question is whether
or not we have an understandable and implementable
mandate and whether the military component
understands us and is ready to make its contribution,
the answer is yes. But, for that to happen, we need to
address some of the challenges such as those I made
reference to previously, which include having the
numbers mandated.

S/PV. 8251

I made reference to the fact that we have not
reached the ceiling in the number of troops and
enablers that the Council has made available to us. For
example, the Regional Protection Force (RPF), whose
various components are supposed to be at a strength of
4,000 personnel, has stood at slightly over 50 per cent
inducted since 2016. Even then, critical enablers such as
tactical helicopters and combat engineering elements,
which are supposed to help protect and improve our
security, are not with us yet. It is therefore important
that, while we understand and are ready, we need to be
supported and given the resources, especially those that
are within our ceiling.
We have talked about intelligence and information
as important components for being able to do our work.
Information, specifically peacekeeping intelligence,
is critical to proper planning and the utilization of the
resources at our disposal. Once we have information,
we are able to prioritize and employ our resources
appropriately and, in doing so, become efficient and
protect our troops and those whom we are charged
with protecting.
I made reference to looking into the use of
surveillance and other technologies to help us efficiently
manage the protection-of-civilian sites and allow us to
get more troops into other areas, thereby enabling us to
create a better environment for the return of those in the
protection sites and a more secure environment for the
return of those who fled the country. That is happening
in places where I indicated that, after inducting the
initial elements of the RPF, we will be able to send out
troops from Juba and deploy them in the Equitorias so
that we improve access as well as security. That has
been done to the extent that some people are already
coming back from Uganda, where they had fled to
refugee camps. Some have come back, not necessarily
to permanently settle, but to see what they can do in
the areas they left. That should improve as we receive
more troops who are transitioning from static functions
to deployment in areas where people were displaced or
fled from during the conflict.
I will quickly address some specific questions,
starting with the question from the representative
of the United Kingdom on sexual exploitation and
abuse. I would first say that, as a mission, we are
committed to implementing the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. For the peacekeeping force, that translates into
critical and serious command responsibility, because

18-1405127/29

S/PV.8251

United Nations peacekeeping operations

it also constitutes a protection issue. We cannot allow
our forces to abuse or disrespect the people whom
we are charged to protect. It is therefore, first and
foremost, command responsibility to ensure that policy
is implemented.
As a mission, we have also been able to undertake
risk assessments of all the positions and areas of
operation of our troops. Moreover, we have created an
environment in which information is easy to access
and transmit, which bolsters prevention. In instances
where we unfortunately receive allegations of sexual
exploitation or abuse, action is swiftly taken to initiate
thorough investigations and collective measures by both
the Mission and, where required, national investigators,
who receive our full support and cooperation so that
we are able to get to the bottom of allegations and take
corrective measures. Those are some of the mechanisms
in place, which we are working on and continuously
improving to ensure that the policy is adhered to.
There was a question about further increasing the
number of female members among our contingents.
That is primarily the responsibility of the troopcontributing countries, as we employ and deploy the
human resources that we receive. We appreciate that
some troop-contributing countries have yet to achieve
the quotas and numbers required. However, I wish to
recognize the contribution from Headquarters and
troop-contributing countries. I think that, in response
to our meeting last year on 7 July in New York, where
Chiefs of Defence pledged to make a difference and
increase the numbers of female personnel, we have seen
a slight increase of both female officers and female
members of contingents in the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). I would like to commend
Headquarters and troop-contributing countries, and I
urge for such progress to be continued; we cannot overemphasize the importance of the contribution of the
female members of our contingents.
The representative of Sweden also asked about
the flexibility and employment of brigade unit
intervention, such as the Regional Protection Force
and, if I am correct, the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With regard
to UNMISS and the Regional Protection Force in
particular, when the RPF was conceived, in 2016, it
was mandated with carrying out specific tasks in Juba.
However, since 2016 the situation in Juba has changed,

28/29

09/05/2018

and requirements and changes have arisen in other parts
of the country, leading to demands on the Mission. As
such, our current mandate includes some flexibility.
In addition to making a difference and carrying out its
originally mandated tasks in Juba, the RPF has also
been able to intervene and make a difference, where
required, together with UNMISS forces.
In that regard, I also mentioned in my briefing that
we had taken advantage of the deployment of the RPF
and its induction into the Mission to move UNMISS
forces that were originally elsewhere to the south of the
country by first reinforcing company operating bases,
so that we can improve security and outreach and also
open new bases, particularly in Yei, where I mentioned
the impact of improved security and access. It is the
same engineers and enablers of the RPF who are helping
to build bases and open roads, which are generally
supporting the Mission. As such, the employment and
deployment of the RPF and its enablers is improving
the situation in Juba. The Force is carrying out the
currently required tasks and is also helping to make
a difference outside of Juba. As I said, we would like
to receive combat engineers, who are supposed to be a
component of the RPF, as well as tactical helicopters,
which would enable us to project and protect our forces
and improve the chances of the Mission achieving
its mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the question
asked by the representative of Equatorial Guinea on
whose responsibility it is to achieve mission mandates.
It is the responsibility of everyone, because the primacy
of a political solution has been underlined. That is the
responsibility of everyone, including — or starting
from — the Security Council, the United Nations
Headquarters, regional actors and, most important,
the parties to the conflict. For their part, missions are
responsible for the tasks that create an environment that
is going to help enable the actors or the parties to the
conflict to achieve a political settlement. Therefore, all
of us have a role to play. For a mission to be achieved,
or for a mandate to be achieved, everybody has a role.
But, as underlined again by one of my colleagues, it is
us — the missions — who are in the tactical position or
environment that requires action, especially in terms of
protecting civilians who are vulnerable.
Creating that important environment for political
discussions and engagement is therefore an important
responsibility. But, again, it is important that everyone

18-14051

09/05/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

contribute — starting from the political to the
tactical, security and protective environment that is
required for the achievement of the different mandates
that we have been given. The mandates are clear,
workable and achievable so long as everybody makes
their contribution.

S/PV. 8251

On that note, I want to thank everyone and express
my gratitude for the opportunity to express our ideas,
as well as to appreciate and ask once again for the
Council’s support as we carry out our mandate and
our responsibilities.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

18-1405129/29
