UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/326
15 April 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 15 APRIL 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to paragraph 4 (c) of the Memorandum of Understanding between the
United Nations and the Government of Iraq dated 23 February 1998 (see
S/1998/166) and paragraph 18 of the Procedures established in accordance with
paragraph 4 (b) of the Memorandum of Understanding (see S/1998/208 of
9 March 1998), I have the honour to transmit the report of the Special Group on
visits to presidential sites undertaken in the period from 26 March to
2 April 1998.

(Signed)

98-10483 (E)

160498

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 9 April 1998 from the Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs addressed to the Executive Chairman
of the Special Commission established by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)

Pursuant to the terms of paragraph 4 (c) of the Memorandum of Understanding
between the United Nations and the Republic of Iraq and paragraph 18 of the
Procedures, I enclose my report to be forwarded to the Secretary-General (see
enclosure).

(Signed) Jayantha DHANAPALA
Head of the Special Group,
Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Report of the Special Group established for
entries into Iraqi presidential sites

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The Special Group constituted pursuant to the terms of paragraph 4 of the
Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and the Republic of Iraq
dated 23 February 1998 undertook a series of initial visits to the eight
presidential sites named in the annex to the Memorandum from 26 March to
2 April 1998. The Special Group arrived in Baghdad on 24 and 25 March and left
on 4 April.
2.
The Special Group consisted of 20 senior diplomats, listed in appendix I,
who were appointed by the Secretary-General from among nominations received from
a number of Governments invited to provide diplomats for this task. Experts
drawn from the Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), listed in appendix II, also comprised the Special Group. The
results of their activities and findings are contained in the summary report of
the Head of the Team of Experts (appendix III). The Secretary-General appointed
Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, as
Commissioner and Head of the Special Group. Mr. Charles Duelfer, Deputy
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, was designated Head of the Team of Experts. The
formal communication required under paragraph 15 of the Procedures was handed
over by the Head of the Special Group to Dr. Riyadh Al-Qaysi, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, on 25 March.
Immediately thereafter, the Head of the Special Group was invited by Deputy
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz to a discussion of the procedures and the facilities
to be provided by the Iraqi authorities for the visits.
3.
The Special Group was guided by the Memorandum of Understanding and the
Procedures drawn up for their task. In general, the Team of Experts was divided
into three sectoral sub-teams, one external sub-team and specialist sub-teams.
Senior diplomats were deployed accordingly ensuring that experts and their Iraqi
counterparts were observed consistently by them. Senior diplomats also
accompanied experts and their Iraqi counterparts in the helicopters used during
the visits. The observations of the senior diplomats are contained in the
report that follows.

II.

ENTRY INTO THE RADWANIYAH PRESIDENTIAL SITE

4.
The south and south-east sectors of this site were visited by the Special
Group on 26 March. This was followed by a visit to the north sector on
27 March. During the course of the visits the Iraqi authorities were observed
by the senior diplomats to raise national security concerns in respect of
(a) general aerial photography from the helicopter that was used as distinct
from photography of specific situations; and (b) the use of global positioning
system (GPS) instrumentation. Following negotiations conducted on site, the
rights of UNSCOM to general aerial photography embodied in relevant Security
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 4

Council resolutions (e.g. resolution 707 (1991)) were emphasized by the Head of
the Team of Experts and the Iraqi authorities finally agreed, on an ad hoc
basis, that this could take place for a reasonable amount of time. With regard
to the use of GPS instrumentation, a compromise agreement was reached, again on
an ad hoc basis, in deference to Iraqi concerns and in a spirit of cooperation.
This would apply to initial visits to presidential sites and would not be
regarded as a precedent for future visits since UNSCOM asserts its rights to use
GPS instrumentation as standard equipment. National security concerns were also
raised in respect of drawings and sketches of buildings, which UNSCOM required
as part of its "baseline survey". This matter was also resolved satisfactorily.
5.
Soil sampling and the use of other equipment was conducted by the experts
without difficulty. The helicopter was able to complete obtaining all the
imagery it required. With regard to the baseline survey conducted by the
experts, discrepancies were found between the survey conducted earlier and the
ground realities and after some discussion these were resolved satisfactorily.
The helicopter used by UNSCOM was able to land within the Radwaniyah
Presidential Site so that the senior diplomat in the helicopter, Ambassador
Antonio Monteiro of Portugal, could have consultations with the Head of the
Special Group, who was also provided with the opportunity to observe the site
from the air.

III.

ENTRY INTO THE TIKRIT PRESIDENTIAL SITE

6.
The Special Group proceeded by road in a journey of over three hours to the
Tikrit Presidential Site on 28 March and completed its visit on the same day.
Necessary adjustments with regard to the survey of the boundaries were raised
and clarified at an early stage of its visit, illustrating that the experience
of the previous visits had proved beneficial. Consequently much time was saved.
No difficulties were encountered with regard to aerial photography or the use of
GPS instruments. Taking of photographs on site where a soil sample has been
taken was objected to at first, but after discussion acceptable arrangements
were made.

IV.

ENTRY INTO THE MOSUL PRESIDENTIAL SITE

7.
After staying the night of 28 March in a hotel in Mosul, the Special Group
visited the Mosul Presidential Site on 29 March. This visit was conducted in
rainy weather, which hampered the arrangements. The weather conditions resulted
in poor aerial imagery and the Iraqi authorities agreed to a subsequent flight
of an UNSCOM helicopter over the site on Friday, 3 April with a senior diplomat
on board. A request by UNSCOM to meet the site manager could not be met on the
day in question. A subsequent visit on 31 March was arranged so that competent
officials were able to discuss the layout of the site with UNSCOM experts. No
other significant problems were encountered during the visit.

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 5

V.

ENTRY INTO THE JABAL MAKHUL PRESIDENTIAL SITE

8.
The Special Group proceeded to this site directly from visiting the Mosul
site, completing their visit in the afternoon of 29 March. A request was made
by the UNSCOM experts for the landing of the helicopter on site, but the Iraqi
authorities proposed that the helicopter land immediately outside the site but
within close proximity to it. Detailed examinations of underground facilities
for the disposal of rainwater took place without difficulty. The visit was
concluded in approximately three hours and the Special Group returned to Baghdad
late on the night of 29 March. The visit to the site was undertaken by a
reduced number of experts and diplomats since the team proceeding to Basrah had
proceeded to Baghdad after the Mosul site was visited. A subsequent visit was
conducted on 31 March with a senior diplomat to examine the layout of the
cooling and heating system on the site.

VI.

ENTRY INTO THE THARTHAR PRESIDENTIAL SITE

9.
This site was visited on 30 March by a major part of the Special Group.
Aerial photography was undertaken. An issue regarding the boundary survey was
resolved satisfactorily by the Iraqi authorities volunteering to move air
defence batteries further away to prevent any confusion in the future. Those
responsible for the technical management of the site were on hand to provide
information.

VII.

ENTRY INTO THE BASRAH PRESIDENTIAL SITE

10. Three senior diplomats and 21 experts from UNSCOM and IAEA proceeded to
Basrah in a road journey of over six hours and completed their visit to the
presidential site on 30 March. They stayed the night in Basrah and returned to
Baghdad on 31 March. The Head of the Special Group accompanied the experts in
the helicopter. A formal request to land on site by UNSCOM experts was not
acceptable to the Iraqi authorities on the grounds of the special nature of the
site and national dignity. Instead the helicopter landed in very close
proximity to the site and the Head of the Special Group was provided with a
vehicle to meet the experts and the senior diplomats on the site.

VIII.

ENTRY INTO THE REPUBLICAN PALACE PRESIDENTIAL SITE

11. This site in Baghdad was visited on 1 and 2 April. In addition to the
Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Oil and the Secretary to the President,
who were regularly present at all sites, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
the Minister for Information were also present. The aerial survey by helicopter
was postponed to 2 April, when the helicopter flew for 45 minutes with aerial
photography being conducted. Two diplomats were present in the helicopter. The
Iraqi authorities expressed concerns over flights above populated areas, which
they claimed had been avoided in the past, and questioned the functional need
for aerial photography when U2 imagery was available. In finally agreeing to
the flight they maintained this was not to be cited as a precedent. The experts
conducted what they considered to be a baseline survey of the site with the
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 6

cooperation of the Iraqi authorities. Issues concerning the entry into family
living quarters occupied by the staff of the Palace and other matters were
quickly resolved either at the field level or through the intervention of higher
authorities. Discrepancies between the earlier survey and ground evidence were
settled with the use of GPS equipment. Where documents were available a random
check was conducted smoothly. Spot checking of computers was undertaken with
the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities.

IX.

ENTRY INTO THE SIJOOD PRESIDENTIAL SITE

12. This site in Baghdad was visited on 1 and 2 April and work proceeded
smoothly with the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities. Initial disagreement
between UNSCOM and the Iraqi authorities over the boundaries of the site were
resolved through the use of GPS. In one isolated incident a request for a file
was delayed.

X.

CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS

13. In general the senior diplomats observed that the relations between the
UNSCOM and IAEA experts on the one hand and the Iraqi counterparts on the other
were correct and both sides conducted themselves with professionalism and
restraint. In many cases they had worked together for a long time and had
developed a certain mutual respect. In the case of lower-level Iraqi officials
encountering UNSCOM and IAEA experts for the first time, an understandable
unfamiliarity sometimes translated itself into some hesitation in cooperating
until orders were received from higher authorities, which invariably arrived in
time. In a few instances, cultural differences and miscommunication caused
misunderstanding, but this was soon settled, often through the good offices of
senior diplomats. There were different perceptions on the relevance of
questions asked by UNSCOM and IAEA experts to the mandated purposes under the
relevant Security Council resolutions and Iraqi officials objected to some of
the inquiries made by the UNSCOM and IAEA experts from time to time.
14. The regular presence of senior members of the Iraqi leadership on the
presidential sites illustrated the seriousness with which the Government of Iraq
approached the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding. This
facilitated the decision-making process. Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, Oil
Minister Lt.-Gen. Amir Muhammed Rashid Al-Ubeidi and Dr. Abed Hamid Mohmood,
Secretary to the President, were present at the majority of the sites together
with Brig.-Gen. Hussam Amin, Director of the National Monitoring Directorate.
In addition, Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed Al-Sahaf and Information Minister
Humam Abdul-Khaliq were present at the visit to the Republican Palace
Presidential Site in Baghdad.
15. Paragraph 3 of the Memorandum of Understanding required that the Government
of Iraq provides UNSCOM and IAEA with "immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access in conformity with" relevant Security Council resolutions, while UNSCOM
"undertakes to respect the legitimate concerns of Iraq relating to national
security, sovereignty and dignity". At the commencement of the visits to the
presidential sites and regularly thereafter, the Iraqi authorities conveyed
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 7

their concerns relating to national security and made reference to the June 1996
modalities for inspection of sensitive sites, which Iraq claimed had been agreed
to between UNSCOM and Iraq with the argument that the presidential sites merited
a higher degree of sensitivity and modalities that were special to them. In
particular, the use of helicopters over populated areas adjacent to presidential
sites, general aerial photography of presidential sites, unlimited access to
State documents, examination of computers, the use of GPS and the taking of
detailed sketches and drawings of buildings were objected to on national
security grounds. UNSCOM for its part pointed out that the Security Council
resolutions were the final source of their authority and that none of the
activities objected to were specifically excluded by the Procedures drawn up to
implement the Memorandum of Understanding of 23 February 1998. Despite this
difference of opinion between the two sides, it was observed that working
arrangements were devised on an ad hoc basis to enable the initial visits to the
presidential sites to proceed. It is not clear whether these ad hoc
arrangements will remain applicable for subsequent visits.
16. The concerns of the Iraqi authorities over national dignity and sovereignty
connected to the special nature of the presidential sites were expressed in
objections to landing UNSCOM helicopters on presidential sites and in entering
the offices and living quarters of the Iraqi leadership. These concerns were by
and large respected by the UNSCOM and IAEA experts, but the right to land
helicopters on sites was reserved by UNSCOM.
17. During the visits to the presidential sites, entry into some buildings
proved inconvenient for the UNSCOM and IAEA experts because of the presence of
too many representatives of the Iraqi authorities. It was consequently
necessary in certain instances for requests to be made for a restricted number
of Iraqi representatives to accompany the UNSCOM and IAEA experts and senior
diplomats, especially where there was inadequate space.
18. Paragraph 17 of the Procedures required that the observations of the Iraqi
representatives be taken into consideration without impeding the ability of the
team of experts to fulfil its mandated tasks. The senior diplomats observed
that this provision was complied with and they themselves were always available
to listen to the observations of the Iraqi authorities. On one specific
occasion, they attended a briefing by the Minister for Oil in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs at the request of Iraqi authorities.
19. It was observed that the Iraqi authorities readily agreed to subsequent
visits to some of the presidential sites necessitated by weather conditions or
the need of UNSCOM and IAEA experts to clarify specific points.
20. The senior diplomats were present observing the work of the UNSCOM and IAEA
experts at all presidential sites even when they broke up into sub-teams within
the sites. In certain exceptional instances, because of transport difficulties,
this was not possible. Where the attention of the Head of the Special Group was
drawn to this, remedial arrangements were made immediately.
21. In the actual conduct of the visits to presidential sites, delays were
sometimes experienced over the non-availability of keys, but the Iraqi
authorities were often ready to break down doors, including steel doors, in
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 8

order to provide access. Some irritation on the Iraqi side over the repetition
of visits to the same location by different teams of experts arose because of an
inadequate understanding of the different tasks performed by different teams of
experts.
22. The Iraqi authorities expressed serious concerns about the confidentiality
of the information being gathered by the UNSCOM and IAEA experts, who for their
part maintained that the information was totally safe in the hands of UNSCOM.
23. The stated objective of UNSCOM was that the round of initial visits to the
eight presidential sites was a "baseline survey". The Iraqi authorities did not
accept this characterization of the visits. The Memorandum of Understanding
provides for "initial and subsequent entries for the performance of the tasks
mandated at the eight presidential sites".

XI.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

24. As the Head of the Special Group, I wish to thank the Government of Iraq
for the cooperation, facilities and courtesies extended to me and to the members
of the Group. I also wish to thank Mr. Charles Duelfer, Head of the UNSCOM and
IAEA Team of Experts, and all members of the Team, the Director and staff of the
Baghdad Monitoring and Verification Centre and the Bahrain Field Office of
UNSCOM for their assistance in ensuring the fulfilment of our tasks. I thank
the Governments of the Member States who released the senior diplomats for this
important mission. I would like to place on record my appreciation of the
conscientiousness with which the senior diplomats discharged their duties in
difficult conditions. The role of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Prakash Shah, who assumed duties immediately before the visits
commenced, was invaluable.

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 9

Appendix I
Senior diplomats

1.

Ambassador Roberto Garcia-Moritan

Argentina

2.

Counsellor Hassan M. Al-Ansari

Bahrain

3.

Minister Counsellor Oswaldo E. Portella

Brazil

4.

Ambassador Michael Bell

Canada

5.

Minister Counsellor Tiankai Cui

China

6.

Ambassador Marcel Laugel

France

7.

Counsellor Alfred M. Moussotsi

Gabon

8.

Ambassador Horst Holthoff

Germany

9.

Counsellor Josef Papp

Hungary

10.

Ambassador Pietro Cordone

Italy

11.

Counsellor Tsukasa Uemura

Japan

12.

Ambassador Antonio Monteiro

Portugal

13.

Minister Counsellor Woong-Nam Kim

Republic of Korea

14.

Counsellor Gheorghe Tsarlescu

Romania

15.

Minister A. Kalugin

Russian Federation

16.

Ambassador Andrej Zlebnik

Slovenia

17.

Ambassador Saeed Saad

Sudan

18.

Ambassador Johan Nordenfelt

Sweden

19.

Counsellor Simon Collis

United Kingdom

20.

Ambassador Ryan Crocker

United States of America

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 10

Appendix II
Experts

1.

Charles Duelfer (Head of the Team)

25.

George Healey

2.

Roger Hill (Chief expert)

26.

Michio Hosoya

3.

Jacques Baute (Senior expert)

27.

Ibrahim Cherradi

4.

Bill McLaughlin (Senior expert)

28.

Nam Zhang

5.

Chris Cobb-Smith

29.

Diane Seaman

6.

Ragab El-Shaer

30.

Gustavo Diedrichs

7.

Gavin Newson

31.

Daniel Clemments

8.

Lesley Rose

32.

Esteban Mackay

9.

Wayne Goodman

33.

Niall Creed

10.

Steven Frerk

34.

Oliver Desmandryl

11.

Steve Elliot

35.

Mohamed Amayreh

12.

Simon Thommason

36.

Jiachang Pei

13.

John Sim

37.

Steven Scagnelli

14.

Greg Owen

38.

Andre Lagattu

15.

Patrick Hamzadeh

39.

Mikhail Rijinski

16.

Craig Johnson

40.

Alain Bernard

17.

Ken Norman

41.

Alex Macdonald

18.

Oliver Schacht

42.

Andrzej Grezelka

19.

Hosni Baderddine

43.

Andrzej Lajourdie

20.

Alexandre Jassani

44.

Jerzy Deren

21.

Patrick Walker

45.

Colin Mills

22.

Genc Osmani

46.

Taisseer El-Shamy

23.

Cui Xinshui

47.

John Senchak

24.

Ali Adam

48.

Francis Towndrow

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 11

49.

Tainmi Chen

64.

Peter Hubbard

50.

Andrew Jones

65.

Jack Lennox

51.

Frank Pabian

66.

William Olcott

52.

Neville Whiting

67.

Yuri Rudakov

53.

Samir Morsy

68.

Gerard Essertel

54.

Jess Foxx

69.

Vladimir Lisenko

55.

Martin Frankl

70.

Viacheslav Slastionov

56.

Ngemar Vintersved

71.

Vitaly Agababyan

57.

James Lee

72.

Alan Earle

58.

Siegfred Ruzicka

73.

Chris Webb

59.

Wladislaw Bury

74.

Louis Briscese

60.

Ruifu Yang

75.

Lawrence Meledeth

61.

Vin Murphy

76.

Helgard Du Preez

62.

Michale Burkland

77.

Gregg Whitaker

63.

Craig Murray

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 12

Appendix III
Initial entry to the presidential sites
Summary report of the Head of the Team

1.
The initial entry to the eight presidential sites in Iraq, tasked by the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission (UNSCOM), was performed by mission
UNSCOM 243 during the period from 25 March to 4 April 1998. The initial entry
was conducted following the Memorandum of Understanding between Iraq and the
Secretary-General of 23 February 1998. This agreement and its implementing
procedures provided for special arrangements by which Iraq would accept UNSCOM
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) access to the eight
presidential sites. Previously, and contrary to Security Council resolutions,
access to these sites had been blocked from United Nations inspectors. As will
be seen below, one major aspect of the agreement - involving the continuing
nature of such access - is still unresolved, merely postponed.
2.
The initial entry to the sites had limited objectives, which were achieved.
It is important to emphasize that this mission was not a search-type mission,
nor was it no-notice. Iraq had over a month to make whatever preparations it
desired.
3.
Cooperation from Iraqi counterparts was satisfactory. The presence of
senior diplomatic observers worked out generally well. Of particular note was
the constructive presence of Presidential Secretary Mr. Abid Hamoud and
Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid, the Minister for Oil, during the visits.
4.
The team was composed of a Head of Team, Mr. Charles Duelfer (the Deputy
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM), a Chief Expert, Mr. Roger Hill, and approximately
71 inspectors from 17 countries. IAEA was a joint participant in this mission
represented by Deputy Chief Expert, Mr. Jacques Baute, and 14 IAEA experts.
5.
The team assembled in Bahrain on 21 March and conducted training until
25 March, when the team travelled to Baghdad. Detailed planning was done in
advance to identify site approach routes and the inspection procedures.
Operation and logistical planning was conducted in Bahrain and was accomplished
smoothly. The team also provided operational and logistical support for the
senior diplomats once in Iraq. This placed an additional responsibility on the
243 UNSCOM logistics and operations planners. They performed superbly and the
diplomats had few complaints about the planners.
6.
Site entries began on 26 March.
according to the following schedule:

The eight presidential sites were surveyed

26-27 March

Three sites in Radwaniyah

28 March

Tikrit

29 March

Mosul and Jabal Makhul

/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 13

30 March

Lake Tharthar and Basrah

31 March

Report writing and perimeter re-survey visits

1-2 April

Republican Palace and Sijood

3-4 April

Report writing and perimeter re-survey visits

7.
The team was organized into three entry sub-teams and additional support
sub-teams, including a special sensor team, external security team and
headquarters team. Sites were divided into sectors, with each entry team
responsible for a respective section.
8.
A baseline survey was conducted at all presidential sites that allowed the
Commission to establish the location, general purpose and a general
understanding of most buildings within the sites. This involved brief visits to
approximately 1,000 buildings during an eight-day period. Obviously, time was
limited at each building and quick assessments were required. Document and
computer searches were to be limited to spot checks intended to set a precedent.
9.
Iraq, ultimately, provided the cooperation necessary to complete these
tasks. Present during all mission activities was Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid. Present
during most of the visits was also Presidential Secretary Mr. Abid Hamoud.
Deputy Prime Minister Mr. Tariq Aziz was present at all site visits, but avoided
contact with UNSCOM members.
10. The utility of this limited mission is threefold. Firstly, the acquired
database will allow UNSCOM and IAEA to conduct more focused subsequent
inspections, which will support both ongoing monitoring tasks as well as
searching for prohibited materials and related documents. Secondly, the visits
allowed inspectors to gain a much better understanding of the nature of the
facilities in these areas and that will help dispel many uncertainties and
concerns. Finally, the precedent of access to the sites and the use of normal
UNSCOM/IAEA inspection techniques was demonstrated.
11. The mission was not intended to be a search for prohibited material and
none was found. In fact, there was very little equipment, documentation or
other material in the sites at all. It was clearly apparent that all sites had
undergone extensive evacuation. In all the sites outside of Baghdad, for
example, there were no documents and no computers. The buildings were largely
empty. In the Baghdad area, there were limited documents and a few computers at
selected government facilities such as the Presidential Diwan. However, like
other areas, most buildings were emptied of contents. The Republican Palace,
including the area described as belonging to the President, was evacuated.
Iraq’s explanation for this was that such measures were taken in anticipation of
a military strike. This makes follow-on missions more important.
12. A key accomplishment of the mission was to plot more precisely the
boundaries of the presidential sites. Changes were made to four of the sites
and included significant surveying work. Discussions over the precise
boundaries were conducted primarily with Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid with the episodic
involvement of Presidential Secretary Mr. Abid Hamoud. The presence of these
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 14

senior officials provided for quick decisions as required. The revised
perimeters of the sites have now been agreed upon in the signed note between the
Deputy Executive Chairman, Mr. Charles Duelfer, and Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid.
13. One element of the discussions on the established perimeters concerned the
provision for subsequent changes of the presidential areas. The Commission is
concerned that Iraq could change portions of these sites without notifying the
Commission and this might lead to problems in subsequent inspections. The team
sought to include a provision for 24-hour prior notification to the Commission
of any such changes. However, Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid asked that this not be
included in the signed document since it would imply a continuing right of
access to such sites by the Commission. This, he stated, was not Iraq’s
position.
14. Lt.-Gen. Amer Rashid stated that it was well known to the Deputy Executive
Chairman that Iraq had agreed only to a process of visits of finite duration.
This was their view of what they had agreed in the 23 February Memorandum of
Understanding. He also acknowledged that it was the view of the Deputy
Executive Chairman that access would be required for long-term monitoring. The
Deputy Executive Chairman stated that it was his understanding that the
Secretary-General was of the same view. However, since it was not the purpose
of the mission to resolve the problem of time limits on access, it was agreed to
delete reference to any ongoing procedures. It is essential to note, however,
that the fundamental issue of continuing access is by no means solved and has
only been postponed to the future.
15. The most distinguishing feature of the mission was the presence of a
contingent of senior diplomats and the Commissioner designated by the SecretaryGeneral to head the Special Group. The work was organized to ensure that
diplomats were present during all visits to buildings and areas in presidential
sites. For the most part, this did not interfere with the work of UNSCOM/IAEA.
The senior diplomats performed their mission as observers well and with
enthusiasm.
16. Nevertheless, in certain limited circumstances, diplomats engaged in
argumentation and challenges to the work of UNSCOM experts, supporting Iraqi
views against those of UNSCOM. At times it seemed that Iraq was raising
spurious issues with the diplomats to put the Commission’s experts on the
defensive. The Commission’s experts might then raise complaints of their own
and this had the potential of developing into a damaging tit-for-tat situation.
However, as the mission continued, this negative dynamic seemed to recede. It
is important to recognize, however, that such problems are likely to re-emerge
in the future, especially when true no-notice inspections are conducted.
17. The cooperation provided by the Iraqis allowed the completion of the
mission. However, this was not always readily achieved and there were some
instances of denial of UNSCOM and IAEA rights, which were, however, not deemed
essential for the present mission.
18. The most contentious issue was the overflight and photography of the
presidential sites by the UNSCOM helicopter. Such photography is necessary for
the baseline survey to verify reporting of building location and structure by
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 15

ground inspectors. Iraq initially denied permission for such activity. While
the Head of Team insisted on this aspect of the mission and would not proceed
with the rest of the inspection without it, the Iraqis did not engage in
discussion with the UNSCOM team. Instead, they engaged the Secretary-General’s
representatives and, indeed, the Secretary-General himself.
19. Ultimately, the Secretary-General supported the UNSCOM position and Iraq
relented. This has important implications for the authority of UNSCOM and its
chief inspectors when dealing with the Iraqi counterparts and may reflect a
fundamental change in the relationship between Iraq and the Special Commission.
It will be important that the Secretary-General’s representative be supportive
of the approach of UNSCOM inspection teams or the chief inspector risks being
undercut in seeking Iraqi compliance in future disputes over access or other
matters.
20. Two other issues arose related to aerial operations. The team had sought
to land an UNSCOM helicopter within these presidential sites. Iraq blocked this
on all but one occasion. Further, the Commission had planned on moving
inspectors and diplomats from a site in the north (Mosul) to a site in the south
(Basrah) by air. This would have saved time and wear and tear on the
individuals involved since by road this is several hours of driving. During the
recent meetings in Baghdad with the Executive Chairman, the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq again declined to allow the Commission’s aircraft to operate at
any location other than Habbaniya Airbase, in contravention of Security Council
resolutions.
21. Another potential problem surfaced regarding the procedures and stated
requirements for the presence of senior diplomats at specific locations. Iraq
stated that UNSCOM and IAEA staff could not enter buildings without a diplomat
being present. This did not pose a problem during the course of this mission
since many diplomats were present and it was not a surprise visit. However, it
must be noted that the procedures do not contain any such requirement and in
fact allow for the division of the team into sub-teams at the discretion of the
Head of the Team of Experts. There is no stated requirement for a senior
diplomat to be present in each sub-team. In the future this may be problematic
since no-notice visits require quick movement into the location often by
multiple sub-teams. Assuring the presence of several diplomats at all locations
will inhibit the possibility of surprise, since non-Baghdad-based senior
diplomats may then be required. The team did not dispute the request by Iraq to
have a diplomat present at each building entered, but this was without prejudice
to future missions.
22. Another noteworthy feature of this mission was the extraordinary large
numbers of Iraqi minders present at all times. This slowed the work. The
organization of convoys of the 25 or so United Nations vehicles and the 40 to 50
or more Iraqi vehicles was difficult. Convoys at times exceeded a kilometre in
length. Upon entry to sites and buildings, the ratio of Iraqis to inspectors
was often five to one or greater. At times inspectors asked minders to remain
outside the buildings as the crowds inhibited serious work.
23. On balance, the mission was successful, but it was apparent that some key
issues will arise again in the not too distant future and the Council should be
/...

S/1998/326
English
Page 16

prepared to face them when they arise. Certainly, the matter of continuing
access is unsettled and will ultimately re-emerge as the Iraqi side clearly
feels that the phrase in the 23 February Memorandum of Understanding referring
to "initial and subsequent visits" means for a limited period only.

(Signed) Charles DUELFER
Deputy Executive Chairman,
Head of the Team

-----
