S/PV.9041

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9041st meeting

Tuesday, 24 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. Hunter/Mr. Mills . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2022/400)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35937 (E)
*2235937*

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2022/400)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/400, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.

24/05/2022

released 86 detainees, including high-profile officials
affiliated with the work of the Committee to Dismantle
the 30 June 1989 Regime and Retrieve Public Funds,
and violence by security forces against protesters
appears to have decreased overall, even if violations,
regretfully, still occur.
I have commended the recent release of detainees
as an important step towards creating conducive
conditions and rebuilding trust. However, approximately
110 persons reportedly remain in detention in
Khartoum, Port Sudan and elsewhere. On Saturday,
another protester was killed by security forces. If the
authorities want to build trust, it is essential that those
responsible for violence against protesters be held
to account.
It is time for all violence to end. We have urged the
authorities to reach out to the public and make clear
that they support dialogue as the only way to a reach a
political solution. Let me use this forum to call on the
military leadership and the Sovereign Council to make
an announcement that, in order to make this dialogue
happen, they will release the remaining detainees,
cease arbitrary arrests and, importantly, lift the state of
emergency, without limitations.

Mr. Perthes: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council once again on the
situation in the Sudan. Since I last briefed the Council
(see S/PV.9006), the overall situation has remained
precarious, with much at stake, including the Sudan’s
political, social and economic stability. Time is short
for the Sudanese to reach a political solution to forge a
way out of this crisis.

Demands for change and for the restoration of the
democratic transitional process continue, with largely
peaceful protests. Moreover, a growing number of
Sudanese parties and political coalitions have come
forward with initiatives to solve the political crisis.
The resistance committees in Khartoum state have
completed their political charter and are engaging in
dialogue with committees in the other states. As the
Sudan continues to confront further uncertainty, there
is a shared sense of urgency, and many parties are
seeking common ground and are increasingly open to
dialogue. There is also growing recognition of the need
for civilian-military dialogue on a way out of the crisis,
and there is more public debate around this issue.

Following the establishment of a trilateral mechanism
to facilitate intra-Sudanese talks, the African Union
(AU), envoys from the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and I have stated that those
talks can succeed only in a conducive environment. We
have also said that it is up to the Sudanese, particularly
the authorities, to create that environment. And indeed,
since I last briefed the Council on this subject in March,
some positive steps have been taken in that regard. From
late March through today, the Sudanese authorities have

Against that backdrop, the trilateral mechanism
of the AU, the United Nations and IGAD held initial
talks with key components of Sudanese society and
the political scene throughout April, the month of
Ramadan. That included political parties and coalitions,
representatives from resistance committees, youth, the
military, armed groups, Sufi leaders, women’s groups
and academics. The aim was to canvass the views
of the stakeholders on the substance and format of a
Sudanese-led and -owned talks. Almost all components

I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.

2/18

22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

have shown willingness to engage positively with
our facilitation efforts. At the same time, some key
stakeholders continue to reject face-to-face talks with
other counterparts or prefer to participate indirectly.
In the aftermath of the initial release of detainees
and a reduction in violence, we therefore began a process
of indirect substantive talks between the parties on
12 May. Core issues include the terms and composition
of key constitutional organs, the future relationship
between the military and civilian components and
the mechanism and criteria for the selection of a
Prime Minister. Forging shared understandings around
those issues will help chart a way out of the crisis and
address the institutional vacuum left in the wake of
the coup. Once a sufficiently conducive environment
is in place, the trilateral mechanism will convene the
key stakeholders around a negotiating table. That can
and should happen without further delay. But I want
to make it clear that there are also spoilers who do not
want a transition to democracy or who refuse a solution
through dialogue. The Sudanese parties should not
allow them to undermine the opportunity of finding
a negotiated exit to the crisis and thereby enabling an
agreed-upon Government to be appointed with a work
programme for the remainder of the transition period.
I also want to say that the trilateral mechanism
is robustly supporting the inclusion of women in the
political process. We strongly encourage the parties to
include at least 40 per cent women in their delegations,
which is in line with the Sudan’s Constitutional
Document. At the same time, via a Sudanese-led
process, we have facilitated the inclusion of a delegation
of women from all over the Sudan, who bring together
expertise, legitimacy from their own communities and
diversity in terms of age, regional background and
political orientation.
The lack of a political agreement and of a fully
functional Government so far is also affecting the
security situation. Recent events in Darfur, including
the destruction and displacement in Kreinik locality
and the ongoing violence in El Geneina between 22 and
26 April, have once again exposed the deficiencies in
the State’s ability to provide security and protection
for civilians. I briefed this Council on those events in
closed consultations on 27 April. Since that briefing,
relative calm has been restored to the area. Government
forces and several high-level delegations were deployed
to address the violence, and a cessation of hostilities
agreement was signed in El Geneina on 29 April

S/PV.9041

between the conflicting Arab and Masalit communities.
The Permanent Ceasefire Committee, chaired by
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), has engaged to
de-escalate tensions and has launched an investigation
into possible ceasefire violations in the context of those
events following the submission of formal complaints
by the parties.
The risk of a new outbreak of violence nonetheless
remains high. Despite the tragic nature of those events
and the heinous crimes committed against civilians,
it was encouraging to see that armed groups and the
regular forces have accepted the notion of using the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee as a joint institution
to resolve the conflict. Ultimately, the protection of
civilians requires that the root causes of the conflict be
addressed, including problems related to decades-long
marginalization, land issues and the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees. In the meantime,
however, physical protection must be provided, and
must be a priority for the Sudanese Government and
for the regional and state Governments in Darfur.
UNITAMS continues to regularly advise and train
members of the Sudanese Police Force in community
policing, sexual and gender-based violence protection
and the protection of civilians more generally.
The Sudanese authorities have also made significant
progress in setting up the joint security-keeping force
in Darfur, as provided for in the Juba Peace Agreement.
A first batch of 2,000 personnel from signatory armed
movements will complete their 90-day training at the
end of this month and be deployed to North, West and
South Darfur. The Government has agreed to give
them a regular salary on a par with that of the soldiers
of the Sudanese Armed Forces once they graduate.
In addition, a group of 80 officers has been selected
from that batch to receive further training and then
be integrated into the regular forces. My Mission is
currently providing training to non-commissioned
officers from that group on human rights, international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. Going
forward, adequate logistical support will be required to
operationalize the assembly areas for armed groups and
make further progress on the deployment of the joint
security-keeping forces. Once a political agreement is
reached, additional material support will be required
from the international community to implement other
aspects of the Juba Peace Agreement, including key
protocols that address the root causes of the conflict.

22-359373/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The political stalemate continues to exact a heavy
socioeconomic toll. Humanitarian needs are growing,
and they are having a significant impact on the most
vulnerable. That, coupled with global geopolitical
factors, continues to drive up prices for basic goods in
the Sudan. In April, staple food prices increased by an
average of 15 per cent compared to the previous month
and remained 250 per cent higher than last year. The
combined effects of political instability, economic
crisis, poor harvests and global supply shocks are
having a disastrous impact on inflation and the
affordability of food. The number of Sudanese facing
acute hunger is projected to double to about 18 million
by September this year. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has allocated $20 million for
this from its Central Emergency Response Fund, and
donors continue to provide humanitarian assistance.
However, the 2022 humanitarian response plan has
been funded at only an abysmal 13 per cent.
In the absence of a political agreement to
restore constitutional legitimacy, much international
development assistance and engagement by international
financial institutions has remained on pause. Some
donors have also placed restrictions on assistance
that goes through State systems to reach public-sector
workers such as teachers and health-care providers.
While the primary responsibility for changing those
dynamics lies with the Sudanese stakeholders, I am
concerned about the long-term consequences as we
watch the further erosion of the Sudan’s already fragile
State capacity and human capital.
The Sudan also runs the risk that critical assistance
from the International Development Association’s 19
funding programme, which had been allocated to the
Sudan as part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative, will be reallocated to other countries by the
end of June if a political solution to the crisis is not
reached. Additionally, some donor States have warned
that international financial support for the Sudanese
Government, including debt relief, will not resume
without a credible civilian Government. If a solution
to the current impasse is not found, the consequences
will be felt beyond the Sudan’s borders and for an
entire generation. That is a message that I and the two
Envoys continue to convey to Sudanese interlocutors.
Ultimately, it is up to the Sudanese to agree on a way
out of the crisis.
The crisis facing the Sudan is home-grown and can
be resolved only by the Sudanese. A solution is needed.
4/18

24/05/2022

Most Sudanese stakeholders realize that the geopolitical
environment is becoming more challenging and that the
gaze of the international community has been deflected
from the Sudan. They therefore expect the trilateral
mechanism to facilitate the difficult process of finding
a consensus on a path out of the crisis. Too much is at
stake, and too many hopes and aspirations are affected.
I urge the Sudanese to seize this opportunity. I remain
grateful for the support of the international community,
and particularly the members of the Council, for
our efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of the latest note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his briefing and for the continued work
that he and his team are doing in the most difficult
of circumstances. I would also like to welcome our
new Sudanese colleague and the participation of the
Sudanese delegation in today’s meeting.
I would like to make three points in response
to what we have just heard today. First, the United
Kingdom regrets the lack of progress in resolving the
political crisis created by the coup d’état of 25 October.
We deplore the fact that almost 100 protesters have been
killed since October and urge an immediate end to the
violence. We fully support the joint efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to facilitate a Sudanese-led process to resolve the
political crisis. For that to be successful, the Sudanese
military needs to make progress on confidence-building
measures, including the release of all political detainees,
an end to the excessive use of force against protesters
and the lifting of the state of emergency. We urge all
Sudanese stakeholders to engage in good faith with the
tripartite process and make the compromises needed to
realize the Sudanese people’s legitimate demands for
freedom, peace and justice.
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Secondly, I want to emphasize that this is not a
matter that concerns only the Sudan’s political elites.
Political progress will be vital to alleviating the
economic hardship and humanitarian suffering of the
Sudanese people. The restoration of a credible civilianled Government will create the conditions for muchneeded economic reforms and for international support,
including debt relief, to resume. But as the political crisis
drags on, the scale and intensity of the violence across
the Sudan, including in Darfur, has also increased.
We welcome the efforts made by the signatories to the
Juba Peace Agreement to stand up the joint securitykeeping force and, with the support of UNITAMS, to
operationalize the Permanent Ceasefire Committee in
Darfur. However, further steps are urgently needed to
fully implement the Juba Peace Agreement and address
the root causes of conflict if Darfur is to achieve
sustainable peace.
Thirdly, I would like to emphasize that UNITAMS
has the full support of the United Kingdom in its efforts
to implement all of its mandated tasks. We look forward
to working with Council members to renew the mandate
in the coming weeks. The mandate should reflect the
realities in the Sudan and enable UNITAMS to provide
the support that the Sudan requires. UNITAMS can
provide that support only in partnership with the
Sudan. We therefore call on the Sudanese authorities,
through a return to a civilian-led transition, to ensure
that the right structures and interlocutors are in place
for a productive and sustainable partnership.
In conclusion, the Council is committed to
supporting the Sudanese people in their journey to
democracy and ending conflict after decades of misrule
and violence. The United Kingdom will continue to
uphold its commitments and urges full support for the
joint United Nations-African Union-IGAD process as
the best way to deliver that.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and my own
country, Kenya (A3).
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his briefing and
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Sudan in today’s meeting.
As we meet today, the Sudan continues to
experience serious economic, security and political
challenges that have created a situation of uncertainty

S/PV.9041

regarding the future. The patience and resilience of
the Sudanese people continue to be tested. The hopes
and aspirations that accompanied the adoption of the
2019 Constitutional Declaration and the signing of the
Juba Peace Agreement are waning. However, the people
of the Sudan have a long history of tolerance of one
another and of commitment to seeking home-grown
solutions in difficult times. The A3 therefore remains
confident that they will find a quick solution to the
current political impasse in a manner that safeguards
its national security and that of the region. The focus
of our statement is on four issues — the situations on
the political, security and economic fronts, and the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
With regard to the political situation, the A3
welcomes the commencement of the second phase of
the intra-Sudanese dialogue with the facilitation of
the trilateral mechanism of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. We take note that significant ground
was covered during the first phase of consultations,
facilitated by UNITAMS. The A3 appeals to all
Sudanese actors, civilian and military, to take
advantage of that platform and move expeditiously
and unconditionally to dialogue and to agreeing on a
viable democratic transition. The Sudanese authorities
have a fundamental responsibility to create an
environment conducive to viable political dialogue.
We welcome the release of some political detainees as
a critical confidence-building measure in that regard.
We emphasize the imperative for the dialogue to be
inclusive and to give special consideration to the
participation of women and youth, who were the pillars
of the 2019 revolution, as well as other marginalized
groups and communities.
On the security front, the A3 remains deeply
concerned about the recurrent outbreaks of
intercommunal violence in Darfur and other parts of
the country. While we welcome the steps taken by the
Government of the Sudan to respond to the situation,
more efforts are needed to sustainably address the
root causes of the conflicts. In that regard, we urge the
Government and all the parties involved to expedite the
implementation of all activities and programmes under
the National Plan on the Protection of Civilians and
the Juba Peace Agreement. We urge the international
community to continue to extend much-needed
diplomatic, technical, financial and logistical support

22-359375/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in that regard. We welcome the progress made on the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee and the joint securitykeeping force, including the assembling and initial
training of the 2,000 members of armed movements
in Darfur.
The A3 is also deeply concerned about the rapid
deterioration of economic conditions and the worsening
humanitarian situation in the country. Indeed, the lack
of progress on the political track risks wiping out the
initial gains made through economic and structural
reforms. The already dire humanitarian situation in
the Sudan has been aggravated by the economic crisis,
the adverse effects of climate change, food insecurity,
the rise in the number of cases of coronavirus
disease — with only 7 per cent of a population
of 46 million fully vaccinated — intercommunal
violence, the prolonged displacement of populations
and a refugee crisis. The A3 joins the appeal by the
Secretary-General for exceptional modalities to support
vulnerable communities and protect human and social
capital through continued international assistance for
the Sudan.
We commend the efforts of the international
humanitarian donors continuing to provide vital
assistance. We urge the Sudanese authorities to
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access to all in
need, especially in the conflict-affected regions. During
this time of a global food crisis, and as we wait and
hope for the political track to bear fruit, the A3 urges
the international donor community and international
financial institutions to reconsider the temporary
suspension of aid to the Sudan and to continue their
support programmes and projects to sustain the lives
and livelihoods of the civilian population.
Last but not least, in view of the current circumstances,
the A3 believes that the UNITAMS mandate remains
valid and relevant. We therefore support the renewal
of the mandate, including its four main objectives.
What is critical is for the Council to build the Mission’s
capacity to effectively and efficiently implement its
mandate. We call on UNITAMS to continue working
closely with the Sudanese authorities to facilitate the
expeditious implementation of the identified plans and
programmes. We also reiterate that all programmes and
initiatives should be determined based on the needs and
priorities identified by the Sudan.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity
with the people of the Sudan and expresses its
6/18

24/05/2022

commitment to continuing to support their endeavour
to achieve sustainable peace, security and greater
economic development.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Perthes,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing on the latest developments in the Sudan
and for his tireless efforts. We reaffirm the importance
of the joint work of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development in facilitating the indirect intra-Sudanese
talks that started this month. We also welcome the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, Ambassador
Mohamed, to his first Council meeting. As we consider
the renewal of the UNITAMS mandate in early June, on
which we look forward to constructive consultations,
we would like to share three key observations.
First, regarding the political process, the United
Arab Emirates welcomes the concerted tripartite
efforts to engage with Sudanese political parties and
stakeholders. That approach demonstrates the potential
for the active engagement of regional actors in helping
Sudanese stakeholders to forge a common understanding
and build consensus on the main tracks of the Sudan’s
transitional process, which include transitional
constitutional arrangements, the selection of a Prime
Minister and Cabinet, Government programmes and an
electoral timeline.
We also view the recent release of several
political detainees as a step towards building trust and
confidence between the Sudanese parties and helping
to pave the way for the indirect talks between them.
We stress the importance of ensuring the meaningful
participation of women and young people throughout
the process in order to enable the transitional period
to make sustainable progress. The United Arab
Emirates also emphasizes that the process must remain
Sudanese-owned and -led so that it can truly fulfil the
aspirations of the Sudanese people.
Secondly, in light of the alarming economic
situation, we believe that debt-relief packages and
development assistance from international financial
institutions and other international donors remain
critical to preventing the Sudan’s economy from
collapsing. As the international community considers
how best to assist the Sudan through the political
process, we must ensure that the urgency of the current
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

economic situation is taken into account, especially
given its severe impact on the lives and livelihoods of
the Sudanese people.
The United Nations estimates that 39 per cent
of the Sudan’s population will be food-insecure by
September, while the existing humanitarian response
plan is currently only 10 per cent funded. In addition,
the continued suspension of international assistance
is making the dire economic situation in the Sudan
even worse, exacerbated as it already is by current
geopolitical tensions, climate change and the disruption
of the agricultural season.
Thirdly, we are aware of the important steps
taken by the Sudan to address its current security
challenges, including efforts to de-escalate tensions in
the Darfur region, where recent clashes have claimed
many lives. In that context, we are encouraged by the
Government’s efforts to move forward with transitional
security arrangements for Darfur under the Juba Peace
Agreement, including the gradual operationalization
of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee, which has a
critical role to play in investigating ceasefire violations.
In conclusion, we continue to underscore the
need to support the Sudan in its efforts to achieve
sustainable peace and security, including by addressing
the economic conditions that are disproportionately
affecting the most vulnerable. We therefore reiterate
our call on the international community, including
the Security Council, to support the aspirations of the
Sudanese people in a manner that respects the Sudan’s
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Perthes for his briefing.
We welcome the new Permanent Representative of
the Sudan as he takes up his new position, and his
participation in today’s meeting.
During the reporting period, all parties in the
Sudan, together with the United Nations, African
Union (AU) and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) trilateral mechanism, continued
the dialogue on the political transition. The parties in
the Sudan have shown their willingness to continue
with the political transition and complete all the tasks
before them during the transition period. At the same
time, there are clear divergences on specific issues.
The parties should keep the big picture in mind while
pursuing dialogue and consultations to address their

S/PV.9041

differences and consolidate consensus. Addressing
those differences is a process, and the international
community should show the necessary patience and
continue to uphold the principle of a Sudanese-owned
and -led process, fully considering the realities in the
Sudan and providing constructive help to the parties in
the country. And the international community should
avoid exerting too much pressure, picking sides and
exacerbating the existing differences.
The security situation in the Darfur region has
become even worse, with multiple intercommunal
conflicts, numerous casualties and the ongoing
displacement of civilians. In response, the Sudan’s
Sovereign Council has taken swift measures, stabilizing
the local situation and providing humanitarian
assistance. Thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese
Government, the Juba Peace Agreement continues to
be implemented in an effective manner. The Permanent
Ceasefire Committee is operating normally, and the
work of the joint security-keeping force has made
progress, thereby creating positive conditions for
improving the security situation in the Darfur region.
The Security Council’s sanctions have severely
hindered the security capacity-building of the Sudanese
Government. China hopes that Council resolution 2620
(2022) will be implemented in earnest and that clear
benchmarks on changing the sanctions regime will be
set before 31 August.
The economic situation in the Sudan continues
to worsen. The country is seeing serious inflation,
disruptions to its water and electricity supply and
shortages of other basic supplies. The deteriorating
economy and its impact on people’s livelihoods are
among the root causes of the many challenges facing
the Sudan. The implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement lacks financial support, and intercommunal
conflicts in the Darfur region are being triggered
by competition over resources, while the unstable
political situation is to a large extent due to the issue of
affected livelihoods.
While the Sudanese people are in their time
of greatest need, some countries and national
organizations have suspended international assistance,
which will obviously not help the Sudan to find a way
out of the current crisis. The country is also dealing
with a serious threat from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, with only 7 per cent of the
population fully vaccinated. China has always shown

22-359377/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

solidarity with the Sudan. We were the first country to
send a COVID-19 medical expert team to the Sudan,
as well as to provide it with vaccine assistance via
bilateral channels. We have already sent a total of 23
batches of COVID-19 vaccines and medical supplies
and will continue to provide assistance in that regard to
the best of our ability.
The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) and Special
Representative Perthes have focused on the political
transition and done extensive work in that regard. We
hope that the Special Representative will strengthen
communication and coordination with the AU and
IGAD as a next step in order to enable the tripartite
mechanism to reach its full potential. As the economy
in the Sudan continues to worsen, China hopes that
UNITAMS will fully implement its mandate to mobilize
international assistance to the Sudan. The Permanent
Mission of the Sudan, in a letter to the Council dated
18 April, provided a matrix of specific areas and items
where UNITAMS can provide assistance to the country.
Based on its mandate from the Council, UNITAMS
should adjust its priorities in its work, focused on the
reality on the ground, in order to better respond to the
Sudan’s needs.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too would like to thank
Special Representative Perthes for his briefing and
welcome the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to
this meeting.
Since we last discussed the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) in
the Council (see S/PV.9006), it seems that the situation
on the ground has continued to deteriorate, as the report
of the Secretary-General also indicates (S/2022/400).
Human rights violations and abuses are widespread,
with zero accountability for the perpetrators. The recent
report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
the Human Rights Council speaks very clearly of the
sharp reversal of human rights achievements following
the military coup. Albania is deeply concerned about
the fact that the accountability measures put in place by
the previous civilian Government have been reversed
and dismantled by the military authorities. At the same
time, there have been some positive developments.
First, we welcome the fact that the trilateral
mechanism of cooperation between the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has started its work. We
8/18

24/05/2022

applaud the efforts of the three organizations and
their respective Special Representatives and Envoys
to work together to consolidate the framework for an
inclusive intra-Sudanese dialogue. A genuine dialogue
between all stakeholders is needed to end the current
political deadlock.
Secondly, the creation of a women’s support
group facilitated by UNITAMS is an important step
towards bringing the voices of women, young people,
persons with disabilities and others to the table and
mainstreaming a gender perspective into all the items
under discussion.
Thirdly, while we welcome the fact that some
political detainees have been released, we urge the
military and security forces to release all political
detainees, cease arbitrary arrests, lift the state of
emergency and avoid any acts that may jeopardize
the dialogue.
We are very concerned that violence in Darfur has
intensified in recent months and is still on the rise,
leading to new waves of displacement, intercommunal
violence and humanitarian suffering. In order for the
Sudan to end the violence, to move forward and to
find lasting political solutions, accountability is key.
Independent investigations into all acts of violence
by all actors are essential — whether in Darfur, in
Khartoum or elsewhere.
Finally, as we see from the report, UNITAMS and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
are fulfilling their mandate as entrusted to them by
the Council.
Albania supports the work of UNITAMS, and we
look forward to the renewal of the mandate.
I wish to stress in conclusion that the dire economic
in the Sudan is not due to lack of international support
but to a lack of political will on the part of the Sudanese
authorities. We are convinced that the international
community stands ready to re-engage in the Sudan
if true political will to solve this crisis is visible. All
Sudanese stakeholders should continue to engage
constructively in the political process to restore a
constitutionally legitimate transition and to resume the
path to civilian leadership and democracy in the Sudan.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan, Volker Perthes, for
his comprehensive briefing and for his committed
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

work on the ground. I wish also to welcome the new
representative of the Sudan to this meeting.
My delegation will raise three points today.
First, we should underscore our concern about
the protection of civilians. We extend our heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims
in Kereneik, West Darfur. We deplore the attacks on
health-care facilities and the mass displacement that
those waves of violence have caused. We support the
investigation announced by the Sovereign Council and
call for additional measures to provide protection for
civilians in the Darfur region.
Secondly, I would like to commend the activities
of the trilateral mechanism – the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). We are convinced
that solutions to the Sudan’s political stalemate should
include support at the multilateral and regional levels.
Aided by the trilateral mechanism, the current broad,
inclusive consultations should rekindle the hopes of the
millions of Sudanese who took peacefully to the streets
in 2019.
Thirdly, I would like to reiterate the challenges
facing the women and peace and security agenda
in the Sudan. We commend the Security Council’s
Informal Expert Group on its efforts to place the
spotlight on those challenges. The legitimacy of both
the ongoing consultations and the Sudan’s transition to
democracy is firmly rooted in women’s leadership and
political participation.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker Perthes, for the
information he provided on the developing situation
in the Sudan. We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the new Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the United Nations, Mr. Al-Harith Idriss
Al-Harith Mohamed. We read carefully the most recent
quarterly report on the country (S/2022/400) and on
the work being done there by the Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
The situation in the Sudan remains challenging.
The country is in the throes of a political crisis. The
Sudanese street remains feverish. The situation has been
aggravated by the suspension of a significant portion of

S/PV.9041

donor assistance, which has resulted in humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges.
We fully support the efforts being made by the
Government of the Sudan against that background
to stabilize the situation and establish a constructive
national dialogue. It is vital that the authorities reaffirm
their commitment to the Juba Peace Agreement and
declare their intent to hold general elections in July
2023. We note that that work is already bearing fruit,
given the reduction in the number of demonstrations in
the capital. At the same time, we are seriously concerned
at the fact that the radicals retain influence in the
country and reject the idea of any kind of dialogue with
the Government, even through mediation. We expect
that the trilateral coordination mechanism, established
in March, consisting of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will contribute to resolving that problem
by helping with the intra-Sudanese dialogue.
We remain convinced that the people of the Sudan
can on their own resolve their issues through national
dialogue. We hope that that process will be inclusive in
nature and that all political forces of the country that
have the genuine support of the people of the Sudan
will participate.
We call on the special political mission and
Mr. Perthes personally to strictly abide by their
mandate and focus equally on all its components.
Particular attention should be paid to helping mobilize
international financial and donor assistance so as to
support the transitional institutions, the economy and
the social sphere, implement the Juba Peace Agreement
and tackle the issue of internally displaced persons
and refugees. Those tasks cannot be left for later. They
are exactly the goals that were set when the Mission
was created.
We also note that it is unacceptable to use assistance
in economic development and implementing the
provisions of the peace agreement for blackmail. That
is unfair and inhumane vis-à-vis the Sudanese people,
regardless of what part of the country they are in.
The recent intercommunal clashes in Darfur
are worrisome. At the same time, we note that the
Government of the Sudan is taking measures to react to
the situation in line with its capacities and resources. In
recent months, deputy governors have been appointed in
the states of West and South Kordofan. Some progress
has also been made in the formation of a joint security

22-359379/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

force in the region and the work of the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee.
We are convinced that under current circumstances
it is important to maintain a balanced stance regarding
the events in the country; that is especially true for the
United Nations. We note with regret that the reports
provided by the Secretariat remain politicized. The
particular features of Sudanese political culture and the
irreversible political changes that have taken place in
the country should be borne in mind.
In the very near future, the Security Council will
have to work on a draft resolution to extend the mandate
of UNITAMS. We categorically oppose the use of that
document to exert political pressure on the Sudanese
authorities and impose on them questionable schemes
and democratizing patterns developed in countries
located on other continents. The Sudan is a country
with a very rich political, multi-ethnic, cultural and
religious past and present, whose citizens can and, most
importantly, must find solutions to their own problems.
United Nations assistance must be based on respect for
the views of the host country, in a spirit of cooperation
and a genuine intent to help the people of the Sudan.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes for his detailed briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) concerning
the implementation of resolutions 2524 (2020) and 2579
(2021). I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan at today’s meeting.
The reporting period has not seen any forward
movement on issues related to the constitutional
order and the democratic transition process. In that
context, the formation of a trilateral cooperation
mechanism
comprising
the
Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
United Nations to support a Sudanese-led process is a
welcome initiative. The mechanism has brought about
some momentum in the intra-Sudanese talks in recent
weeks. We encourage the mechanism to continue its
efforts and to assist Sudanese stakeholders in finding
a way forward. In this regard, we note the steps
undertaken by the Sovereign Council, particularly the
release of political detainees.
We continue to underscore the importance of the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement. In this
regard, we note the positive developments, such as
10/18

24/05/2022

further advances in the establishment of governance
structures and operationalization of security
arrangements in Darfur, including the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee and the initiation of the Standby
Force. This momentum needs to be sustained in the
coming days. We encourage reconstitution of the
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission to facilitate integration of signatory armed
movements into a security arrangement.
The recent intercommunal violence in West Darfur
is a matter of concern and reflects the complex reality
on the ground. It is important to take measures to
de-escalate tensions and promote active engagement
between communities in order to build trust and
confidence. There is no room for negative rhetoric
or fault-finding. We acknowledge the efforts being
made by the Sudanese authorities to open channels of
dialogue between the conflicting parties in such places
as South Darfur.
On the economic front, we note with concern the
points made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2022/400). The report states that the temporary
suspension of a significant portion of international
donor assistance, together with the pause in engagement
by international financial institutions, severely affected
the inflows of overseas development assistance. We
believe that the international community needs to avoid
linking humanitarian and developmental assistance
with progress in the political process. As evident
from Secretary-General’s report, these measures
are exacerbating the humanitarian suffering. There
is also an urgent need to scale up assistance as well
and to ensure that humanitarian agencies receive the
funding they need to fully execute their plans without
politicizing the basic needs of people.
UNITAMS support for the Sudan will be critical
during the coming months, particularly in assisting
the political transition, implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement and supporting peacebuilding efforts.
After the renewal of its mandate by 3 June, we expect
UNITAMS to focus on implementing the core activities
of the four strategic objectives in close partnership with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
India has long-standing relations with the Sudan
and its people. Over the years, India has assisted the
Sudan through several projects under concessional
lines of credit, capacity-building and humanitarian
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

assistance. India wishes to see the Sudan emerge as a
prosperous, peaceful and stable country and, towards
that objective, will continue to support the Sudan and
its people in these challenging times.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes for his comprehensive
briefing, and for his and his team’s tireless efforts in
an increasingly challenging environment. I would
also like to welcome our new Sudanese colleague to
today’s meeting.
The Sudan is in a dire situation. The current
national crisis may be the worst the country has
faced since independence in 1956. While the political
deadlock continues, violence has caused immense
human suffering in Darfur, with tensions high in other
parts of the country as well. The killing and injury of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence and grave
violations against children have been documented,
and the economic crisis and poor harvests have led to
increased prices and constrained supplies, which has
had an alarming impact on food security.
Against this disturbing backdrop, Norway fully
supports the joint efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development aimed at
undoing the political crisis. Their role as facilitators is
crucial. However, the search for a sustainable agreement
should be Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned.
Historically marginalized groups must also
be brought into the process. This includes women
and youth — and let me underline the importance
of prioritizing their full, equal, and meaningful
participation. We appreciate in particular the
engagement of women’s rights groups, as mentioned
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Any agreement or Government resulting from
a non-inclusive process will lack credibility with the
Sudanese people and the international community.
Moreover, there will be no real progress until the
authorities have established an enabling environment.

S/PV.9041

ethnic dimensions, which reminds us of the situation
in 2003-2004. This should serve as a warning. The
Juba Peace Agreement is important, but only if it is
fully implemented. Swift and effective implementation
of the transitional security arrangements remains
critical. It is also important to address the root causes
of recurrent conflicts. But this requires political
will — and resources. Mobilizing resources, including
for the joint security-keeping force and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, is first
and foremost the responsibility of the authorities, with
UNITAMS mandated to provide support, including
through the Permanent Ceasefire Committee.
National authorities also bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, including
children, and for the prevention of conflict. Signatories
of the Juba Peace Agreement, as well as non-signatories,
must take urgent and concrete actions to de-escalate
and reduce risks of further conflicts, and take active
steps to refrain from further harming civilians.
Before concluding, let me again stress that an
inclusive political settlement is the surest path to
economic recovery and development, improvement
of the humanitarian situation and strengthening the
protection of civilians. A stable situation will enable
Norway and other partners, together with Sudanese
authorities, to do more than current precarious
circumstances allow. UNITAMS continues to play
a key role in supporting the Sudan in reaching this
goal. Allow me to be frank: in the current situation,
UNITAMS is indispensable. Norway therefore fully
supports the renewal of UNITAMS mandate.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Volker Perthes for his very comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to welcome the presence in the Chamber
today of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
I would like to highlight three points.

Violence in response to peaceful demonstrations
must stop, and all remaining political detainees released
without delay. Ending the state of emergency will also
send a positive political signal.

France reiterates its full support for the joint
facilitation of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
It is a viable way out of the current political impasse.
We encourage all Sudanese, civilians and military alike,
to take part in the dialogue in a spirit of compromise
and responsibility.

Norway is greatly concerned about negative
developments in Darfur. The subnational violence has

We call on the military authorities to continue their
efforts aimed at creating conditions conducive to ending

22-3593711/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the crisis. We take note of the commitments — which
must be fulfilled as soon as possible — to returning to
a civilian and democratic transition, with the prospect
of elections at the end of the process. I would like to
remind Council members that this is a commitment
made by the authorities that reflects the aspirations of
the Sudanese people.
We await the implementation of all the announced
measures. In particular, all remaining political prisoners
must be released and the state of emergency must be
lifted. It is also necessary to put an end to violence
against demonstrators, including sexual violence. We
also regret the failure to prosecute those responsible for
human rights violations.
Political instability continues to worsen the
security, economic and humanitarian situation in the
Sudan. Every effort must be made to ensure that the
political crisis does not fuel a worsening of the security
situation, particularly in Darfur. Some progress has
been made in training members of the armed groups
that signed the Juba agreements. This must continue.
We call on the authorities to ensure the protection of
civilians, in particular by accelerating the deployment
of the joint force and the reintegration of fighters.
We are concerned about the deteriorating economic
and humanitarian situation. France and the European
Union remain committed to the Sudanese people.
European cooperation has therefore been reoriented
towards civil society, with €12 million disbursed in
support in 2021. European humanitarian assistance
has also been maintained, in the amount of €40 million
for the first five months of 2022. I would also like to
point out that the Sudan also benefits from the regional
support to the Horn of Africa announced by the
European Union, totalling more than €633 million.

24/05/2022

of the Secretary-General Perthes for his briefing and
commend his work. I welcome the representative of
the Sudan.
Restoration of the constitutional order is vital to
addressing the deteriorating economic and humanitarian
situation in the Sudan, as well as the escalating violence
in Darfur. We acknowledge the joint efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan, led by Mr. Perthes, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to facilitate a genuinely Sudanese-led and -owned
political process. That process has to be implemented
with a sense of urgency, because prolonging the status
quo will have a negative impact on every aspect of life
in the Sudan. We call on all political stakeholders do
everything possible to ensure a return to constitutional
order as soon as possible. We also call for lifting the
state of emergency and releasing those who have been
arbitrarily detained, while of course we acknowledge
the release of prisoners that occurred recently.
The process must also involve women, since as
many of us in the Council have said, the revolution
was in large part the result of their work. Despite the
deteriorating situation, Sudanese women continue to
work for full participation in the political and civic
life of their country. We call for including a significant
number of diverse women in all the delegations that are
participating in the process. In that regard, we welcome
the initiative to form a group of Sudanese women
to participate on an equal footing in the dialogue
facilitated by the trilateral mechanism, with the main
objective of advancing an agenda focused on their
rights and priorities.

Finally, we call on the Sudanese authorities to
cooperate fully with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). The mandate established by the Security
Council as the status-of-mission agreement is an
obligation for the Sudanese authorities. The members
of the Security Council have a responsibility to support
the United Nations in the implementation of the tasks
entrusted to it. In that regard, we thank the United
Kingdom penholder for all its efforts regarding the
renewal of the UNITAMS mandate.

The situation in Darfur has deteriorated
significantly. The withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has
created a security vacuum. Intercommunal fighting
has unfortunately increased, resulting in displacement
and further exposing women and children to the
risk of sexual and gender-based violence. There are
mechanisms to address some of the most pressing
challenges both in terms of the protection of civilians
and reducing tensions, with the Permanent Ceasefire
Committee being a case in point. We urge the authorities
to continue working for the full implementation of the
National Plan on the Protection of Civilians.

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank Special Representative

However, for security gains to be sustainable, they
must go hand in hand with the implementation of other

12/18

22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

aspects of the Juba Peace Agreement. It is critical to
address the root causes of intercommunal violence,
such as land rights issues, create lasting solutions for
internally displaced persons and further the adoption
and establishment of transitional justice mechanisms.
We reiterate that accountability and other reconciliation
mechanisms will be the pillars of peace in Darfur.
I would like to conclude by urging the Sudanese
authorities to see to a conclusion the investigations still
pending of alleged human rights violations, particularly
in the context of the recent demonstrations against the
coup d’état, which, as Mr. Perthes said, were largely
peaceful. The erosion of the people’s confidence in
national judicial institutions must be prevented, and
there must be full cooperation with international
institutions. In that regard, we will be closely following
the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman at the International
Criminal Court, which began recently. We are
encouraged by the authorities’ announcement that they
will continue to cooperate with the Court.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome our new colleague
Ambassador Mohamed to our table this morning.
Clearly, the situation in the Sudan is deeply
worrying. As we have heard this morning, the country
is facing a political, economic, food and humanitarian
crisis, with half the population expected to need
assistance by September. On its current trajectory,
I also fear we may now be seeing the country sliding
back into authoritarian control. I echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call, and that of the Special Representative
today, for a return to the transitional path and to a
civilian-led, democratic Government, which should
be through an inclusive, Sudanese-owned political
dialogue. We commend the joint efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
facilitating political dialogue among all Sudanese
stakeholders so far. Mr. Perthes and his team have
worked tirelessly in difficult circumstances, and their
efforts have our full support.
I encourage all Sudanese stakeholders to play
their part, show good faith and create an environment
conducive to peace talks and inclusive dialogue. In
particular, I urge the military and security authorities
to immediately end the violence against civilian

S/PV.9041

protesters. The Sudanese authorities must ensure the
right to peaceful assembly, lift the state of emergency
and take concrete steps to hold the security forces
and associated armed groups to account. The release
of some political detainees last month was welcome
news, but I again call for the release of all remaining
political activists detained since the October coup. I
am encouraged by the involvement of women in the
political talks. However, as we heard, Sudanese women
legitimately fear a return to the oppression, exclusion
and injustice of the Omar Al-Bashir era. The right of
the women of the Sudan to play a decisive role in the
economy, politics and peacebuilding of their wider
society must be protected.
A dire economic picture has steadily worsened since
the coup in October. While the invasion of Ukraine has
had a significant impact on the prices of food and basic
goods in the Sudan, we call on the Sudanese authorities
to avoid actions that exacerbate those problems. As we
heard just now, 40 per cent of the Sudan’s population
is on track to be food-insecure by September. I want to
note that today is the fourth anniversary to the day of
the adoption here in this Chamber of resolution 2417
(2018), on conflict and hunger. We should live up to our
responsibilities in the Security Council with regard to
that resolution. As for the Sudan’s plight, UNITAMS
and the Sudan’s partners, including the European Union,
stand with the people of the Sudan and will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance. I want to emphasize
that it is vital, indeed fundamental that humanitarian
access not be impeded, so that humanitarian support
can get to those who need it most.
The political breakdown in Khartoum has also
resulted in increased violence in Darfur. Since the
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Security Council has
too often had to discuss violence, mass killings and
widespread displacement in Darfur. There has also been
a disturbing rise in sexual and gender-based violence in
Darfur that simply must end. We welcome the role that
the Permanent Ceasefire Committee has been playing
in Darfur, but we need to see the National Plan on the
Protection of Civilians and the Juba Peace Agreement
fully implemented without delay.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate our call for all
parties to live up to their commitments to the Sudanese
people, and to re-emphasize our support for UNITAMS
in continuing its work supporting the Sudan in
overcoming its challenges.

22-3593713/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would first like to thank Special Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
Perthes
for
his
comprehensive briefing. We commend his efforts
and those of his team supporting the people of the
Sudan and their aspirations to restore a civilian-led
transition to democracy. Let me also take a moment
to welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the Security Council. I warmly welcome
Ambassador Mohamed.
The United States fully supports the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan so that the Mission
can continue to serve its vital role in furthering peace,
security and stability. Today I would like to discuss
three key issues for the United States in the Sudan:
the transition to democracy, the release of political
prisoners and support to the Sudanese people.
First, the United States is closely following, and
fully supports, the collaborative efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to facilitate a Sudanese-led
process to transition to a fully civilian-led democracy.
We strongly encourage the Sudanese people — civilians
and military personnel alike — to use that process to
make rapid progress on the framework for a civilianled transitional Government. We are encouraged by the
outreach and progress that we have seen so far.
As that process gains momentum, as other speakers
have said, we must make sure that women, young
people and members of other marginalized groups
enjoy full, effective and meaningful participation and
inclusion throughout every stage of the process. That is
the hallmark of a true democracy, and including women
makes it more likely that the transition will be peaceful.
We are hopeful that the tripartite-facilitated
dialogue will succeed — and soon. The transfer of
power to a civilian-led Government will enable the
resumption of international financial support and
development assistance — support that is desperately
needed. To make sure that progress happens and that the
people of the Sudan are well served, we are prepared to
levy consequences on those who impede or otherwise
spoil the Sudan’s transition to democracy.
14/18

24/05/2022

Secondly, while we welcome the recent release of
some political prisoners, the United States reiterates
its call for an immediate end to unjust detentions
of civil society activists, politicians, journalists,
cultural figures and humanitarian workers. Lifting
the state of emergency and ending the use of violence
against protesters would send a strong signal to the
Sudanese people that the authorities are serious about
good governance.
Thirdly and finally, while progress is made towards
the election of a civilian-led Government, the United
States will continue to support the Sudanese people. The
continued violence throughout the Sudan demonstrates
the urgent need for the protection of civilians.
The Sudan needs security sector reform, robust
international monitoring and reporting mechanisms and
comprehensive, inclusive and transparent transitional
justice processes, including accountability. In the
meantime, the United States will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people and
support for civil society.
In conclusion, we stand with the Sudanese people in
their pursuit of a democratic, human-rights-respecting
and prosperous Sudan. We will continue to add our
voice to bolster theirs and take action to help them
create a peaceful, democratic Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2006/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to extend my warm congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council this month. We affirm our readiness
to work with you on issues related to the Sudan in the
Council. I would also like to express our appreciation to
the United Kingdom for its presidency of the Security
Council last month.
I would also like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), for his
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

briefing today. We have also taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General to the Council (S/2022/400).
For some months, the Sudanese situation has
been witnessing an ongoing movement that seeks to
make the political transition in the Sudan a success
and puts the country on its path towards democracy,
freedom, peace and justice in order to form a civilian
Government by means of a national consensus as a
result of a negotiating process under the tripartite
mechanism of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
in which several organizations and political actors have
begun to participate constructively. Lieutenant General
Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, Head of the transitional
Sovereign Council, assured me that he had informed
the representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNITAMS of the efforts to unify initiatives and reach a
meaningful national consensus in order to form a broadbased civilian Government. In that case, the military
component would hand over power to that Government;
the other option is to complete the transitional period
and avail the country of democratic elections, which
is the ultimate goal of the transitional period. We
appreciate the support of the United Nations to reach
a negotiated national consensus solution in the Sudan.
I would like to focus on the following three points
related to the overall situation in the Sudan, as well as
a fourth point related to the work of UNITAMS and the
Sudanese Government’s outlook regarding that work.
In addition, we would like to make comments regarding
the Secretary-General’s remarks contained in his report
before this meeting.
First, with regard to the security situation and
the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, we
note that the Sudanese Government is working in full
coordination with the partners of the peace process in
order to implement the terms of the Agreement. In that
regard, the first batch of forces from the movements
that signed the Juba Peace Agreement will graduate
within the next few days. It is a 2,000-strong force that
constitutes the first batch of the joint security force to
maintain security and protect civilians in Darfur, which
will have a strength of 12,000, divided equally between
Government forces and the forces of the factions that
signed the Peace Agreement.
The graduation of that first batch is an essential
step in implementing the security arrangements clause.
It comes in parallel with the armed factions’ response

S/PV.9041

to the decisions announced at the meeting of the Joint
Supreme Council for Security Arrangements, which
was held in El Fasher in March, especially those
related to collecting weapons in cities and state capitals
and assembling the movements’ forces in locations
outside cities.
I would like to clarify that, as part of implementing
the provisions of the Juba Peace Agreement, the
Government is facilitating the work of the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee, which is headed by UNITAMS,
while the Committee continues its work in the states
of Darfur. It is worth noting that the Government is
committed to maintaining the ceasefire and the laying
down of arms, even by non-signatories to the Juba Peace
Agreement, in order to build trust and ensure that such
parties join the overall peace process. The Government
has the strong political will to implement the provisions
of the Juba Peace Agreement, including with regard to
security arrangements, the demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programmes as well as the formation
and deployment of the joint civilian protection force in
order to strengthen security in Darfur.
We would like to stress that those tasks are hard and
challenging and that it is difficult for the Government
of the Sudan to undertake them alone in the required
manner. We therefore call on the international
community to share the burden by providing the
necessary financial and technical support in that
regard. We expect that UNITAMS will play a major
role to that end.
We are determined to continue working to improve
the security situation in Darfur by implementing
the Juba Peace Agreement, collecting unauthorized
weapons, achieving justice and accountability,
implementing the National Plan on the Protection of
Civilians with the participation of the signatories to the
Juba Peace Agreement and working to negotiate with
the Abdul Wahid faction on the peace process.
In Darfur, we are witnessing an important
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We
need the support of the international community for
the transitional Government to ensure that security and
stability sustainably prevail in the region.
Secondly, the tribal clashes that erupted in the
town of Kereneik, in the Western State of Darfur, are
regrettable. As I pay tribute to the victims, I also wish
a speedy recovery to the injured. I would like to point
out that the tribal clashes in Darfur can be understood

22-3593715/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

only by placing them in their correct context as an
integral part of the huge security burden that the
Government inherited from the previous regime, while
the Government is making every effort to find a lasting
solution to such challenges.
Furthermore, we note that, immediately after the
outbreak of the tribal clashes, the Sovereig Council,
as well as the National Council for Security and
Defence, held emergency meetings. That resulted in
measures being taken, including urgently sending
troops from the armed forces to the region in order to
restore security and peace, strengthen border controls
to prevent the flow of small arms and light weapons,
initiate comprehensive investigations and make those
responsible accountable, while also expediting the
provision of humanitarian aid to those affected by
tribal violence. Those actions seek the de-escalation
and non-recurrence of tribal clashes. To that end, a
member of the Sovereign Council accompanied, by a
high-level delegation, visited the city of El Geneina. In
the wake of that visit, effective decisions were made to
implement the measures just mentioned.
Thirdly, the Sudan also continues to implement
economic reforms that can have a great impact on large
swathes of the population, with a view to resolving
inherited economic issues. Those are important
reforms, and we hope to receive more development
aid and strengthen cooperation with bilateral partners
that want to see a successful transition in the Sudan.
That includes obtaining funding from international
financial institutions in order to mitigate the impact of
those reforms and alleviate the Sudan’s external debt
burden pursuant to the initiative for highly-indebted
poor countries.
The Sudan has also opened its doors to host refugees
from some of its neighbouring countries affected by
unprecedented circumstances, particularly Ethiopia
and South Sudan. My country has therefore become
the largest refugee hosting country on the African
continent. The Sudan continues to receive refugees from
neighbouring countries, based on its values and morals
and in order to fulfil its international obligations. We
urge the international community to further assume
its responsibilities with regard to the burden that the
Sudan has taken on as a result of the waves of refugees
and the growing pressure on local Governments and
host communities, which has exacerbated the economic
situation and the spread of the coronavirus disease.
16/18

24/05/2022

Fourthly, the Government is eager to engage
constructively with UNITAMS and has therefore once
again set up the national executive mechanism for that
purpose. That coordinating mechanism is headed by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and includes relevant
bodies and institutions. During the previous period,
the mechanism studied the Mission’s actions since its
inception, two years ago, and established an 11-point
matrix based on the terms of reference governing the
work of the transitional Government and the work of
the Mission, namely, the Constitutional Declaration, the
Juba Peace Agreement and the letter sent by the Sudan
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council in
February 2020 to establish the Mission. The matrix was
sent to the Council and the Secretariat. We believe that
there is a need to objectively reassess UNITAMS, as it
is an international mechanism for providing support and
advice to the Government and civilians in peacebuilding
during the transitional period. We must agree on a
systematic framework and a new conceptual context
and work together to prevent conflicts and promote the
stability of local communities by prioritizing actions
based on local realities in conflict situations and the
manner of resolving those conflicts.
The achievements and failures of the Mission
must also be assessed in a rational way, which was
agreed by Mr. Perthes yesterday and identified among
the main priorities for the peacebuilding operation
in the Sudan, which is facing massive challenges.
Maintaining sustainable peace in the Sudan should be
the most important objective of UNITAMS, in addition
to promoting democratic governance and mobilizing
financial and development support to enforce the
Juba Peace Agreement. In that regard, the process of
protecting civilians in Darfur is the most important
objective, which requires mobilizing economic and
development support, coordinating humanitarian aid
and activating the peacebuilding process.
Historically, the Sudan has cooperated with the
United Nations in several operations. That includes
productive development projects, relief operations
under the auspices of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Operation Lifeline, during the
third democracy in the 1980s, as well as support for
refugees owing to the Sudan’s location in Africa, which
attracts illegal migrants and refugees.
We believe that development support should not be
linked to political conditions, because that would harm
the integrated peacebuilding operation conducted by
22-35937

24/05/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

UNITAMS. Violence has numerous causes and exists
in all the communities of the world. The peacebuilding
process must implement its priorities in order to be
able to manage tribal skirmishes and societal violence.
The protection of civilians is a relative issue that is
subject to interests related to economic resources and
achieving economic and development prosperity, which
would reduce community disagreements, particularly
in conflict areas. It is for that reason that the United
Nations peacebuilding operation was established.
We must also consider cross-border factors that
threaten national security and public order in Darfur,
bearing in mind the prevailing circumstances in the
neighbourhood. We hope that the peacebuilding process
will include support to prevent the proliferation of small
arms and address the causes of gender-based violence.
We must also strengthen national efforts to bolster
the police, security and judicial systems in Darfur.
It is clear that it is a mistake to suspend democratic
governance because of a lack of a legal reason for its
continuation. We must mobilize exterior resources to
support the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee.
Without international support, the process for
security arrangements and protecting civilians would
flounder, as we do not have sufficient resources.
Other financing challenges also threaten our work,
particularly with regard to supporting children in
areas of armed conflict and the efforts of the National
Council for Child Welfare.
We hope to implement the National Plan on Civilian
Protection in Darfur, headed by the Minister of the
Interior, which was submitted to the Security Council.
Despite its meagre resources, the Ministry of Finance
allocated a budget for strengthening the protection of
civilians and the flows of refugees to the east of the
Sudan. It is sometimes said that the laws that truly
prevent us from acting are the same ones for which we
are criticized for our inaction. We hope that is not true
in our case.
The current political situation is scalable with the
efforts made by Mr. Perthes by coordinating national
initiatives with a view to forming a third transitional
civilian Government. That is possible with national
consensus and national perspective.
Peacebuilding also is affected by insufficient
financing at the community level, which negatively
impacts the situation of internally displaced persons.
Mechanisms for resolving local conflicts must be

S/PV.9041

promoted, and gaps related to the protection of civilians
must be addressed because they, in turn, result in the
financial inability to enforce the National Plan on
the Protection of Civilians. There are also security
challenges posed by cross-border armed groups.
The funding of these operations must therefore be
reviewed by the international community, while the
authorities are willing to cooperate with the United
Nations in order to bolster the protection of civilians.
Reducing the scope of peacebuilding activities
because of an unclear political environment is unwise,
in our view, because had it not been for the complex
peace situation, the Government of the Sudan would
not have requested the help of a United Nations mission.
Limiting peacebuilding activities because of the
political landscape will have negative consequences.
In that connection, we commend the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund for the $20 million allocated to
support the community needs of the eight affected
regions of Darfur.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s remarks in
his current report, particularly those in support of the
democratic transition by emphasizing the importance
of peace, dialogue and national spirit under the auspices
of the United Nations and the tripartite regional
mechanism to form a broad-based civilian Government
and complete lasting peace negotiations with the
factions in Darfur and South Kordofan. We support his
call for all national actors and stakeholders to overcome
obstacles and create an environment conducive to
moving forward. The Secretary-General stressed that
the region and the international communities are ready
to provide support.
The Secretary-General also commended the
initiative of human rights groups and the participation of
Sudanese women in the peace process. We value his call
for taking into consideration the humanitarian situation
in the Sudan, which is affected by the economic and
climate crisis, as well as the interruptions of the global
supply, which directly affects the inflation rate and
increases the poverty level, given that only 15 per cent
of humanitarian needs are being met. The SecretaryGeneral also mentions the importance of Member
States supporting Sudanese social and human capital,
including the promotion of private partnerships within
the international financial institutions.
The Secretary-General welcomed the national
efforts made to strengthen the joint force in maintaining

22-3593717/18

S/PV.9041

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

security in Darfur, and also welcomed the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee as a means of reducing tensions
in Darfur by abiding by the ceasefire, grouping
armed units pursuant to the Juba Peace Agreement
and implementing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. We are pleased that despite
the political crisis that the Secretary-General has
discussed, he has called on Member States to increase
donors’ support for priority programmes in the Sudan.

18/18

24/05/2022

In conclusion, we support the Secretary-General’s
points about investing locally in the peacebuilding
process in order to reduce conflict and secure the lives
of citizens and communities.
The President: There are no more names on the list
of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-35937
