United Nations

A/RES/59/150

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 95

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/493)]

59/150. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the
Political Declaration and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 1
as well as its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took note, inter
alia, of the road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/14 of 21 July
2003, in which the Council invited Governments, the United Nations system and
civil society to participate in a “bottom-up” approach to the review and appraisal of
the Madrid Plan of Action,
Recalling further Commission for Social Development resolution 42/1 of
13 February 2004, entitled “Modalities for the review and appraisal of the Madrid
International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002”, 2 in which the Commission decided
to undertake a review and appraisal of the Madrid Plan of Action every five years,
with each review and appraisal cycle to focus on one of the priority directions of the
Madrid Plan of Action,
Recommends that ongoing efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
1.
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 3 take into account the situation of older persons;
2.
Calls upon Governments and the agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system, within their mandates, and encourages the
non-governmental community, to ensure that the challenges of population ageing
and the concerns of older persons are adequately incorporated into their
programmes and projects;

_______________
1

Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 6 (E/2004/26), chap. I,
sect. E.
3
See resolution 55/2.

04-48526

A/RES/59/150

3.
Invites Member States and the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to take into account the needs and concerns of older persons in
decision-making at all levels;
Stresses the need for additional capacity-building at the national level in
4.
order to promote and facilitate the implementation of the Madrid International Plan
of Action on Ageing, 2002, 4 and in this connection, encourages Governments to
support the United Nations Trust Fund for Ageing to enable the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat to provide expanded assistance to
countries, upon their request;
Invites Governments, intergovernmental organizations and non5.
governmental organizations to encourage and support comprehensive, diversified
and specialized research on ageing in all countries;
Invites the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council
6.
to integrate the issues of population and individual ageing into their work in order to
promote the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action;
Recommends that the Commission on the Status of Women continue to
7.
consider the situation of older women, in particular those who are most vulnerable,
including those living in rural areas;
Encourages those regional commissions that have not yet done so to
8.
elaborate a regional strategy for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action;
9.
Takes note of Commission for Social Development resolution 42/1, 2 and
in this context requests the Secretary-General to present his proposals for
conducting the review and appraisal exercise at the regional and global levels to the
Commission at its forty-fourth session;
10. Requests the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to
continue to strengthen the capacity of the focal points on ageing and to provide
them with adequate resources for the further implementation of the Madrid Plan of
Action, in particular through appropriate mainstreaming action;
11. Stresses the importance of the collection of data and population statistics
disaggregated by age and sex on all aspects of policy formulation by all countries, and
encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations system to support national
efforts in capacity-building, especially those of developing countries and countries
with economies in transition, takes note in this context of the establishment by the
United Nations of an Internet-accessible database on ageing, and invites States to
submit, whenever possible, information for inclusion in the database;
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 5 and requests that it be
forwarded to the Commission for Social Development at its forty-third session in
order to assist the Commission in its deliberations;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004
_______________
4
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5
A/59/164.

2
