United Nations

S/PV.6360

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6360th meeting
Friday, 16 July 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ajumogobia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools: Prospects and challenges
in Africa
Letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/371)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-45412 (E)

*1045412*

S/PV.6360

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy
tools: Prospects and challenges in Africa
Letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/371)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Benin, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Egypt, the Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Kenya, Morocco, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa and the
United Republic of Tanzania in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took seats at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to welcome the participation of the Minister of
International Relations and Cooperation of South
Africa, who is not here with us yet but will be joining
us, Her Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special Representative and Director
for the World Development Report on Conflict,
Security and Development of the World Bank.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Cliffe to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Serrano to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The Security Council will now being its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2010/371, which
contains a letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility
for
the
maintenance
of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council recalls Articles 33 and 34 of the Charter
and reaffirms its commitment to the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means and the promotion of
necessary preventive action in response to
disputes or situations the continuation of which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.
“The Security Council recalls that the
prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of Member States. As such, actions
undertaken within the framework of conflict
prevention by United Nations entities must be
designed to support and complement, as
appropriate, the conflict prevention roles of
national Governments.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

“The Security Council notes that, consistent
with its functions in relation to international
peace and security, it seeks to remain engaged in
all stages of the conflict cycle and in exploring
ways of preventing the escalation of disputes into
armed conflict or a relapse into armed conflict
and the Council recalls that, in accordance with
Articles 99 and 35 of the Charter, the SecretaryGeneral or any Member State may bring to the
attention of the Council any matter which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.
“The Security Council recalls that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive
deployment, mediation, practical disarmament
measures and post-conflict peacebuilding are
interdependent and complementary components
of a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy.
The Council notes the importance of creating and
maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and re-integration.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and
reiterates its call to increase the equal
participation, representation and full involvement
of women in preventive diplomacy efforts and all
related decision-making processes with regard to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding in line with
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), and 1889 (2009).
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of a comprehensive strategy
comprising operational and structural measures
for prevention of armed conflict, and encourages
the development of measures to address the root
causes of conflicts in order to ensure sustainable
peace. The Council reaffirms the central role of
the United Nations in this regard.
“The Security Council recalls its previous
presidential statements concerning the various
factors and causes that play a role in inciting,
worsening or prolonging conflicts in Africa, and
in particular the factors and causes that have been
highlighted and addressed by the Council. The
Council also notes that, especially in the context
of Africa, implementation of effective security
sector reform programmes, strengthening of

10-45412

human rights and the rule of law, protection of
civilians, ensuring accountability, meaningful
progress in sustainable economic development
and poverty eradication, support for elections and
the building of democratic institutions and
effective control of small arms, inter alia, have
become
important
elements
of
conflict
prevention.
“The Security Council also recognizes the
increased material, human and financial resources
required by peacekeeping operations over the last
decade. Accordingly, the Council acknowledges
the potential benefits and efficiencies that could
be achieved through an integrated approach to
preventive diplomacy efforts similar to the
approach to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
methods, which underscores the interrelationship
between political, security, development, human
rights and rule of law activities.
“The Security Council encourages the
development of peaceful settlement of local
disputes through regional arrangements in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter and
reiterates its support for the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC), the
East African Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
as regards conflict prevention. The Council
acknowledges the need for closer and more
operational cooperation between the United
Nations
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations in Africa to build national and
regional capacities in relation to the preventive
diplomacy tools of mediation, information
gathering and analysis, early warning, prevention
and peacemaking, and in this context the Council
recognizes the important role regional United
Nations offices, such as UNOWA, can play and
stresses the valuable contribution of mediation
capacities such as the Council of Elders, the
Panel of the Wise and good offices of the
Secretary-General and his special envoys, and of
regional and subregional organizations, to
ensuring the coherence, synergy and collective
effectiveness of their efforts.

3

S/PV.6360

“The Security Council underlines the
importance of continually engaging the potential
and existing capacities and capabilities of the
United Nations Secretariat, regional and
subregional organizations as well as national
Governments in preventive diplomacy efforts
including mediation, and welcomes the
promotion of regional approaches to the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
“The Security Council further reiterates its
support for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (the Commission) and recognizes
the need for greater coordination with the
Commission. The Council further recognizes the
need for greater coherence with all relevant
United Nations entities in relation to the most
effective use of preventive diplomacy tools at
their disposal. The Council recognizes the
important role of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Offices in supporting national
efforts to prevent conflicts and in addressing
cross-border threats. The Council also recognizes
the value the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa continues to
add to the process of embedding preventive
diplomacy practices into the Organization’s
conflict management architecture. In this
connection, the Council recalls the role of the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in matters relating to the
prevention and resolution of conflict. The
Council emphasizes the need for the full
engagement of all relevant actors, including civil
society, to sustain the momentum and perspective
for
a meaningful
preventive diplomacy
framework.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of enhancing efforts, including
coordination among relevant bilateral and
multilateral donors, to ensure predictable,
coherent and timely financial support to optimize
the use of preventive diplomacy tools, including
mediation, throughout the conflict cycle.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit, within 12 months of
the adoption of this statement, a report making
recommendations on how best to optimize the use
of preventive diplomacy tools within the United

4

Nations system and in cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and other actors.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2010/14.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Nigeria.
Let me begin by saying how pleased and
honoured I am to be presiding over this very important
debate on the item on this morning’s agenda,
“Maintenance of international peace and security:
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa”. I believe that this
is an auspicious time to revisit the concept and practice
of preventive diplomacy.
I also wish to especially acknowledge and to
express my Government’s appreciation to Council
members and to all participants for the cooperation and
support given to Nigeria during our presidency of the
Council. Let me also especially extend a welcome to
the Deputy Secretary-General and to Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
Special Representative and Director for the World
Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development of the World Bank.
The theme of today’s debate aims to capitalize on
the extensive work under way throughout the United
Nations to promote and preserve peace in an everchanging world. It attests to my country’s
acknowledgement of the multifaceted challenges
presented by the growth in scope, complexity and cost
of current peacekeeping operations and the need to
maintain the momentum gained over the past few
decades in the field of conflict management through
the use of preventive diplomacy. We are encouraged by
the support we have received for this initiative from
fellow Council members and others.
We live in a world in which violent conflict is an
all too common feature in the daily lives of too many
Africans. Fragile constitutional frameworks, limited
natural resources and economic disparities can together
render a State vulnerable to conflict.
The costs of such an outcome are high in terms of
both human suffering and economic loss. Moreover,
the socio-economic advances achieved through
development efforts are also often lost. Add to this the
price of warfare and peacekeeping operations, and the
resulting figures are staggering.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

In unanimously adopting resolution 1625 (2005),
the Council expressed the need to adopt a conflict
prevention strategy that addresses the root causes of
armed conflict. Aspects of preventive diplomacy have
since found their way into several peacebuilding
programmes. An example of this is the Department of
Political Affairs mediation assistance amid Kenya’s
post-electoral unrest in 2008. Furthermore, the United
Nations has undertaken or supported regionally led
political interventions to quell constitutional crises in
Madagascar, Niger and Guinea within the past year
alone. Indeed, Nigeria itself benefited from the
preventive diplomacy efforts of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, when he mediated between my country and
Cameroon after the ruling of the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on the Bakassi peninsula dispute.
However, the humanitarian crises that persist in
such places as the Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo illustrate what the Secretary-General, in
his 2008 report on conflict prevention (S/2008/18),
characterized as a gap between rhetoric and reality.
While these developments are noteworthy, it is
time to take stock. As at April 2010, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations estimated that its annual
resources should rise from $7.87 billion to $8.4 billion.
This uplift places additional strain on contributing
nations in these already challenging times. It is our
considered view that the potential savings for humanity
make a compelling case for optimizing the use of
preventive diplomacy tools.
The elements of the preventive diplomacy tool kit
do not function in isolation, and the means of their
application is obviously highly context-specific. The
strategies are by their nature anticipatory, relying upon
early warning to be effective. Efforts must therefore be
made to establish trust with key local, national and
regional actors, well before a crisis reaches the tipping
point.
While there may be obstacles to cooperation,
such as sovereignty sensitivities, these are not
insurmountable. As was recognized in presidential
statement S/PRST/2009/3, it is crucial that the
expertise of such bodies as the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Southern African Development Community

10-45412

(SADC) be harnessed and supported by the United
Nations.
The Department of Political Affairs is well placed
to steer this initiative. Yet, it would benefit from
having its capacities strengthened through the
Council’s commitment to Chapter VI of the Charter
and preventive diplomacy strategies. The Security
Council has the potential to be a fulcrum in the process
of generating political will, securing pre-positioned
funding, building capacities on the ground and
promoting the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools. Accordingly, Nigeria believes that the
time has now come for the United Nations to use its
resources to act an ex ante as well as an ex post facto
agent for peace. In unanimously passing resolution
1625 (2005), this body committed itself to a preventive
approach to conflict management, as a complement to
the peacekeeping activities more frequently in use
today. We are now honour-bound to make the
statements therein real, by putting the full weight of
the Council behind the preventive diplomacy initiative
contained in today’s presidential statement.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Let me again acknowledge and welcome the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migoro, and invite her to
take the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Preventive
diplomacy is an old art, but it faces new and evolving
challenges. There is a pressing need to re-evaluate how
we can use our limited resources and capabilities to
maximize the impact of preventive action. I therefore
thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative in convening this debate. I would like
to welcome in particular His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Nigeria. I thank you, Mr. Minister, for
taking time out of your business schedule to be with us
this morning for this important debate.
I am pleased to speak to the Council today on
behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The term “preventive diplomacy” was first coined
by former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld. Since
his time, the good offices of successive SecretariesGeneral have helped in the peaceful resolution of
inter-State wars, civil conflicts, electoral disputes,

5

S/PV.6360

border disputes, questions of autonomy
independence and a range of other problems.

and

In today’s fluid geopolitical landscape, we have
new challenges to address. Preventive diplomacy must
evolve to deal with increasingly complex civil wars,
organized crime and drug trafficking and other
transnational threats.
In recent years, we have witnessed the very
welcome emergence of stronger policy frameworks in
favour of conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
with a growing capacity for operational response.
Preventive diplomacy today is being conducted by a
broader array of actors than ever before, using a wide
range of tools. This makes it possible to consider
multifaceted preventive strategies of a kind that were
previously not an option.
Over the past three years, we have sought to
strengthen the Department of Political Affairs so that it
would be capable of effectively carrying out its lead
role in this area. In the past year alone, the United
Nations has supported, often in partnership with others,
more than 20 peace processes, and responded to many
more disputes that did not reach that level.
We have improved our response capacity at
Headquarters; we have regional diplomacy and
peacemaking offices on the ground; we cooperate more
effectively within the United Nations system and with
regional and subregional organizations.
With the support of Member States, we are
continuing to professionalize our mediation support
capacity, which is seen as an increasingly valuable
resource within the United Nations system and by our
partners. We have also attempted to develop new tools,
including the use of investigative mandates to help
defuse tensions in judicial cases with political
implications.
We are helping national authorities to build their
capacity for dispute resolution, in addition to
development programmes that can help address some
of the structural causes of conflict. Most missions
mandated by the Security Council today include an
important mediatory role, typically carried out by the
head of mission, in recognition of the fact that the need
for diplomacy persists throughout the conflict cycle.
All of this holds promise for our preventive
diplomacy in Africa. We see a need to focus, in
particular, on four fronts.

6

First, we must continue to strengthen our
partnerships. Successful peace processes require the
contributions of a range of actors, at both the regional
and the international levels. Our Dakar-based Office
for West Africa has forged innovative working
relations with the African Union and ECOWAS to
address political crises throughout the subregion, a
model that could be usefully replicated elsewhere.
Other noteworthy developments include the increasing
use of international contact groups and elders
structures. Recent engagements in Guinea, Niger, the
Comoros and Kenya have shown what we can achieve
through partnerships that yield a combination of
influence, impartiality, capacity and capability.
Secondly, we must be prepared to persuade.
Effective preventive action depends critically on the
will of the parties to the conflict. The better we
understand motives, calculations and incentives to use
violence, the better we can target our response. We
must be willing to use all available leverage to
persuade the key actors that it is in their own interest to
accept diplomatic assistance to avert conflict.
Neighbouring countries and subregional organizations
that are closest to events on the ground and may have
unique influence can be key allies here.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to invest in prevention. The global economic
crisis has put new pressures on resources, and there is
an overall trend towards doing more with less.
Diplomatic
approaches
and
responses,
when
successful, are highly cost-effective.
Fourthly, we must do more to support and
encourage the role of women in prevention. Time and
again, women in Africa and elsewhere have
demonstrated a strong commitment to working to
achieve sustainable peace. Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) reaffirmed the important role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. Yet women are still underrepresented in
the formal stages of conflict prevention. We can and
must do better.
According to recent studies, 15 years’ worth of
development aid to Africa has been effectively
cancelled out by the cost of war on the continent. The
case for preventive diplomacy is compelling on moral,
political and financial grounds.
We have improved our ability to detect warning
signs of impending crises, and we have at our disposal

10-45412

S/PV.6360

a growing range of tools and instruments to address
them. We must now set our sights on building our
capacity for international preventive diplomacy, so that
when called upon we can respond reliably and
promptly.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Migiro, for her statement.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special Representative
and Director for the World Development Report on
Conflict, Security and Development of the World
Bank. I now give the floor to Ms. Cliffe.
Ms. Cliffe: I am delighted and honoured to be
here. I thank the Nigerian presidency for having asked
us to participate in this meeting.
As many members of the Council will know, the
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development has been developed in very close
cooperation with the United Nations. We have had the
benefit of expert input papers from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme and other funds and
programmes, and the benefits of an exchange just last
month with the General Assembly on some of the
preliminary conclusions of the Report.
I am particularly delighted that the subject of this
debate is prevention, since this is likely to be one of
the key messages of the World Development Report
(WDR). Prevention is one of our central messages for
two particular reasons.
First, countries that we consider to be postconflict are experiencing more renewed insecurity that
before, so the dividing line that we perhaps have
between the idea of post-conflict and the idea of
prevention situations is much less clear than we
previously thought. That ranges from renewed civil
war — by this decade over 90 per cent of new civil
wars have occurred in countries that had already had
civil wars — through fighting after political
agreements. Up until the late 1990s, for example, peace
settlements roughly did the job that we expect them to
do, in that they prevented fighting after the settlement.
Less than five per cent of global battle deaths in that
period occurred in countries with peace settlements in
place.

10-45412

From the late 1990s onward, that picture changes
quite a lot. Now, one third of battle deaths globally are
taking place in countries that have political settlements
or peace settlements in place, including some of the
countries that the Honourable Minister referred to,
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan.
Then there are high levels of crime and violence
occurring after post-conflict settlements. For example,
there is the situation in the Central American countries,
where Guatemala or El Salvador achieved very
successful peace settlements but now face rates of
crime and violence that are causing more deaths than
occurred during their civil wars. That issue has been of
particular concern in Latin America. Of course this
debate focuses on Africa, but I think we see some of
the same trends starting to occur in other regions.
For all these reasons, prevention — even in
situations where a successful post-conflict initial
settlement has been achieved — is a very key
challenge.
New research that we have conducted for the
WDR indicates that the common element in those risks
of recurring violence is weak national institutions,
whether they be in the political, security or
developmental areas.
Secondly, there is the challenge of preventing an
escalation of violence in countries that have not
previously had large-scale civil conflict. Here, the
international donor community at present provides
much less assistance to countries seeking to prevent
violence than we do collectively to countries that have
already had civil war.
If we look at West Africa, for example, we have
committed large amounts of funds — again,
collectively as donors — to Liberia, Sierra Leone or
Côte d’Ivoire. But when we come to the transition
arrangements that the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations have helped to facilitate in Guinea or Niger,
we find that far fewer funds are available to help those
Governments and those societies try to consolidate
attempts to prevent escalation of conflict.
We term those transitions “preventative
transitions”. In one of our recent consultation
meetings, President Johnson-Sirleaf — who is on the
Advisory Council for the World Development report —

7

S/PV.6360

underlined that, as she put it, “You guys give
everything to us after we have had a civil war, but
nothing to us when we are trying to prevent a civil
war.” So that contrast will be one of the issues that we
underline.
I thought I would conclude by raising some
practical points or questions that are very much still in
our minds as we go into the last third of this process
that we have been conducting.
The first is the question raised as to whether we
should provide more support for mediation. Certainly —
as both the Deputy Secretary-General and the Minister
raised — the cost of a civil war that actually breaks out
is, as we know, enormous; it runs into the tens of
billions of dollars, on average. Countries take, on
average, 14 years to recover from civil wars to
anything like their earlier stage. Mediation efforts tend
to cost in the hundreds of thousands of dollars — a
much, much lower cost.
The second question is whether we should look at
longer periods of facilitation after peace agreements.
That was raised to us in our consultations. It is not
within the area that the World Bank supports, but it
was raised as a general point about the international
architecture, that mediators tend to leave immediately
after peace agreements are signed. In fact, countries
face predictable risks for longer periods after that,
often with very much less international facilitation. I
think in that sense the peacebuilding architecture and
the efforts made under the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund are also important.
The third question is whether we should look at
more financial support for Governments working
towards peaceful, preventative transitions. That is
exactly the question of countries that are currently in
the situation of Guinea or Niger, for example.
Fourth, is there an opportunity for a new
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and other regional organizations and the more
developmental or economic institutions such as the
international financial institutions? I think the question
to ask ourselves here is whether there is more that we
could do to try to provide the kind of economic
development activities that can help stabilize countries
entering a fragile, preventative transition.
I think there are also questions about whether
there is potential to link up the more specialized,

8

technical areas of the economic area agencies over
issues such as natural resources management or
wealth-sharing, which can be important issues in this
kind of situation.
Lastly, I would like to underline — as the
Minister and the Deputy Secretary-General also said —
that prevention is not an issue only for individual
nation-States. We have done quite a lot of new research
on the way in which violence is clustering along
insecure border areas and how violent movements are
mobile in areas like Central Africa or the Sahel. It is
very difficult for any single nation-State to take the
actions, even with international support, that would be
successful in truly resolving this sort of problem in the
long term. Another question that we have here, as we
finalize our own process, is whether we should be
looking at more structural prevention at a
multi-country or regional level, which includes
supporting initiatives such as the African Union’s
border programme to bring stability and development
instruments into those most fragile areas.
I will conclude here, and I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to contribute to this
debate.
The President: I thank Ms. Cliffe for her
comprehensive briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council Members, I should like to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is an honour for me to
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
today. Your presence testifies to Nigeria’s commitment
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro for her presence and her important remarks.
And I am grateful to Sarah Cliffe for her very
interesting presentation. I particularly appreciated the
points that she has just made on the links between
peace consolidation and development and how best to
support efforts in that area.
The Security Council has on many occasions
recognized the importance of the prevention of

10-45412

S/PV.6360

conflicts, particularly in Africa. The focus of today’s
debate on optimizing preventive tools allows us to
consider concrete and potentially innovative means to
strengthen preventive diplomacy.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, whereas the primary responsibility
for preventing conflicts lies with Member States.
Effectively articulating the dimensions of conflict
prevention requires strategies that neither pre-empt the
primary duty of Member States to prevent conflicts nor
delay action by the Council. In order to achieve such a
balance, constant dialogue between the Council and
key stakeholders in potential conflicts is of utmost
importance.
In this context, and as is widely recognized, the
role of regional and subregional organizations in
preventing conflicts cannot be overemphasized,
particularly in Africa. By way of example, I wish to
refer to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and its early warning system, which
relies on a network of actors, including civil society
organizations, to collect and analyse data on potential
conflicts and provide early warnings. Another major
tool, the Council of Elders, is engaged in important
preventive diplomacy efforts. In addition, a Conflict
Prevention Framework has guided ECOWAS actions to
both avoid disputes turning into conflict and address
the causes of conflict.
These institutional achievements are being
translated in results on the ground. As has already been
mentioned, that was the case in Niger, where ECOWAS
was instrumental in preventing a serious political crisis
in 2009 from degenerating into violence. That was also
the case in Guinea and other countries. I should also
like to mention the efforts of the three organizations,
with the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, which play a very important role in GuineaBissau. Conflict-prevention activities and early
warning mechanisms have also been important aspects
of the work under way within the Southern African
Development
Community,
the
East
African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and Economic Commission for Africa.
At the regional level, the African Union has made
conflict prevention a cornerstone of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. Its Panel of the Wise is
engaged not only in preventive diplomacy, including

10-45412

through fact-finding missions in areas of potential
conflict, but also in examining some of the root causes
of conflict, such as electoral crises and impunity.
Considerable
progress
has
been
made
in
operationalizing the Continental Early Warning
System.
These success stories show that enhancing United
Nations support to the preventive capacity of African
regional and subregional organizations is fully
warranted. The Mediation Support Unit has made an
important contribution to the work of the African
Union Panel of the Wise. More should be done.
Improved communication between the regional
and subregional bodies and the Security Council is also
needed. In this regard, we were pleased by the recent
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
Another significant aspect to pursue in conflict
prevention strategies and tools is the careful
consideration of the usually manifold root causes of
conflicts. Efforts to manage disputes and avoid their
degeneration into conflict are necessary. However, they
are insufficient if they do not effectively address the
deep motives of the parties.
Coordination and coherence are also key
elements of successful strategies for conflict
prevention. In this context, it is fitting to mention the
call made in the 2005 Outcome Document (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) for the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council to coordinate their activities, under their
respective Charter mandates, so as to adopt an
integrated approach to prevent conflicts.
The whole United Nations system should act
together to effectively address the root causes of
conflicts. In Africa, that means, for example,
redoubling efforts to fully implement the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and supporting
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and the prevalence of the rule of law. It also means
supporting African Union efforts to address the issue of
unconstitutional changes of Government in the
continent.
Enhanced prevention activities by the Security
Council require a strong capacity in the Secretariat to
identify, assess and provide early warning on disputes.
The Secretary-General should make full use of Article 99

9

S/PV.6360

of the Charter and of resolution 1625 (2005). Further
recourse to fact-finding missions and confidencebuilding measures in the early stages of a dispute may
also foster its peaceful settlement. At the same time,
prudence and foresight are necessary to avoid
involving the Security Council before its consideration
of the issue is truly necessary and helpful.
Preventing the relapse of conflicts is also key.
Peacebuilding,
including
its
socio-economic
component, and accountability are especially relevant
to consolidate stability in post-conflict situations. The
Peacebuilding Commission, an important institutional
step in that direction, should be further strengthened.
Truth and reconciliation commissions and transitional
justice mechanisms also play an important role. In
addition, the International Criminal Court has an
important deterrent effect.
In conclusion, I wish to stress Brazil’s continued
commitment to the efforts of the Security Council to
prevent the occurrence and recurrence of conflicts. As
always, the Council can count on the support of my
delegation.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I should like to
welcome you, Mr. President, and to thank you for
having organized and for presiding over this important
debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro and Special Representative Sarah
Cliffe for their statements.
There is unanimity on the fact that it is better and
cheaper to prevent and resolve conflicts. It is much
more difficult and costly to keep the peace and deal
with the consequences of the outbreak of conflict,
especially when they degenerate into war or mass
atrocities. My delegation is therefore convinced that
optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools,
including early warning, mediation and peacemaking,
has immense benefits. Without durable peace and
stability, sustainable development cannot be attained.
Conflict prevention is thus a key component of
peacebuilding.
The need to focus on more effective utilization of
preventative diplomacy tools to avoid lapse or relapse
into conflict is more urgent than ever before. The
African Union (AU) and its subregional organizations
have put in place mechanisms and structures for
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution. These
mechanisms have made some timely and useful
interventions, and a lot more can be achieved.

10

Operationalizing the AU Continental Early Warning
System and its linkage with the subregional systems of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Southern African Development
Community, the East African Community, the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa and the
Economic Community of Central African States will
provide comprehensive monitoring and analysis. That
will facilitate decision-making on the most appropriate
preventive or response actions at either the continental
or subregional level.
Given the ongoing strengthening of the strategic
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
the prospects for optimum use of preventive tools and
capacities are greater. The African Union has shown its
commitment to promoting and upholding constitutional
order, democracy, good governance and rule of law for
sustainable peace and development. It is enhancing its
mediation
and
peacemaking
efforts
through
mechanisms such as the panels of the wise and eminent
persons. Former Presidents Mkapa, Buyoya, Obasanjo,
Chissano and Mbeki, to mention a few, have played
important roles in efforts to resolve conflicts in a
number of countries.
The increasing cooperation among AU and
United Nations mediators, as well as special envoys, is
a welcome trend. It is important to emphasize that the
primary responsibility for preventing conflict rests with
national authorities and national actors. Consequently,
initiatives by regional or international partners should
be aimed at supporting national efforts in a wellcoordinated manner.
In our view, there are three key challenges that
must be addressed to ensure the optimal use of conflict
prevention tools.
First, timely and robust preventive responses and
actions are needed. In a number of cases, warning
signals of impending violent conflict are given in good
time, but often they are not matched with prompt
action. That may be due to a number of factors,
including political sensitivities, vested interests or lack
of adequate capacity at national, subregional or
regional levels.
Secondly, in spite of universal concurrence that
conflict prevention is far less costly, there is a
paradoxical reluctance to provide adequate and
predictable resources for it. There is instead greater

10-45412

S/PV.6360

willingness to allocate more resources for
peacekeeping. It is time we invested more in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
Thirdly, there is a need to focus more on
addressing the root causes and drivers of conflict to
ensure durable peace, stability and development. The
key causes and drivers of conflict include proliferation
of small arms, bad governance, human rights
violations, marginalization, high unemployment levels,
resource scarcity and, in some cases, poor management
of abundant resources.
This debate provides yet another opportunity to
focus on optimizing conflict prevention tools,
particularly in Africa. The prospects are bright and
challenges are surmountable. Let us sustain this
momentum by actively prioritizing, supporting and
investing in conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, and Nigeria for taking the initiative of
organizing today’s open debate. I am grateful to
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and Ms. Sarah Cliffe
for their respective briefings. I particularly welcome
the priority the World Bank attaches to the issue of the
nexus between security and development and,
particularly, the very inclusive dialogue that the World
Bank is conducting with stakeholders in the United
Nations in preparation for the World Development
Report.
In many parts of Africa conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
prevent relapse into conflict is not a linear progression
but rather a circuitous and often overlapping process.
Even after a ceasefire agreement is reached, it has
proven to be a challenge to escape the vicious cycle
created by poverty and recurring conflict.
In order to meet the challenge, it is essential to
implement an integrated approach encompassing
security and development. We must also strengthen our
efforts to build nations based on a comprehensive
development agenda that includes poverty reduction
and creation of employment opportunities, especially
for the youth. The United Nations must engage actively
in both preventive diplomacy and development
assistance, particularly in Africa, as we are discussing.
The primary responsibility rests with Africans
themselves for preventing conflict and maintaining
peace and security in Africa. Many African countries

10-45412

have recently celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of
their independence. We have full confidence that
African national leaders will continue their stride to
promote democratic elections, security sector reform,
good governance and the rule of law.
In parallel with national efforts, the African
Union (AU) and subregional organizations have in
recent years been increasingly proactive in conflict
prevention and crisis management. Their active
engagement in preventive diplomacy deserves high
praise. For example, the AU and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have
taken a clear stance by issuing a statement that they do
not tolerate unconstitutional changes of Government
and that they expect a Government to accept
international norms and standards for good governance
and the rule of law. It was an important qualitative
change in the preventive diplomacy efforts of the AU
when its operating principle progressed from
non-interference to non-indifference. That principled
approach has produced positive results in many African
countries.
Japan also welcomes the steady progress in
developing the AU peace and security architecture,
including the early warning system. Worthy of note in
this connection is the African Peer Review Mechanism,
the system that was created with a view to enhancing
good governance.
What is the role of the United Nations
international community? It is to encourage and
support those African-led good offices activities
through the United Nations, the World Bank and others
institutions. The international community should
strengthen, in particular, support for the capacitybuilding efforts of the AU and subregional
organizations.
The Secretary-General’s good offices and
preventive diplomacy have frequently proved effective
because they can be launched swiftly and flexibly at
his initiative and within his authority under the Charter.
To ensure that they have maximum effect, the United
Nations should expand a reserve of experienced United
Nations envoys and mediators who will act on behalf
of the Secretary-General, who cannot be everywhere at
once. The strength and advantage of the United Nations
is its extended presence on the ground, through
peacekeeping operations, integrated peacebuilding
offices and regional political offices. The Secretary-

11

S/PV.6360

General and his representatives may make full use of
those field offices for detecting any warning signs at an
early stage and taking political initiatives to prevent
escalation of tensions, crisis and conflict. For instance,
the consolidated United Nations office to the African
Union in Addis Ababa was established this month. We
hope that this new setup will help to strengthen the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union.
In West Africa, where the countries in the region
share the challenges posed by cross-cutting security
issues such as drug trafficking and small arms, the
United Nations Office for West Africa is playing an
important role in facilitating collaboration among all
relevant players and preventing and mediating conflicts
in cooperation with ECOWAS. We believe that in the
Central African region, a similar regional office will
prove as useful in promoting regional security and
preventing conflict, in the light of recent developments
in the subregion. We should be mindful of resource
implications, but we believe also that the costs can be
largely offset by savings in peacekeeping operations in
the region. The proposal by the Secretary-General has
been pending since the beginning of the year. The
Security Council should make its formal approval
without further delay.
Another advantage is that the United Nations has
the legitimate authority and capacity to mobilize all
stakeholders in a timely manner. This impartial
convening power should be useful not only in
emergency and crisis but also in building confidence
among concerned parties to defuse tensions. With such
efforts, even if a conflict breaks out, the parties will be
able to accept and engage in a continuation of
dialogue, which might under normal circumstances be
interpreted — or misinterpreted — as interference.
Long-term engagement and perseverance are essential,
because conflict resolution requires carefully nurturing
trust and building confidence among key players.
What is the specific role of the Security Council?
It is to provide effective support. The Council should
encourage and support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, the AU and subregional organizations, and,
when appropriate, the Security Council should adopt a
decision or issue a statement in support of the
Secretary-General’s efforts and urge the parties
concerned to settle their dispute peacefully. When the
Council expresses its position on a crisis in a timely

12

manner, it puts pressure on the parties concerned and
influences the international community.
The key question for the Council is how early it
should engage in supporting the preventive diplomacy
of the Secretary-General. In the light of the importance
of drawing the attention of the Council to early
warning signs, I suggest that we might request the
Secretary-General to provide Council members with a
regular political and security briefing, focusing on
potential risks of conflict erupting or recurring. It
might also be useful to organize an informal interactive
meeting with concerned countries before a conflict
breaks out.
Among other tools available, the Council tries to
prevent the recurrence of conflicts when it deploys
peacekeeping and political missions. But sanctions on
those who hamper efforts at preventing conflict can
also be an effective tool for conflict prevention and
resolution. A mechanism to prevent illicit use of
national resources, such as the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme for instance, would also be
helpful.
To conclude, I would like to congratulate Nigeria
on the adoption of today’s presidential statement. In
future, the Security Council should focus as much on
preventive and anticipatory measures as it does on its
reactive measures.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
thankful to you, Mr. Minister, and to your delegation
for taking the initiative of holding a thematic debate on
a subject that is of great importance on the
international peace and security agenda. We are
likewise grateful for the statements by Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro and Ms. Cliffe, Special
representative and Director for the World Development
Report on Conflict, Security and Development of the
World Bank.
The high human cost and material losses caused
by internal and international armed conflict oblige us
to strengthen the link between peace, security and
development, particularly as regards prevention. The
international community should make use of all means
at its disposal to prevent or limit the ravages of
violence. To try to prevent the devastating
consequences of armed conflict, especially for the
civilian population, is a humanitarian, political and
economic imperative. Traditionally, and perhaps
unfortunately, the Organization has adopted a mainly

10-45412

S/PV.6360

reactive role in crisis situations after they have broken
out. We consider it of the highest priority to advance
strategies that would help to strengthen capacities and
improve the effectiveness of the United Nations in
preventing conflicts through dialogue, consultation and
peaceful settlement of disputes, in order to facilitate
timely answers to emerging disputes and crises.
In this regard, we reaffirm the vital importance of
implementing resolution 1625 (2005), one of the
greatest advances in including the prevention of
conflicts in the work of the Security Council,
particularly in the context of crises and conflict
situations in Africa.
In my delegation’s view, it is important to
improve the focus and effectiveness of the
Organization and the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts, first, by promoting more
effective partnerships among the various actors,
particularly regional and subregional organizations,
non-governmental
organizations
and
financial
institutions; secondly, by improving information and
early warning and preventive diplomacy mechanisms,
particularly by promoting the application of the tools
for the peaceful settlement of disputes set out in
Chapter VI of the Charter, including regional and
international mediation; and thirdly, by promoting
measures aimed at tackling the structural causes of
conflict, measures which include promotion of
development, disarmament and strengthening the rule
of law.
We support the establishment of strategic
partnerships between the Security Council and
subregional and regional organizations and the
fostering of local capacities for conflict prevention and
resolution. Strengthening this strategic relationship
between the United Nations and the organizations that
have been mentioned in Africa in the framework of the
United Nations should be fuelled by greater technical
cooperation in the sphere of conflict prevention and
management, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, security
sector reform, promotion and protection of human
rights, strengthening of the rule of law and building the
mechanisms necessary for early warning by linking
national, regional and international networks to
encourage the exchange of timely and objective
information about potential crises and to anticipate
situations before and during emergencies.

10-45412

An illustration of the preventive work that we
need in the Organization is the work that is being done
by the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in his efforts to reach the
international community and generate early warning
mechanisms to prevent the irreversible deterioration of
especially delicate situations internationally and
especially on the African continent.
We recognize that a fundamental element in
prevention is the promotion of observance of and
respect for international law and the benefits and
opportunities offered by Chapter VI of the Charter. On
that basis, during its presidency of the Council in April
2009 and in June of this year, Mexico convened two
thematic debates on mediation and peaceful settlement
of disputes, and on the promotion and strengthening of
the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Here, our aim was to seek to
strengthen the Council’s capacity to play a key role in
promoting a major purpose of the Organization — the
peaceful settlement of disputes — in keeping with the
principles of justice and international law.
My delegation has reaffirmed that the Security
Council has the twofold challenge of urging States to
settle their disputes by peaceful means, and of
providing all necessary support to strengthening and
facilitating ongoing mediation exercises, including the
preventive diplomacy efforts of the Secretary-General
in his role as a mediator and by offering his good
offices to parties to conflict, as well as through his
special representatives and special envoys. It is also
important to make use of the advisory functions of the
International Court of Justice in the settlement of
disputes.
Prevention also plays an important role in the
post-conflict phase. Here, we encourage the Council to
work with the Peacebuilding Commission in
strengthening conflict prevention and peacebuilding
strategies and to improve coherence and integration
between
peacemaking,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding on the one hand and development on the
other in order to ensure timely responses and to avoid
the recurrence of conflict.
Finally, and just as important, my delegation
views peace and justice as inseparable components of
any effort to resolve any armed conflict. Therefore,
giving precedence to one over the other only hampers
action by the institutions that have been established to

13

S/PV.6360

guarantee those objectives. We also consider that
combating impunity is often indispensable to avoid
tension and the resurgence of violence of violence and
confrontation. We are convinced that no lasting peace
or true national reconciliation cannot be achieved
unless those responsible for the most serious crimes are
brought to justice, irrespective of their status, position
or rank.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to begin by thanking Nigeria for its initiative to
convene this open debate. I also welcome your
presence, Foreign Minister Ajumogobia of Nigeria, to
preside over today’s meeting. My thanks go also to
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and to Ms. Cliffe of
the World Bank for their presentations.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is a basic
principle of the United Nations and a major
responsibility of the Security Council. Preventive
diplomacy is an important means for the settlement of
disputes. The Charter of the United Nations offers
philosophical guidance and a basis for action in
diplomatic efforts to prevent crises and conflicts. For
many years, the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations and Member States have
been engaged in preventive diplomacy in many forms
and have made significant contributions to easing
tensions, resolving hot-spot issues and restoring
regional peace and stability.
In today’s world, the nature of conflicts and
disputes is undergoing profound change. Traditional
conflicts between States are evolving towards a blend
of inter- and intra-State conflict. Some regions in
Africa have witnessed frequent conflicts; these remain
a threat to the peace and stability of Africa and hamper
the continent’s development.
This new situation poses new challenges and
requires that we move with the times, intensify our
input and invigorate preventive diplomacy so as to
make a greater contribution to international peace and
security.
First, we must strengthen the concept of
prevention and give priority attention to early
prevention. Experience has repeatedly shown that
remediation yields only limited results compared to
prevention. If we cannot take rational and legitimate
action in the early stages of a crisis and seek to settle
disputes peacefully through mediation and other
means, then we will have to spend several times more

14

time and energy to remedy the situation once a crisis
has erupted.
In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been overstretched, and the gap
between supply and demand has widened. If we can do
a good job at conflict prevention, we will be able not
only to save resources and increase the efficiency of
peacekeeping, but also to save people from the scourge
of war. We must therefore strengthen the concept of
prevention and put it into practice.
Secondly, we must adopt comprehensive
strategies in the light of local conditions. The Security
Council must study the root causes of disputes and
conflicts of different natures and forms. It must come
to objective and accurate judgements concerning
disputes and offer appropriate proposals and
procedures. Here, the Council must strengthen its
coordination with other United Nations entities and
work to resolve crises through good offices, mediation
and other means.
For post-conflict countries, priority attention
should continue to be focused on preventing the
recurrence of conflict. Crisis management alone is not
enough in conflict prevention: there must also be a
commitment to helping the countries concerned to
develop their economies, extricate themselves from
poverty, achieve sustainable development and eradicate
the economic and social root causes of conflict.
Thirdly, we must respect the views of the parties
concerned and must give full scope to the comparative
advantages offered by regional and subregional
organizations. The key to the success of good offices,
mediation and other means of preventive diplomacy is
adequate political will among the parties concerned.
The United Nations must enhance communication with
the parties concerned, secure their cooperation and lay
a solid foundation for preventive diplomacy.
Regional and subregional organizations have
unique advantages in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. In recent years, the African Union (AU) and
African subregional organizations have been actively
engaged in mediation efforts addressing hot-spot issues
in Africa, and they have achieved positive results. The
Security Council should establish or deepen strategic
partnerships with the AU and should fully motivate the
AU and other regional and subregional organizations in
the sphere of preventive diplomacy. It should
encourage them to play their front-line role and should

10-45412

S/PV.6360

create an enabling environment and conditions for
them. At the same time, the Council should provide
more assistance to them and should help them with
capacity-building.
Fourthly, we must strengthen coordination and
form synergies. The prevention and resolution of
conflicts should follow a multi-pronged approach with
political, security, economic and social dimensions.
The Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should enhance their exchanges and
cooperation, complement one another’s advantages,
yielding synergy.
In recent years, the Secretary-General and his
representatives have been actively engaged in resolving
regional conflicts, and they have achieved fruitful
results. In future, the Security Council should continue
to support the Secretary-General in his active role.
China has always maintained that disputes should
be settled peacefully, through dialogue and negotiation.
We support a greater role for the United Nations and
the AU and other regional organizations in preventive
diplomacy.
I thank Nigeria for its preparation of today’s
presidential statement. China supported the Council’s
endorsement of that statement in order to demonstrate
to the international community the Council’s political
will in its support for preventive diplomacy.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized today’s
thematic debate on prevention of conflicts in Africa. As
we know, Africa today hosts half of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and nearly 75 per cent of Blue
Helmets deployed: 73,645 out of 100,645, as of
30 June 2010.
In this context, the prevention of conflicts is a
major issue. It has decisive advantages over traditional
conflict management because it makes it possible to
avoid human casualties, which include belligerent
parties but civilians above all, as well as the series of
population displacements and the economic devastation
that often accompany conflicts. Moreover, in the
context of the budgetary austerity that we are all
experiencing, the cost of deploying peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations is increasingly difficult to
manage.

10-45412

Preventing conflicts begins with information. To
obtain it, it is important that the Security Council can
receive regular briefings, and as soon as it considers
necessary, from the Secretariat on zones of fragility so
as to be in a position to use as soon as possible and in a
coordinated manner all of the tools available to it to
prevent the exacerbation of a tense situation, tools such
as mediation, good offices, condemnation and even
sanctions.
These tools have proven their effectiveness in
avoiding the outbreak of conflicts. Thus the mediation
on the border dispute between Nigeria and Cameroon
over the Bakassi peninsula, after the arbitration of the
International Court of Justice and the Greentree
Agreement, is now being implemented under the aegis
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit. The role of
coordination in the field of the regional offices of the
United Nations that can be called upon by the Security
Council to deal with situations should, in this respect,
be strengthened.
Moreover, as previous speakers have said,
African ownership of the prevention of conflicts and of
the issues of peace and security in Africa is gaining
ground. We can note, for example, the commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Côte d’Ivoire in 2003 before the
establishment of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire and the ECOWAS success in Togo in 2005; the
many cases of mediation by the African Union, in
particular for Madagascar and the Sudan, the firm
positions taken by its Peace and Security Council
against coups d’état, or recently in Guinea after the
massacre of 28 September; and the actions by African
peacekeeping forces, such as the African Union
Mission in the Sudan before the transfer of authority to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The international community’s various targeted
initiatives also contribute to preventing conflicts in
Africa. France is particularly active today in combating
illicit transfers of small arms and light weapons, which
fuel the outbreak of crises in Africa and render them
more dangerous. United Nations sanctions regimes,
which can include arms embargoes, can also lead to
reducing the number of weapons. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes also
make it possible to reduce the number of combatants
and weapons and are an essential tool in combating

15

S/PV.6360

trafficking, which nourishes conflict, by targeting arms
trafficking.
Plans to reform the security sector aim to
establish a security system that is effective and
legitimate in the eyes of the population and controlled
by civilian authorities. Under its foreign security
policy, the European Union has led or supported at
least three civilian operations dedicated to the reform
of the security sector in Africa in recent years: in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic. Moreover, at the
initiative of France, the European Union is providing
active support to strengthening African peace and
security capacities.
To combat the plundering of natural resources for
the purposes of conflict, France has also supported —
including within the General Assembly and this
Council — the establishment of the Kimberley Process,
which establishes a mechanism to certify the origin of
diamonds, and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative to ensure that the exploitation of this wealth
contributes to the development of the countries
concerned and does not serve to fuel wars underway by
privatizing them for the benefit of armed groups, as we
are seeing today, namely in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a
complementary way, development assistance also
contributes to the stability of States.
Finally, the fact that the majority of African
States have adhered to the Rome Statute also has a
preventive effect by sending a signal that crimes will
not go unpunished. The International Criminal Court is
an essential element in conflict prevention.
France’s White Paper on Foreign and European
Policy for 2008 to 2020 places among its priorities the
prevention of crises and conflicts. The White Paper on
Defence and National Security, for its part, states that
Africa will be at the forefront of our conflict
prevention strategy for the next fifteen years,
considering the direct or indirect repercussions that
African conflicts can have on France and Europe, as
well as the increase in traffic toward our continent.
As we can see, the prevention of conflicts in
Africa is at the heart of international action. In parallel,
an African system of collective security is now being
established. Support for African initiatives remains
essential because the continent does not have the
material resources to face the demands of

16

peacekeeping on its own. This support should have an
essential place in the coordination and constancy of
actions.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Minister, as President of the Security Council. We
are grateful to you for organizing this meeting on this
theme of such importance to international peace and
security.
In recent years, the United Nations, its Security
Council and Secretary-General and many regional and
subregional bodies have done significant work to
identify the reasons for and to prevent conflicts. It is
clear that efforts here must be focused, first and
foremost, on overcoming the often long-standing
political and socio-economic problems that are
exacerbated by a wide range of new transborder threats
and challenges. Among them are international
terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime and the
danger of the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. This list, of course, is far
from exhaustive.
There are no quick formulas for resolving largescale challenges in the area of preventing and resolving
conflicts. There is a need for multidimensional and
careful joint efforts to break the vicious cycle when
insufficient development leads to social problems and
when, against that backdrop, increasing political and
military instability leads to the outbreak of a conflict.
As a result, the effective realization of socio-economic
development programmes becomes impossible. The
complexity of those tasks requires working out a
balanced strategy stemming from the interrelated
nature of the problems of security, socio-economic
development and human rights.
States themselves should be at the forefront of
action. Of course, any assistance from the international
community to prevent the outbreak of new hotspots of
conflict should not be imposed. It is quite clear that the
duplication of efforts, any kind of competition and,
especially, hidden rivalry do not serve the common
cause.
To a large extent, success in the early prevention
of conflicts depends on the comprehensive use of early
warning instruments and on taking into account the
specific characteristics of individual conflict situations.
We are convinced that investment, both material and
intellectual, in the early prevention of conflicts and the

10-45412

S/PV.6360

strengthening of the capacity of the United Nations in
the area of peaceful mediation, political analysis and
assessing conflict situations will pay off for the
international community.
Today’s conflicts cannot be resolved by force.
The solution must be sought by involving all sides in
dialogue and negotiation, and not by isolating any of
them. The Russian Federation will consistently work to
achieve a political diplomatic settlement to regional
conflicts on the basis of collective actions by the
international community.
Russia believes that it is extremely important to
continue to actively use the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which encourage
regional organizations to take more initiative in their
preventive diplomacy actions and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The existence of strong regional
organizations that can take on greater responsibility for
the situation in their regions will allow the United
Nations to deal in a more targeted manner with
genuinely global issues in the interest of the entire
international community.
Given the increasing demands of the effective
and judicious distribution of work between the United
Nations and regional organizations, the leading role of
the Security Council remains essential, under the
Charter, in questions of maintaining international peace
and security. This has to do first of all with obligatory
sanctions and control over regional and coalition
peacekeeping operations, which provide for the use of
force.
We note with satisfaction the noticeable growth
in activities of African States, primarily of the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations, in
the prevention and settlement of conflict situations on
the continent. This demonstrates the readiness and
increasing ability of Africa to take responsibility for
resolving its problems.

tribute to Nigeria’s contribution to the work of the
Security Council, including stewardship of the Council
this month. I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and Sarah Cliffe for their insights earlier in
this debate.
I want to make three main points.
First, the United Kingdom believes that the
international community needs to give greater attention
to conflict prevention. Particularly in the Security
Council, with its unique responsibilities, we have a
duty to ensure that people do not suffer the devastation
that comes with violent conflict when it could have
been prevented.
Let us be clear: conflict prevention is an essential
part of maintaining international peace and security.
Indeed, arguably, it is the most important part.
Prevention is also cheaper than cure. But the
balance of resources seems to have settled
disproportionately in favour of peacekeeping rather
than preventive diplomacy — that is, responding to
conflict rather than preventing it. But powerful
preventive diplomacy is not just a question of more
resources. It is about making use of the full range of
tools available to the United Nations across different
stages of the conflict cycle. Recent experience in
Kenya and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo has demonstrated that the rapid deployment of
mediation teams can be crucial for effective conflict
prevention. We have shown ourselves capable of
deploying forces preventatively to halt an escalation of
tension into armed conflict. A good example of this
was the deployment of preventative force in Macedonia
1995.

Russia itself participates in mediation activities
and efforts to prevent conflicts and actively supports
the relevant efforts by the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations.

Effective peacebuilding is, after all, a key means
of preventing a relapse into conflict, and I thought that
Sarah Cliffe’s statistics on the relapse into civil war
were very telling on this point. We need to be more
confident that we are directing our resources to the
places where they will have the greatest impact. This
means that, however difficult it may be, we must have
confidence that we can evaluate any efforts undertaken
to prevent conflict.

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Today’s debate is a welcome opportunity to highlight
again the importance of preventive diplomacy, and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting this morning. I would also like to pay

Secondly, the Security Council, along with the
rest of the United Nations system, needs to develop a
genuine culture of prevention. In our view, this is
largely, a question of political will. It will sometimes
involve difficult decisions about fast-moving situations

10-45412

17

S/PV.6360

in countries that are not currently on the Security
Council’s agenda. But if the Council is to meet its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, Council members must be prepared to take
those difficult decisions.
As a practical step, we should minimize the
obstacles to action by improving the information flow
between United Nations bodies, between the
Secretariat and the Security Council and between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The Security Council should hear, as a matter of
course, from the Secretary-General and his senior staff
when they have visited regions where potential conflict
is a concern. This is not to criticize their efforts to date.
We, the member States of the Council, must be ready to
draw on the Secretariat’s early warning analysis and
reporting on emerging conflicts.
Linked to that, the Secretary-General should offer
regular advice to the Council on potential emerging
conflicts — a sort of horizon-scanning exercise. We
should encourage greater exchange of expertise and
information across the United Nations system on
potential precursors to conflict, and there needs to be a
mechanism within the United Nations for drawing
together the different strands of information and
analysis. We therefore welcome the work under way to
strengthen the United Nations early warning capacity.
We should also seek a stronger dialogue with
regional and subregional organizations on ways to
prevent conflict, including on issues that we know can
drive conflict, such as the illicit extraction of natural
resources.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to support and help develop the capacity of
regional and subregional organizations. Timely
African-Union-facilitated mediation in areas such as
Madagascar, Kenya and Guinea played a vital role in
preventing escalation of conflict. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts by the United Nations and the
African Union together to create a mediation support
unit at the headquarters of the Economic Community
of West African States. Through the African Peace
Facility, the European Union has provided
€300 million in the last three years to support Africanled peacekeeping operations. There is still more that
could be done in this area.

18

As the British Foreign Secretary, William Hague,
recently said, we need a sharper focus on conflict
prevention and to support the capacity of regional
actors to take a leading role in promoting stability. We
hope that the presidential statement adopted today will
provide some measure of political support to those
ongoing efforts.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President,
and the mission of Nigeria for organizing this debate to
discuss this pertinent topic. We would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe for their very informative briefings.
This issue is of particular importance for our
increasingly globalized world, in which social and
political crises have the potential to create an
atmosphere of tension that can erupt into acts of
violence or lead to instability for countries or regions.
In the past decade, peacekeeping has become the
most important instrument of the United Nations in
solving disputes and conflicts. Overstretched as it
currently is, peacekeeping must encompass new
initiatives and innovative methods for solutions
helping to preserve or maintain peace. Those measures
not only represent a peaceful alternative but are also
less costly.
Addressing and solving contemporary conflicts
requires an integrated approach with complementary
tools such as mediation, negotiation, dialogue or
conflict resolution and management. Bosnia and
Herzegovina emphasizes the role of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue in advancing regional
cooperation and solving some of the difficulties. We
are convinced that this is a necessary measure in order
to build confidence and trust.
The links between security and development are
mutually reinforcing. Therefore, conflict prevention
should address the root causes of conflict in a
comprehensive manner, including the promotion of
sustainable development, good governance, rule of law,
national reconciliation and poverty eradication.
Building preventive diplomacy capacity involves
national, regional and, finally, United Nations
expertise. The assessment of early warning information
coming from the United Nations system should be
timely in order to enable good policy options and
decisive actions.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
attaches
great
importance to enhanced cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations and the United Nations.
Strengthening cooperation and strategic partnership
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union is of key importance for enabling
early responses to disputes or emerging crises.
Pursuing effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding
strategies should be based on flexibility and on making
use of each partner’s comparative advantages. This is
relevant not only in terms of knowledge on the ground
and exchanges of experience, but also for the training
of military experts and the development of civilian
expertise.
We welcome the progress made in recent years in
the implementation of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme. We urge the United Nations to increase its
engagement to make African Peace and Security
Architecture fully operational as soon as possible, in
particular in the areas of early warning, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and training. Furthermore,
we consider it crucial for the African Union to ensure
leadership and ownership of the process.
The United Nations and the Security Council,
which have the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, should invest more
effort in conflict prevention, through such means as
fact-finding missions, mediation and confidencebuilding measures and the appointment of special
representatives,
who
could
provide
useful
recommendations for the peaceful settlement of
disputes prior to preventive deployment or enforcement
measures.
We are convinced that support for regional
mediation initiatives, in close consultation with
regional and subregional organizations, is an important
element of ensuring peace and security, not only within
countries but also between countries.
It is of vital importance that the Security Council
be provided with regular reports and analyses on
developments in regions of potential armed conflict in
Africa, as well as on ongoing preventive diplomacy
initiatives. Regional conflict management structures
should provide the Security Council with timely and
rapid information to facilitate adequate and proper
decision-making.

sectors. Special attention should be given to
monitoring tensions arising from economic and social
issues and actions against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and high-value commodities.
Particular emphasis should be placed on
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, as an integral
element of peacebuilding activities. Strengthening the
role and capacities of civil society groups and women
and their involvement in post-conflict peacebuilding
activities are necessary for the promotion of a culture
of peace and economic empowerment.
In
conclusion,
cooperation
should
be
strengthened in the deployment of peacekeepers and to
more closely involve regional and subregional
organizations
in
peacebuilding,
post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction processes through the
framework of the Peacebuilding Commission. Linking
United Nations expertise and experts from regional
organizations will significantly contribute to increasing
the pool of available expertise.
Multilateral endeavours and actions should be
focused on conflict resolution in a more transparent
and open way. Short-term solutions should only pave
the way for long-term approaches that require proper
understanding of the root causes of conflict, which
often lie in political grievances, underdevelopment,
backwardness, lack of good governance or concerns
related to the preservation of ethnic, cultural, national
and religious identities.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
believes
that
enhancement of consultations between the Secretariat
and its counterparts at the regional and subregional
levels will enhance complementarity and minimize
duplication of efforts. Strengthening the input of
regional organizations in decision-making and the
peaceful settlement of disputes is crucial. At the same
time, regional organizations can act as bridges when
the ownership of peace processes is transferred from
international to domestic authorities.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): The
United States thanks Nigeria for organizing this
meeting and welcomes Minister Odein Ajumogobia to
the Council today. I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for
their remarks.

We must not exclude or underestimate negative
developments in the economic, social and security

10-45412

19

S/PV.6360

Conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes are among the founding purposes of the
United Nations and the pillars of its Charter. They are
an important focus for our work here in the Council.
In our interconnected age, conflicts that start in
fragile States can drag entire regions into violence, and
such conflicts can turn already fragile States into
incubators of transnational threats, including terrorism
and trafficking in arms or drugs. Development and
security are inextricably linked, and to stave off
conflicts and bolster fragile States we must work with
partners, including the United Nations, regional and
subregional groups, development banks, donors and
non-governmental organizations. In short, we must
sharpen and strengthen our instruments to prevent
conflict and settle disputes.
We must also tackle the underlying factors that
fuel all too many conflicts: discrimination, corruption,
lack of accountability, poverty, economic disparities
and threats to the rule of law.
With this in mind, I would like to make five
points today.
First, we need to continue to improve early
warning capabilities and ensure that they inform and
drive preventive action to prevent conflicts and save
lives. This means enhancing both intelligence
gathering and analysis, including monitoring trends,
spotting triggers or accelerators of conflict and
understanding local contexts and cultures.
We are getting better at gathering this
information, but there remain significant gaps between
on-the-ground reporting, political analysis and
decision-making. To close these gaps, we need to link
the best available information to the best possible
analysis. This will require having the right United
Nations country team on the ground, with the right
training and the right resources. It will also require
better real-time communication
and stronger
coordination among reporting entities and political
analysts so that decision-makers have a range of
creative and credible options from which to choose.
Lives could also be saved through closer cooperation
between the United Nations and regional early warning
systems, such as the one being developed by the
African Union.
Secondly, multilateral mechanisms must be better
equipped to respond effectively to potential and

20

emerging crises. Among the most effective ways to
prevent violence and halt escalation are international
mediation and preventive diplomacy, backed by a
readiness to use other tools. The United States is
working to advance multilateral diplomatic initiatives
to reinforce the foundations of peace, security, human
rights and development.
For its part, the United Nations has produced
useful innovations, such as the Department of Political
Affairs Mediation Support Unit, and its standby panel
of mediation experts. But these teams are not used
enough, and they lack sufficient resources. They also
need the full support of local and regional actors, as we
saw in the effective international response to the
violence after Kenya’s 2008 elections.
Secretary-General Ban and his predecessors have
used their good offices to help end many conflicts over
the past 20 years. But regional and subregional
organizations have important roles to play as well. The
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States have helpful mediation capacities, and
we encourage them to do more to resolve conflict. We
also encourage such regional groups to deepen their
cooperation with the United Nations.
Thirdly, the recent creation of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN Women) and resolutions 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) remind us
all of the struggles that women face in times of armed
conflict, including rape and sexual violence. We must
include women in peace processes and give them
significant decision-making roles in conflict resolution.
Mediation efforts that exclude women’s perspectives
are likely to neglect issues vital to securing a lasting
peace.
Fourthly, enhancing multilateral capacities to
stave off conflict also means strengthening the
international community’s ability to support peace in
fragile States or ones where newly reached peace
agreements have yet to take hold. The most accurate
means of predicting future armed conflict is looking at
places where armed conflict has recently ceased.
United Nations peacekeepers have proved that they can
help prevent further violence in the wake of bloody
conflicts, but only if they have adequate resources,
proper training and clear mandates. Civil society has an
essential role in building the institutions that make a
society resilient at times of crisis including

10-45412

S/PV.6360

communities, churches, mosques, synagogues, temples,
schools, a vigorous free media, human rights groups
and other strong organizations.
But in some situations, atrocities will unfold so
quickly or massively that they can be quelled only by
the swift arrival of people to keep the peace. In such
cases, the United Nations must continue to work with
local Governments and regional organizations,
including the African Union, the European Union and
NATO, to ensure that it has both the political will and
the logistical capacity to deploy quickly.
Finally, let me say a few words about
peacebuilding. The past decade has witnessed
important innovations here, including the creation of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, but we
still have much to do. We need more flexible
development funds that arrive sooner, early
investments in the core capacities of the struggling
State and international support for national efforts to
reinforce the rule of law, to demobilize ex-combatants
and to reform State security services. We also need to
provide lasting support to the victims of sexual
violence and the victims of other human rights abuses.
Just because an armed conflict stops does not
mean it will not start again, and the international
community must continue to enhance the tools at its
disposal to prevent the recurrence of armed conflict
and cement durable peace and lasting reconciliation.
We share a common responsibility to do
everything in our power to develop the mediation tools,
the warning mechanisms, the multilateral institutions,
the effective peacekeeping forces and the strong
communities to prevent conflict and avoid the shedding
of the blood of the innocent.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I should like to welcome
you, Sir, and to thank you for presiding over the
Council today. I should also like to thank the Nigerian
presidency for its leadership in preparing the
presidential statement we have just adopted. I should
also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro and the World Bank Special Representative,
Ms. Cliffe, for their presentations.
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting. As members will recall,
at the Istanbul retreat, where Council members
discussed
the
issues
of
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding, the complementary nature of preventive

10-45412

diplomacy in the overall peacemaking process was
underlined, and it was suggested that the Council take
up this issue in the future. Today’s meeting fits into
that understanding.
Preventive diplomacy, in the sense of using
proactive measures to prevent political conflicts from
erupting into violence and to promote peaceful dispute
resolution is, indeed, a crucial part of the peacemaking
process. We all agree that international security is
better served by working to prevent the outbreak of
crises rather than by simply reacting to them once they
have occurred. Adopting a policy of doing nothing in
the face of deadly conflict simply defers the problem to
a later date, when the level of destructiveness and the
costs of intervening are much higher and the risks of
action even greater.
There is broad consensus that the usefulness of
preventive action depends critically on the sense of
legitimacy they elicit, not just from domestic
constituencies, but also from the larger international
community. Undertaking such actions without due
regard
for
their
legitimacy
can
prove
counterproductive, in particular where these actions
conflict with established norms of State sovereignty.
Poorly justified actions from outside may provoke
resentment and further escalate conflict.
In fact, conflict prevention is one of the chief
obligations set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations; primary responsibility for it belongs to
national Governments. Yet, no State or organization
can act alone. Sovereign Governments must be able to
rely on the support of external actors, whose activities
can be crucial in helping to prevent conflict. National
sovereignty is strengthened by early action to prevent
armed conflict because such action rules out the need
for unwelcome external interference later on. That
having been said, it is also a fact that third parties
cannot remove the underlying causes and perceptions
of conflict. They can undertake and encourage
measures to set relations between the parties to a
conflict on a new course.
Best practices for conflict prevention rely on well
developed systems of early warning, explicitly provide
for resource pooling and burden sharing among a range
of diverse actors, and apply diplomatic as well as
military leverage appropriate to the problem at hand.
No single agent is likely to be equal to the complex
task of helping others with their conflicts.

21

S/PV.6360

Interventions and pressures are more effective when
employed collectively, and are most effective when
issued by an institutionalized group of which the
parties to the conflict are members, such as an
international or regional organization. Beyond
unilateral action, non-governmental organization
assistance, State coalitions, regional and subregional
organizations and, finally, the United Nations comprise
the other layers.
As the organ with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a responsibility to promote and
support mediation as an important means for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is the only
institutionalized collectivity available, yet it is
strained.
Here, it becomes clear how important the
coherence of mediation processes conducted by or
under the auspices of the United Nations is, through
the improved coordination of efforts with other actors,
including regional and subregional organizations.
Engaging the potential and existing capacities and
capabilities of such organizations in mediation efforts
will help ease the burden on the United Nations.
As a matter of fact, regional organizations have
an important role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, as well as relevant
resolutions. We are encouraged to see the Council’s
resolve to strengthen United Nations support to such
prevention and mediation efforts through improved
coordination and cooperation, in particular in Africa.
We welcome the promotion of the deepening and
broadening of dialogue and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. Moreover, we believe that there is
definitely a need for closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Southern African Development Community, to
build national and regional capacities in relation to the
preventive diplomacy tools of mediation, information
gathering and analysis, early warning, prevention and
peacemaking, with a view to responding more

22

promptly to the emerging threats to security in their
areas.
In this context, I should like to make reference to
the importance of the role played by the regional
United Nations offices, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa, and the valuable contribution of
mediation capacities such as the Council of Elders, the
Panel of the Wise, the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretary-General’s special envoys.
If we are to enhance the impact of our efforts and
address the root causes of conflict, the thrust of
preventive work must shift from reactive, external
interventions with limited impact to internally driven
initiatives for developing local and national capacities
for prevention. This approach fosters home-grown,
self-sustaining infrastructures for peace that promote
ownership.
We believe that the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals and development in general are the
indispensable foundations for prevention. Many of the
Millennium Development Goals, if attained, would
serve to significantly reduce the overall sources of
tension for developing countries that are vulnerable to
conflict. Women have an important role to play in the
settlement of disputes. Their equal participation and
full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security is particularly
important.
Addressing the primary sources of tension in
conflict-vulnerable regions and countries is key to
preventing armed conflicts. Conflict situations require
monitoring to coordinate action since, whether early or
late, opportunities are often brief; but attention must be
sustained.
The establishment of the Department of Political
Affairs Mediation Support Unit, which provides
expertise to support the mediation efforts of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, is
a welcome development in that sense. Yet, it is not
sufficient. If prevention is central to United Nations
efforts, system-wide strategic leadership in this area
should be strengthened. The Department of Political
Affairs, which is the centre for direct support for
preventive diplomacy and good offices, should be
better equipped in the light of its growing workload.
The Security Council must also undertake more
missions to areas of potential or actual conflict.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

Meeting humanitarian needs in a timely way can
also contribute to preventing the outbreak or recurrence
of armed conflict. A great deal more can and should be
done on the humanitarian front to avert crises before
they lead to armed confrontation. In particular, tackling
climate change, food insecurity and related problems
of agricultural underproduction and resource scarcity
can do much to stabilize a fragile situation.
In that sense, development of a more structured
relationship between the United Nations system and
the international financial institutions to ensure better
coordination in the policy planning process and to
create greater synergies and stronger joint leverage
could be encouraged. Similarly, effective coordination
between and within United Nations organs,
programmes, funds and agencies involved in policy
formulation and implementation is vital to ensure
greater coherence in existing mechanisms and
appropriate balance between peacekeeping operations
and preventive activities.
The financial resource question should be
examined in comparison to the costs of handling the
problem later, when it is worse, more costly, more
difficult to handle and more disruptive to our own
concerns. “Future opportunity cost” is a concept that
needs to be taken into account.
In order to build the foundations for sustainable
peace, recovery requirements should be taken into
consideration during the mediation process. This
highlights the crucial role that the Peacebuilding
Commission has to play in promoting mediation.
Every conflict prevented or managed contributes
to building precedents and principles for dealing with
future cases. Early intervention and prevention are
always the better approach. Most important, missed
early opportunities should not be taken as cause for
despair or unripe later situations as an excuse for
inaction.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Sir, for honouring us with your presence
today. My delegation would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Cliffe for their
comprehensive briefings. My delegation commends the
initiative of the delegation of Nigeria to convene this
open debate. This theme is, indeed, a topic of the
utmost importance to my delegation.

10-45412

The United Nations Charter has entrusted the
Security Council with the primary responsibility to
maintain peace and security in the world. And it was
only five years ago that world leaders adopted the 2005
World Summit outcome document in which they
reiterated the obligation of States to settle their
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Chapter
VI of the Charter. They also stressed the importance of
the prevention of armed conflict, the need to have a
coherent and integrated United Nations approach to
prevent such conflicts and the role of the good offices
of the Secretary-General to that end.
Where do we stand today with respect to all these
noble objectives and how are we to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools to achieve them? In this
context, my delegation would like to focus on three
areas. The first is the United Nations and preventive
diplomacy. The complexity of today’s world requires
an integrated and comprehensive strategy based on a
multifaceted approach by the United Nations to detect,
intercept and prevent any source of tension, to resolve
conflict and to ensure the consolidation of peace.
My delegation welcomes the four fronts to which
the Deputy Secretary-General eloquently referred in
her presentation, which demonstrate the attempts by
the United Nations to move from reaction to action.
My delegation considers the creation of the Mediation
Support Unit and Mediation Support Standby Team
within the Department of Political Affairs as a positive
step in the right direction. Those two components have
enhanced preventive diplomacy capabilities at
Headquarters and in the field. At the same time, while
we should recognize the good offices efforts of the
Secretary-General and his envoys, additional resources
are needed to expand those efforts. Financial resources
are an essential prerequisite without which an effective
approach,
common
objectives
and
enhanced
predictable support capacities will remain a theoretical
paradigm.
Secondly, on the active role of national
Governments in cooperation with the United Nations,
indeed the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with national Governments and other
local actors. National Governments will be able,
through dialogue with civil society, women’s
organizations, youth groups and other national actors,
to identify sources of tension and address root causes
of conflicts. Afterwards, those Governments should be
able to assess their needs and priorities and create road

23

S/PV.6360

maps to achieve them. If, as Ms. Cliffe stated, 90 per
cent of civil wars recur in countries which have
suffered from civil war, the role of the United Nations
will become more crucial to support and assist
Governments in their efforts to prevent the recurrence
of violence through providing expertise and know-how
and sharing lessons learned and success stories.
In this context, special attention should be paid to
adopting an integrated approach linking security,
justice and development. This integrated approach will
draw from the spectrum of expertise and vast
experience of the Security Council, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and other specialized agencies. This integrated
approach will be more effective if it includes regional
and subregional organizations.
That leads me to my third point: how to enhance
coordination and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. The African Union and its
Peace and Security Council and the Economic
Community of West African States have emerged as
important players in addressing conflicts in Africa and
have thus made invaluable contributions to maintaining
peace and security. They are already working to
implement effective conflict prevention techniques, in
particular through the African Union Border
Programme. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, should continue to strengthen
cooperation with these organizations to effectively
utilize their regional early warning mechanisms,
peacekeeping efforts and peacebuilding capacities.
This cooperation is particularly important as most
armed conflicts in Africa result from a multitude of
causes, which are, inter alia, poverty, corruption, drugs,
misuse of natural resources and the illicit arms trade.
The United Nations can provide assistance when these
organizations are trying to address in a comprehensive
manner the root causes of these armed conflicts. United
Nations bodies should provide their expertise and
resources in finding solutions and contributing towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In this context, it is worth noting that the
informal interactive meeting which was held last week
between the representatives of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the Security Council
strengthened the path of cooperation that, it is hoped,
will be transformed into partnership. It is only through

24

that partnership that both councils can face the
challenges in Africa in general, and in Darfur and
Somalia in particular.
It is our collective duty to prevent conflict and
the loss of innocent life whenever and wherever we
can. Successful mediation and settlement of disputes,
including, inter alia, provision of financial resources
and human expertise, is one of the greatest assets we
have in combating violence. Such assets, combined
with our concerted efforts and goodwill, help us not
only to maintain international peace and security but
also to implement policies that will prevent human
loss.
We congratulate Nigeria on the adoption of
today’s presidential statement.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all, Sir, to say how delighted I am
that you are presiding today, on behalf of your country
Nigeria, over this important debate on the prevention
of conflict.
The complexity and cost of current conflicts,
especially in Africa, have substantially weakened the
chances for stability and development on the continent.
This situation in itself justifies the Council’s desire
increasingly to emphasize prevention. For several
decades Gabon has been firmly committed to conflict
prevention, especially in Central Africa. That
commitment was recently reaffirmed by our President,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, in his
statement of 9 March 2010 at the International Peace
Institute in New York, coinciding with the Gabonese
presidency of the Council.
We are convinced of the benefits of establishing a
true culture of prevention at the United Nations, and
we have consistently encouraged the Council to adopt
an operational strategy for conflict prevention. As the
debate has been framed, the question of conflict
prevention is a vast question comprising several
aspects. My statement will address only two of these,
undertaking first an updated evaluation of the work of
the Council on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
2008 report on conflict prevention (S/2008/18), and
then suggesting some approaches to transforming the
challenges of preventive diplomacy in Africa into
opportunities for partnership with the United Nations.
The 2008 report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1625

10-45412

S/PV.6360

(2005) confirms, inter alia, the Council’s commitment
to follow a preventive approach. Indeed, since the
adoption of that resolution the Council has affirmed its
role in conflict prevention activities. Resolution 1778
(2007), authorizing deployment of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), already responded to the need for
preventive approach, in that the aim was to prevent
conflict spilling over from Darfur into Chad and the
Central African Republic. Since then the Security
Council has opted for a disciplinary approach in
preventing conflicts.
The mandates of the peacekeeping missions
adopted by the Council in 2010 provide appropriate
frameworks for mechanisms to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. The mandates of MINURCAT, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, set out respectively
in resolutions 1923 (2010), 1924 (2010) and 1925
(2010), are inspired essentially by the disciplinary
approach proposed in the 2008 report of the SecretaryGeneral. In these cases this comprehensive and
multidisciplinary approach is based on cooperation
with the Governments of Chad, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Côte d’Ivoire, as well as numerous other Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) as well as civil society actors.
These advances should be highlighted and
welcomed. By taking this approach, the new mandates
take into account the root causes of conflict and
provide for operational activities and systemic
prevention. By working to eliminate poverty and by
working for lasting development, security sector
reform, the rule of law, respect for and protection of
human rights and greater involvement of women in
national reconciliation processes, United Nations
missions today are working more effectively towards
the complete eradication of the causes of conflict and
towards their geographical containment to prevent
them from spilling over into neighbouring countries.
My delegation is convinced, however, that the
development of a broad, visible, realistic conflict
prevention strategy based, inter alia, on an early
warning mechanism covering especially the potential

10-45412

conflict zones and on a true culture of prevention
shared by all Member States would make United
Nations action more effective.
Turning to Africa, the challenges should be
viewed rather as opportunities to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union or the continent’s subregional
organizations. Convinced that the United Nations
cannot succeed in Africa on its own, the African Union
and subregional organizations such as ECOWAS and
ECCAS, to mention only two, have succeeded in
setting up their own conflict prevention mechanisms.
But it is clear that for them to fully carry out their role
and to become operational these mechanisms should be
enjoy substantial supported from the United Nations.
From that perspective it is important to ensure more
efficient implementation of the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union, adopted
jointly by the United Nations and the AU in November
2006. A closer partnership with the African Union has
two main purposes: first, to facilitate rapid reaction in
the event of crisis, as was done in Guinea and in Niger,
and secondly, to enhance the African Union’s capacity
to find solutions to crises and conflicts, as is the case in
Darfur, particularly through the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and to a lesser
extent in Somalia with the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
The operationalization of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture is the challenge that
most urgently calls for cooperation from the United
Nations. The various mechanisms that make up the
Architecture, namely, the Continental Early Warning
System, the Panel of the Wise, the African Standby
Force and the African post-conflict reconstruction and
development policy framework are meant to play a
crucial role in conflict prevention. That role would
naturally lead to a significant reduction in the number
of United Nations interventions in Africa and
accordingly a reduction in the cost of United Nations
operations.
At the subregional level, cooperation with the
United Nations requires a greater and more visible
presence on the ground. Rather than calling for a
strengthening of its peacekeeping missions in Africa,
we would aim at encouraging the United Nations to be
more present through the action of its regional offices.
The excellent work done by the United Nations Office
for West Africa, very often in cooperation with the

25

S/PV.6360

African Union and ECOWAS, demonstrates the
capacity of the United Nations to excel in prevention.
Central Africa is particularly affected by cross-border
tensions, and the countries of that subregion have been
endeavouring to establish a conflict prevention
architecture organized, essentially, around the Central
African rapid response mechanism and the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa. Those two
mechanisms need United Nations support to be fully
operational.
My country has always favoured the
establishment of a new regional preventive mechanism,
similar to the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA), whose experience and success have been
clearly acknowledged by the Security Council.
Through good offices, mediation, information sharing
with subregional mechanisms — as UNOWA does in
West Africa — this office would support the States of
Central Africa with a view to making the subregion
another zone of lasting peace, security and stability.
More than ever before, the Security Council must
strengthen its preventive action and capacities. In terms
of advantages and costs, there are innumerable benefits
in such an approach. My delegation is convinced that
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union would encourage such a trend.
The future of Africa — which, like all other continents,
increasingly aspires to greater peace, stability and
development — depends on the commitment of those
two organizations to work together to eradicate the
causes of conflict that weaken us.
I hope that the outcome of this debate will lead
the United Nations to deepen its commitment along
these lines. It is with that in mind that my country
supported the presidential statement endorsed today.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, for honouring us by presiding
over this important debate today and also to thank you
and the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council for
having organized this important meeting. We were
grateful for the statement by Deputy Secretary-General
Asha Rose Migiro and for the interesting presentation
by Ms. Cliffe.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation later in the
course of this meeting.

26

In today’s world, we are confronted by a large
number of crises and new global challenges that can
potentially develop into fully fledged conflicts and that
can pose a threat to international peace and security.
The peaceful settlement of conflicts should be the first
instrument that we always try to resort to. It is
indisputable that, in terms of cost effectiveness,
conflict prevention and resolution benefit from a
substantial comparative advantage over other forms of
engagement, such as large-scale conflict intervention
and post-conflict reconstruction.
Preventing the escalation of disputes into armed
conflict or relapse into armed conflict needs to go hand
in hand with other crisis management activities, such
as mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. All
those activities must ensure respect for the rule of law
and human rights, as well as the need to fight impunity
and address the root causes of conflict.
The settlement of conflicts by peaceful means
remains one of the biggest challenges the African
continent is facing today. Instability in Africa also has
global implications which require the continued
attention, action and commitment of the Security
Council, as well as of all other relevant actors.
Austria fully supports efforts aimed at
intensifying cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU) and
its regional economic commissions, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African
Development
Community.
African
involvement and experience in conflict prevention and
resolution, early warning and mediation are vital. It is
also an issue of ownership, and existing African
capacities should be used and further developed in line
with the AU-United Nations Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme. These enhanced capacities will
in turn also foster the implementation of Security
Council resolutions with regard to the protection of
civilians, women and peace and security and children
in armed conflict.
The development of a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is therefore of particular
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. We further believe that all options for
funding conflict prevention efforts should be
thoroughly considered.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

In that context, we believe that there is also a
need to further strengthen and efficiently use the
capacities of the United Nations Secretariat or other
actors, such as the European Union (EU). The
European Union cooperates closely with the African
Union in the framework of the Africa-EU Strategic
Partnership, including through regular high-level
consultations in the framework of the EU Political and
Security Committee and the AU Peace and Security
Council, and in the field of human rights through the
AU-EU human rights dialogue. The AU-EU road map
of the peace and security partnership, as agreed in
October 2009, further underlines the commitment of
both organizations to deepen their cooperation. In
doing so, it is important to bear in mind a clear
division of labour, as well as the comparative
advantages that each organization may have.
Austria is convinced that the good offices of the
Secretary-General and his special envoys make a
significant contribution to the prevention of armed
conflict and to mediation in Africa. In particular, we
wish, as others have already done today, to commend
the valuable contribution of the United Nations Office
for West Africa in successfully preventing conflicts, as
was seen in the recent cases of Guinea and Niger. In
addition, I wish to highlight the important role of
integrated peacebuilding offices in addressing the root
causes of conflict and enhancing resilience by
supporting security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well
as activities aimed at strengthening the rule of law and
human rights. We believe that the Security Council
could examine the merit of expanding the network of
such offices.
Moreover, the potential of the various United
Nations field presences in Africa in the area of conflict
prevention and early warning should be fully utilized
to improve and sustain the ability of the United Nations
in cooperation with regional partners and national
Governments to respond to emerging conflict situations
in a timely and decisive manner. In addition, we would
also like to stress the crucial role that the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide has in matters relating to the prevention and
resolution of conflict.
Effective efforts to prevent armed conflict also
represent a tool to address cross-border and
transnational threats to stability, such as drug and
human trafficking, the proliferation of small arms and

10-45412

light weapons and transborder organized crime. Austria
believes that prevention measures should also be aimed
at addressing those threats. We support numerous
projects that the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna is undertaking in this regard and wish
to commend the Office for its valuable contribution to
conflict prevention.
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) urge Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the increased representation of
women in all aspects of conflict resolution and peace
processes. We hope to see an increase in the
participation, representation and full involvement of
women also in preventive diplomacy and mediation
efforts in the future.
In conclusion, Austria would like to express its
thanks to Nigeria for promoting the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution in the Security Council and
congratulates it on the presidential statement that was
adopted today. We look forward to continuing our
discussions on this very important matter.
The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I wish to warmly welcome the participation of
Her Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane,
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa, and I have pleasure in inviting her to take
the floor.
Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane (South Africa): South
Africa would like to thank you, Mr. Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, for inviting us to this very
important debate on the maintenance of peace and
security and optimizing the use of preventive
diplomacy. The topic you have chosen relates directly
to the decision of the African Union (AU) Assembly to
proclaim 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa. We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the participation of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the representative of the World Bank in
this debate.
We have long recognized the importance of
preventive diplomacy as a critical tool to avert the
outbreak of conflicts. The escalation of peacekeeping
costs over the years, both in material terms and in
terms of human life, has also made it necessary for the
international community to focus more on conflict
prevention, both regionally and globally.

27

S/PV.6360

The African continent has borne the brunt of
violent conflict over the decades. It is for this reason
that, since its inception in 2002, the African Union has
worked tirelessly to establish a comprehensive Peace
and Security Architecture which is founded on a
paradigm that recognizes both preventive diplomacy
and post-conflict reconstruction and development as
key to eradicating conflict on our continent.
The mechanisms that the African Union has since
put in place in this regard bear testimony to the
commitment of our continent in addressing peace and
security challenges in a comprehensive manner. In our
subregion, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) continues to play a critical role in
ensuring subregional stability. In that context, the
SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security has
undertaken mediation efforts in quelling potential
conflicts. SADC has also launched the SADC Brigade,
consisting of military, police and civilian components
from all SADC member States, which will form part of
the African Union Standby Force for rapid deployment
should the need arise.
All of these efforts are anchored in the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly Article 33, which
provides for mediation as one of the diplomatic
methods for the pacific settlement of disputes. With the
changed nature of conflicts from inter-State to intraState, preventive diplomacy has become an
indispensable tool used by both the United Nations and
regional organizations.
Efforts to bring about the consolidation of peace
and stability have been and remain a complex matter
that requires political will and commitment from all
parties involved, including support mechanisms. In the
past few years, we have witnessed a reduction in the
number of violent conflicts as a result of the collective
efforts of the United Nations, the international
community and regional organizations. African
Member States, through their subregional formations,
have taken responsibility, while at the same time
recognizing that the peaceful resolution of conflicts
remains a sovereign responsibility.
Also, the Secretary-General’s good offices
continue to play an important role in mediation efforts.
One very important option in this regard is the
strengthening of the Mediation Support Unit and the
early warning capacity within the Department of
Political Affairs, which will help better provide

28

coordination, communication, support and guidance.
With this in mind, the African Union has always
striven to deepen its partnership with the United
Nations on matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our efforts towards a
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in the maintenance of peace and
security on our continent is informed by the reality that
regional organizations have a comparative advantage in
confronting such challenges within their regions.
This comparative advantage is increasingly
allowing the AU to respond proactively and in a rapid
manner, limiting the escalation of conflict and human
suffering. This is evident in the recent interventions by
the African Union in the Sudan and Somalia, as well as
in its mediation efforts and peace support operations,
thus clearly demonstrating its political will and its
commitment to confronting peace and security
challenges.
Dialogue is important to South Africa, and we
therefore hold the view that in preventing lapses and
relapses back into conflict, the importance of creating
and maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration must always be
underscored. Finding a global strategy for preventive
diplomacy, including the traditional means of
mediation, as well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding
methods deployed under the United Nations Charter, is
essential in this regard.
We firmly believe that, at the heart of preventive
diplomacy, socio-economic development is important
for the realization of sustainable peace and can indeed
create economic opportunities in countries affected by
conflict. The success of preventive diplomacy depends
not only on an effective early warning mechanism, but
also on the involvement of non-State actors. For
instance,
community-based
organizations
have
demonstrated time and again that they can be a partner
with Governments and the international community in
providing early warning support and acting proactively
and decisively to prevent a potential conflict situation.
Preventive diplomacy is one good example of the
international community working together for lasting
peace and sustainable development. We therefore
heartily support you, Mr. President, in this noble
initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

10-45412

S/PV.6360

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
African Group and to start by expressing the Group’s
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency and to you
personally, Mr. Minister, for organizing this important
debate focusing on the issue of optimizing the use of
preventive diplomacy tools, which is of significant
importance to the African continent. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her valuable
introductory remarks and to welcome the participation
of the World Bank in this valuable discussion.
Today’s debate constitutes an integral part of the
broader discussion on the most effective ways to
address threats to international peace and security, as
well as to enhance the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in that regard.
Despite the fact that several conflicts have plagued
different parts of Africa over the past decades, the
leaders of the African continent have always been
aware of the importance and benefits of adopting
conflict prevention approaches. Preventive measures
that were designed to address some of the root causes
of conflicts in Africa and to prevent the eruption of
further conflicts include the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, the legal
instruments on unconstitutional changes of government
and the conflict prevention mechanisms within the
African Union, such as the Peace and Security Council
and the Panel of the Wise. Similar mechanisms within
subregional organizations, such as the early warning
system and the Mediation and Security Council of the
Economic Community of West African States, are
additional important manifestations in this regard.
They are also complemented by other efforts in other
subregions, such as the efforts of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in this context that
were just mentioned by the Foreign Minister of South
Africa.
These efforts should be seen in the framework of
the larger context of dealing with various stages of
conflicts in our continent, including efforts within the
framework of Africa’s significant contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the
first hybrid operation, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as African
Union operations mandated by the Security Council,
such as the African Union Mission in the Sudan and the
African Union Mission in Somalia.

10-45412

The African Group believes that efforts to
enhance conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
should be part of a strategic vision and a
comprehensive approach which combine and make use
of all tools within the framework of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to
avoid the eruption of disputes and conflicts, and to
avoid relapsing into conflict in countries in postconflict situations. Such a comprehensive approach
should include defining clear entry and exit strategies
for peacekeeping, making full use of the synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and building
capacity in countries emerging from conflict situations.
This should include enhancing the capacities of State
institutions, strengthening civil society and further
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union, while always maintaining the centrality
of the national ownership principle.
On conflict prevention, the African Union
believes that the increasing budget for United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be an additional reason
for devoting more attention to peacebuilding and
conflict prevention, in order to move beyond the
traditional conflict management approach, building on
the steps taken by the United Nations in this regard
since the 1992 report of Secretary-General BoutrosGhali entitled “An Agenda for Peace: Preventive
diplomacy,
peacemaking
and
peace-keeping”
(S/24111).
In this context, the African Group underscores
that, in order to fulfil the aims of Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter, there is a need for the United
Nations to develop an integrated strategy in the field of
conflict prevention that harnesses the capacities of the
United Nations Development Group, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
relevant areas.
That includes, inter alia, mediation, negotiation
and good offices, along with other tools such as intergroup confidence-building and dialogue processes.
That integrated strategy should be implemented in
close cooperation and coordination with the tools
existing within regional and subregional organizations.
In this regard, the cooperative efforts in mediation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which proved to be successful in early stages such as in

29

S/PV.6360

the case of Kenya, gives us an indication of the
positive outcome of this kind of partnership.
In the meantime, while recognizing that the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, the
African Group believes that the development and
capacity-building aspects of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution makes it imperative that other
United Nations bodies, particularly the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, give
their input to any United Nations preventive diplomacy
strategy.
In this regard, the Department of Political Affairs
should continue to play a central role in activities
related to conflict prevention, especially through its
Mediation Support Unit and other capabilities and
mechanisms available and with full cooperation with
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
While understanding that the focus of our debate
today is on preventive diplomacy, the African Group
cannot ignore, in this context, the importance of
achieving sustainable development in Africa,
especially in countries emerging from conflict. For the
success of our collective efforts in the field of conflict
prevention, we have to depart from the basic
assumption that development, peace and security and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In this context,
the Group looks forward to the high-level plenary
meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in
September as an opportunity to reaffirm the
international community’s commitment to development
and sustainability in Africa.
This year, 2010, which has been designated by
the African leaders as the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa, coincides with the fiftieth anniversary of the
attainment of independence by 17 African countries.
The African Group believes that this occasion should
be seen as an opportunity for African countries, the
United Nations, other international organizations,
donors and partners to scale up their support for the
African Union and other subregional organizations in
order to enhance their capacities in the field of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to further promote
peace, security and stability in Africa.
In this regard, allow me to stress the importance
we attach to the 10-year capacity-building programme
of the African Union. We believe that its full

30

implementation would contribute to enhancing the
capacity of the African Union in the areas of conflict
prevention, particularly in terms of African Union
mediation capacity.
Finally, Mr. President, allow me to thank you
once again for organizing today’s debate, which we
consider a further step in making the best possible use
of all our preventive tools and assets existing within
the United Nations system as well as within the
regional and subregional organizations in order to
achieve our collective aspirations towards peace,
stability and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union.
Nigeria is to be commended for having convened
this important debate on conflict prevention with a
special focus on Africa. Conflict prevention is one of
the main challenges we face today, and the active
engagement of the Security Council is crucial.
My Government welcomes the commitment of
African nations to greater efforts to prevent conflicts
from breaking out in the first place as well as to their
resolution. The solving of the long-running dispute
between Nigeria and Cameroon over the Bakassi
peninsula and the Abyei Arbitration on border
delimitation in Sudan are models in this regard. The
African Union Border Programme aiming at conflict
prevention through solving border issues is another
success story, and Germany is pleased to be associated
with it and actively supporting it.
Only last week, members of the Security Council
and the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council held their annual consultative meeting.
Strengthening the partnership for prevention between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa should remain high on the
agenda.
My Government has been encouraged by the
spirit of cooperation between the United Nations, the
AU and the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development in preparing for the referendum in Sudan.
As a troop and police contributor to both the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, Germany attaches high
importance to an early resolution of the Darfur conflict

10-45412

S/PV.6360

and full implementation of the comprehensive peace
agreement. Germany stands ready to continue to
provide assistance in constitution-building in Sudan.
The United Nations, in particular its Secretariat,
has a wide range of preventive diplomacy tools at its
disposal. Mediation, good offices, the use of special
envoys, fact-finding missions and commissions of
inquiry are instruments that have been used in the
recent past. We have welcomed the creation of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs and contributed to its activities
through the relevant trust fund.
The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) was an important step in enhancing the United
Nations ability to better deal with practical conflict
prevention. Too many times in the past, “after the
conflict” meant “before the conflict”. Countries have
emerged from and re-entered into conflict numerous
times, often over a period of decades. The PBC now
deals with various situations where there is a risk of
lapsing and re-lapsing into conflict and has done
valuable work since its creation in 2005.
During our chairmanship of the PBC, we pay
special attention to the role of women in peacebuilding
and to the cooperation with regional organizations such
as the AU. Last week, the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council met for the first time to discuss how
they could further strengthen their cooperation. They
agreed to support national efforts in conflict
prevention.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): At the outset, the Ghana
delegation wishes to congratulate Nigeria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and for the remarkable skill with
which its delegation has guided the work of the
Council since the beginning of the month. We are
particularly pleased to see you, Your Excellency, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, personally chair today’s meeting. My
delegation also wishes to commend Mexico for ably
presiding over the Council last month.
Mr. President, the valuable concept paper your
delegation prepared for this debate (S/2010/371,
annex) highlights a variety of pertinent issues and
dimensions of the important question of preventive
diplomacy, with particular reference to Africa. My
delegation will attempt to address some of them.
Today, the ebbing — if not the resolution — of
the many violent conflicts that have afflicted the
African continent presents an opportunity for its people
and Governments, acting in partnership with the United
Nations, to pay greater attention to preventive
diplomacy as a strategy to prevent conflicts from
breaking out in the first place and to prevent those
countries emerging from conflicts of crises from
experiencing a relapse or escalation, as the case may
be.

Early engagement and cooperation between
various actors are key to conflict prevention, but there
is a wider dimension as well. As we all agreed in 2005,
peace and security, human rights and sustainable
development are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
We commend the African Union’s New Partnership for
Africa’s Development for its promotion of sustainable
growth and development based on the commitment to
good governance, democracy, human rights and
conflict resolution.

For the people of Africa, the prevention of
conflicts is no longer only a matter of peace and
security, but also a development imperative. This
paradigm shift is underscored in the Constitutive Act of
the African Union (AU) and the protocol on the
establishment of the AU Peace and Security Council,
as well as in legal instruments and regional
organizations such as the revised Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Treaty
and the ECWOAS Protocol relating to the Mechanism
for Conflict Mediation, Management and Resolution.

“Greater investment in prevention could save us
considerable pain and expense.” This is what the
Secretary-General stated during one of the Council’s
latest meetings on the issue of conflict prevention
(5735th meeting). It remains true. The Security
Council, the international community as a whole and,
of course, the individual Member States all have to
shoulder their responsibility.

The international community, including Africa’s
development partners and the United Nations, needs to
sustain and intensify engagement with Africa for the
more effective implementation of the various African
initiatives aimed at strengthening preventive diplomacy
and enhancing the prospects for preventing conflicts on
the continent. Those initiatives include the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, the African Peer

10-45412

31

S/PV.6360

Review Mechanism and the AU Framework for PostConflict Reconstruction and Development, as well as
the various African declarations against coups d’état
and other unconstitutional changes in government.
These African initiatives are intended to prevent
conflicts by tackling their root causes. In that way, our
commitment to preventive diplomacy should find
expression in our relentless resolve and action to
promote constitutional democracy underpinned by
good political and economic governance, the
promotion of the rule of law, respect for human rights,
free and fair elections, social justice, including the
equitable distribution of national resources in a
non-discriminatory manner, the deepening of national
integration and harmonious inter-ethnic relations. We
must also commit ourselves to addressing other causes
of conflict, including terrorism, corruption and
transnational organized crimes such as illicit
trafficking in drugs, arms and persons.
The role of women and that of civil society in this
regard should not only be tolerated but encouraged to
ensure that no section of society is left behind in our
national, regional and international efforts to prevent
conflicts.
Equally deserving of the more serious support of
the international community are African initiatives and
practical arrangements such as the African standby
forces arrangement, intended to make Africans ready to
undertake more effective preventive deployment of
personnel or to intervene in conflicts in a timely and
effective manner.
To redeem the promise of the Charter to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
plagued the peoples of the world in the last century,
there is an urgent need for the international community
to grant priority attention to the prevention of conflicts
around the world, and in Africa in particular, which
features in the overwhelming majority of the situations
on the agenda of this Council.
It is time we saw the value of preventive
diplomacy in terms of the incalculable cost of waiting
until conflicts have erupted and the fact that when they
do they occur, it takes a long time, and sometimes the
sacrifices of a generation of youth, before it is finally
resolved or simply brought under control. Simply put,
we should value preventive diplomacy on the basis of
the cost of doing little or nothing to prevent conflicts.
When conflicts do occur, they destroy investments,

32

retard social progress and undermine
development in any given country or region.

overall

To succeed in placing preventive diplomacy at
the top of our agenda, we must also embrace a shift in
thinking and new concepts such as the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and the incitement
of such acts. This was recognized by world leaders in
their adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and also
finds a place as a treaty principle in article 4 of the AU
Constitutive Act.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that preventive
diplomacy will be taken more seriously if States and
other international actors endeavour to strike an
appropriate balance between the competing values and
principles
of
sovereignty
and
solidarity,
non-interference and non-indifference and sovereign
independence and global interdependence.
I wish to recall the proposal made by Ghana in
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations calling for ways to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in areas of preventive
diplomacy, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
under the Charter, which has been generally welcomed
favourably for further consideration in that Committee.
In this context, Ghana supports the presidential
statement adopted today and looks forward to giving
input on how to optimize the use of preventive
diplomacy tools within the United Nations system and
in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and other actors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I should like to join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Nigeria for having convened this important debate.
Preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention
have been issues of increasing priority for the Council
over the past two decades. This makes good sense,
because the financial and human costs of trying to
quell violent conflicts far outstrip those associated with
preventing their escalation.
While the international community has made
progress in managing conflict, it continues to struggle

10-45412

S/PV.6360

to
prevent
conflict.
Africa
is
increasingly
demonstrating clear leadership on peace and security
challenges on the continent, including preventing
political crises. The African Union (AU) was the first
to deploy peacekeeping missions in Burundi, the
Sudan, Somalia and the Comoros. It has also
consistently intervened, in collaboration with the
regional economic communities and with the help of
African leaders, in the mediation and resolution of
political crises, such as in Madagascar, Guinea and
Niger.
The AU’s Peace and Security Architecture, along
with the complementary mechanisms in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
other local and regional approaches to preventive
diplomacy, including civil society initiatives, show
great promise for stopping violent conflicts before they
spiral out of control.
In our view, the Council must continue to support
those efforts and fulfil its own responsibility for
preventive diplomacy. In a 2009 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/8), the Council declared its intention to
remain engaged in all stages of the conflict cycle,
including in support of mediation as an important
means for the pacific settlement of disputes wherever
possible before they evolve into violence.
Canada believes that three areas in particular
deserve the Council’s attention: preventive action,
proactive action and integrated and coherent action.
First, preventive action, in particular preventive
diplomacy, requires advanced warning that there is a
risk of violence and knowledge about the root causes
and nature of a potential conflict. Perhaps most
importantly, it requires translation of the available
information into concrete analysis and timely action.
What the international community truly lacks is a
consistent means of bridging analysis and policy — of
synthesizing data into effective analysis and rapidly
linking early warning analysis with effective policy
direction. The Security Council has sometimes filled
this niche, but it could improve its contribution to
preventive diplomacy by increasing its attention to the
relationship between analysis and policy direction.
Secondly, Canada calls on the Security Council to
be more proactive. In his report on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1625 (2005)
(S/2008/18), the Secretary-General outlined a

10-45412

comprehensive approach to conflict prevention.
Canada fully endorses the examples of proactive action
by the Council cited in the report, including the
deployment of United Nations missions with political
mandates to conduct mediation, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding activities.
The Council is also increasingly using targeted
sanctions as a proactive measure to deter parties from
choosing violence to resolve conflicts. The Council
must use all of these powerful tools more proactively,
consistently and, we would suggest, with greater
conviction.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, Canada is pleased to note recent marked
improvements in the United Nations system with
regard to integrated coherent action. Canada welcomes
the joint strategy on gender equality and mediation of
the Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), as well as the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to realize the full and
influential participation of women in peace processes.
Canada also recognizes the importance of the
collaboration between the DPA and the United Nations
Development Programme to deploy peace and
development advisers, as well as the positive role of
the Mediation Support Unit in working with United
Nations country teams. Once a situation has become
explosive, the United Nations system will be able to
achieve its full potential in the area of preventive
diplomacy only by using all its resources through a
concerted action.
Regional and subregional capacities, in particular
of the African Union and other African organizations,
must be strengthened. Increased capacity to break the
links among terrorism, drug trafficking and organized
crime is particularly critical, as well as capacity to
support the rule of law and strengthened mediation
capacities.
Canada is committed to supporting global peace
and security. Leaders at the recent summit of the Group
of Eight (G8) endorsed the Muskoka Declaration.
Canada also invited African leaders to the Summit to
discuss not only development, but also issues related to
peace and security.
The Muskoka Declaration outlines a set of three
interrelated initiatives aimed at strengthening civilian

33

S/PV.6360

security systems, in particular civilian reinforcements
for stabilization, peacebuilding and rule of law actions;
strengthening maritime security capacity; and
international police peace operations. These three G8
initiatives aim to reduce conflict-related instability,
protect civilians during armed conflict, counter
terrorism, combat piracy and transnational crime and
help establish an enabling environment for growth,

investment and democratic development. Thus they are
intended to promote peace and security, while
recognizing that solutions to problems of the African
continent are best found in Africa itself.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list. I therefore intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

34

10-45412
