ll2

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress achieved towards the establishment of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, 68
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and
Social Council to create an International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the necessary close
collaboration with the regional centres and institutes
which have similar objectives;
3. Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of Iran to act as host for the Institute;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
substantive preparations for the early establishment of
the Institute and, to this end, to seek actively financial
resources through voluntary contributions as well as
technical support for it;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-second
session on the progress achieved.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/136.

United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that in its resolution 3520 (XXX) of
15 December 1975 it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, to be devoted to effective and
sustained national, regional and international action to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year, 69 and related resolutions 70 adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Aware of the importance of developing and implementing without delay a programme of concrete action
for the Decade,
Considering further its decision to convene in 1980 a
world conference to review and evaluate progress made
and, where necessary, readjust existing programmes in
the light of new data and research available,
Noting with satisfaction the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women as adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its twentysixth session and transmitted to the General Assembly
by the Economic and Social Council at its resumed
sixty-first session, 71
-· 1. Approves the Programme for the United Nations
Decade for Women, which focuses on the first half
of the Decade, 1976 to 1980;
2. Urges Governments and United Nations bodies
to take all necessary steps to give effect to the Programme for the Decade and to give it priority in view
of the real need to attain the goals of the Decade;
6SA/3l/310.
69 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
10 Ibid., chap. III.
71 E/5894.

3. Calls upon Governments to take measures to
ensure equal and effective participation of women in
political, economic, social and cultural life and in policymaking at local, national, regional and international
levels, thereby increasing their role in international cooperation and in the strengthening of peace;
4. Recommends that Governments should establish
machinery, where appropriate, which could include governmental and non-governmental agencies, bureaux and
commissions, in order to ensure the effective implementation and evaluation of the World Plan of Action and
of the Programme for the Decade within the framework
of national development plans and regional policies;
5. Recommends further that Governments, in cooperation with the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions, appropriate regional
and international research centres and institutes as well
as appropriate intergovernmental bodies, should undertake the organization of training courses and seminars
whereby officials responsible for the formulation and
implementation of national development plans would
study multidisciplinary techniques and methods which
can be utilized in effectively integrating women in development;
6. Invites, as a matter of priority, Governments and
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
as well as all governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned and the mass media to undertake
massive public information programmes with a view to
making all sectors of the population aware of the need
to implement fully the Programme for the Decade;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take fully into
account the financial and staff needs required to implement effectively the World Plan of Action and the
Programme for the Decade;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
the consideration of the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, a report on the measures taken to implement the present resolution, in particular paragraphs 4, 5
and 6 above, as well as a progress report on other measures taken to implement the World Plan of Action and
the Programme for the Decade.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/137.

Pledging conference for the United
Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31/136 of
16 December 1976 it endorsed the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women,
Noting that it decided at its thirtieth session that the
voluntary fund for the International Women's Year,
established by Economic and Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, should be extended
to cover the period of the Decade,
Aware that in its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976 it adopted the criteria and arrangements for
the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women,

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the report! of the Third Committee

Conscious that, in its resolution 31/135 of 16 December 1976 concerning the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, it requested the SecretaryGeneral to seek actively financial and technical support
for the Institute,
l. Reaffirms its support for the implementation of
the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Women's Year, 72 adopted
by the World Conference of the International Women's
Year, held at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
as well as the Programme for the United Nations
Decade for Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convene during the thirty-second session of the General Assembly,
in 1977, a pledging conference for voluntary contributions to be made to the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women, for the purpose of financing programmes under the World Plan of Action and
the Programme for the Decade, and to the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women;
3. Appeals to Governments to extend their full
co-operation to help make this pledging conference a
success.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/138.

Elimination of all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion
or belief

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 3069 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
as well as its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 in which it requested the Commission on
Human Rights to submit, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session a single draft Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also its decision of 15 December 197573
to consider with appropriate priority, at its thirty-first
session, the question of the elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance,
Noting the actions of the Working Group established
by the Commission on Human Rights at its thirtieth,
thirty-first and thirty-second sessions with a view to
elaborating a draft Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Noting also Commission on Human Rights decision 7
(XXXII) of 5 March 1976,74 by which the Commission established an open-ended working group which
would meet three times a week during its thirty-third
session, beginning in the first week of the session, and
requested the Secretary-General to provide the necessary facilities for the work of the group,
72 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
7 3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034 ), pp. 99 and 100, item 79.
74 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixtieth S11ssion, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768), chap. XX, sect. B.

ll3

1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
speed up its work on the elaboration of a single draft
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief and to submit a progress report, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance".
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/139.

Co-operation and assistance in the application and improvement of national
information and mass communication
systems for social progress and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1778 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and convinced that the establishment and/or
development of national information and mass communication systems will play an important role in the
promotion of opportunities for the peoples of the developing nations to participate fully in national development and in the promotion of international co-operation,
including the efforts to achieve the goals of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade and the establishment
of the new international economic order,
Further recalling its resolution 3148 (XXVIII) of
14 December 1973 and convinced that the establishment and/ or improvement of national information and
mass communication systems will greatly help preserve
and enhance the cultural values of a country and will
be one of the most efficient methods for transmitting
scientific and technological knowledge and the cultural
values of a country,
Desirous that the benefits of co-operation and assistance in the application and the establishment and/or
improvement of national information and mass communication systems for social progress and development be considered with a view to disseminating those
benefits to all countries regardless of their stages of
economic and social development,
Acknowledging the important contributions made and
the significant roles being played by the specialized
agencies, intergovernmental organizations, regional economic and social commissions, non-governmental organizations and regional communication media training
and research institutions in assisting developing countries in the field of mass communications,
Noting with appreciation the relevant decisions taken
by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
nineteenth session in the field of mass communications,7"
Convinced that consideration of ways and means of
achieving the application and improvement of national
information and mass communication systems for social
progress and development will pave the way for improved international co-operation in the field of mass
communications,
rn See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. Rffords of the General Conference, Nineteenth
.'frssion. vol. I, Resolutions.
