S/2020/1192

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 16 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on “Reports of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan and South Sudan” convened on Thursday, 10 December 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
this briefing and these statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17549 (E) 231220 210121

*2017549*

S/2020/1192

Annex I
Statement by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Fatou Bensouda
I welcome the opportunity to present my thirty-second report regarding
the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and to brief the
Security Council on recent developments.
Before doing so, I congratulate South Africa on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of December and wish it continued success in carrying
out its essential duties.
As the world continues to navigate this uncertain era of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, I again brief the Council virtually.
Since my latest update in June (see S/2020/538), there have been significant
developments in the Darfur situation. Today I will focus on two of those important
developments: the ongoing case against Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman,
also known as Ali Kushayb, and the directly related issue of the status of cooperation
between my Office and the Government of the Sudan.
Fifteen years after the referral of the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), the victims of the crimes
in Darfur finally have a chance to see justice in relation to one of the cases.
My written report sets out the main judicial developments in the case against
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, who was transferred to the International Criminal Court
on 9 June following his voluntary surrender to authorities in the Central African
Republic, as the Council was made aware in my June report. My Office, assisted by
the Registry of the Court, was able to secure the surrender and transfer of the suspect
to the custody of the ICC, notwithstanding the operational challenges presented by
the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Council will recall that the Court had issued two arrest warrants
against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman for multiple counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity allegedly committed in Darfur. The first warrant concerned crimes
allegedly committed during attacks against civilians in the locations of Kodoom,
Bindisi, Mukjar and Arawala between August 2003 and March 2004. The second
arrest warrant concerned the crimes allegedly committed in the town of Deleig in
March 2004.
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman made his initial appearance before ICC Pre-Trial
Chamber II on 15 June. The Pre-Trial Chamber scheduled the confirmation of
charges hearing for 7 December and later postponed it to 22 February 2021.
On 3 December, in the light of the challenges my Office is facing, some of
which I will address today, I requested the Pre-Trial Chamber to further postpone
the confirmation hearing until 31 May 2021. The defence has yet to respond to that
request, and the Pre-Trial Chamber will decide on that request in due course.
Despite limited resources, my Office is adapting to the new reality and
pandemic-related restrictions in its pursuit of justice for victims in the Darfur
situation. My team of investigators, analysts, advisers and lawyers has been working
under difficult conditions, including conducting missions in Europe and Africa to
expedite preparations for Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s confirmation of charges hearing.
The planning, preparation and conduct of those missions have been heavily
impacted — and at times unavoidably delayed — by the challenges that my Office,
cooperating States and other partners have had to overcome to enable my team to
2/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

conduct its work in the circumstances of a global pandemic. I take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to the team for their hard work and resilience over the
past six months, in extremely challenging circumstances.
During the reporting period, my Office continued to monitor alleged crimes
in Darfur that may fall within the Court’s jurisdiction. There have been repeated
allegations of attacks on civilians in Darfur, reportedly occurring mainly in June
and July. Those attacks reportedly resulted in significant casualties. Alarmingly,
there are continuing reports of sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against
children. Such attacks must stop, and the protection of civilians must remain
a priority.
I welcome the Juba Peace Agreement, signed on 3 October, between the
Sovereign Council and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and other movements. I am
hopeful that the Agreement will help bring justice to the victims of atrocity crimes
in Darfur and build sustainable and prosperous peace in the Sudan.
I commend the parties’ agreement to create a special court for Darfur crimes
and a truth and reconciliation commission. I also welcome the importance that the
Juba Peace Agreement lends to the ICC and the emphasis placed on cooperation
between the Sudan and the Court in relation to the five ICC suspects, including
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
Indeed, the parties are committed to facilitating the appearance of those
wanted before the ICC, providing its prosecutors and investigators with access to
victims, witnesses and investigation sites and allowing Court personnel to travel
freely throughout the Sudan. The Juba Peace Agreement also states that the parties
shall not interfere with ICC investigations and shall ensure the safety of victims
and witnesses.
I also welcome the Sudan’s recent repeal of the criminal law provisions that
prevented cooperation with the ICC.
In October, I led the first mission by my Office to the Sudan in 13 years.
In Khartoum, my team and I engaged in productive meetings with officials of the
Government of the Sudan at the highest levels. I also held productive discussions
with representatives of civil society organizations, international bodies and the
diplomatic corps in Khartoum.
Those meetings enabled my team to explain the ICC proceedings and the
status of the Darfur cases. Our discussions also presented an opportunity to hear
directly from the Sudanese authorities about their plans for cooperation with my
Office and their commitment to accountability and justice for the people of Darfur.
My visit to Khartoum further gave my delegation and the Government of the
Sudan the opportunity to hold preliminary discussions on possible mechanisms for
bringing to justice the suspects against whom ICC warrants have already been issued.
I welcome the assurances of support, cooperation and the commitment to justice
expressed by the authorities during my mission to Khartoum. I am also hopeful that
the draft memorandum of understanding on modalities of cooperation, submitted by
my Office to the Sudan shortly after the mission, can be swiftly concluded. At the
present time, we are waiting for the authorities of the Sudan to provide their reaction
to the draft.
In Khartoum, I stressed the urgent need for my investigators to be given access
to the territory of the Sudan. I emphasized that time is of the essence as my team strives
to meet the various deadlines set by the Court’s judges in Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s case.
I reiterate that call and urge the Council to impress upon the Sudan the urgent need

20-175493/26

S/2020/1192

for my investigators to access its territory, and in particular to conduct investigative
missions in Darfur, without further delay.
I had hoped that my team would travel to the Sudan in November for an
operational assessment mission to pave the way for fully fledged investigative
activities immediately thereafter. Unfortunately, that mission was postponed at the
request of the Sudanese authorities. No new dates have been offered, and the window
of opportunity to conduct investigations prior to Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s confirmation
of charges hearing is rapidly closing.
Unless the mission is rescheduled soon, my Office risks losing a golden
opportunity to directly engage with victims and witnesses in situ for the first time and
to ensure that their evidence is made available to the judges at Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s
confirmation of charges hearing, currently scheduled for 22 February 2021.
The Sudan’s immediate facilitation of access to its territory would demonstrate
to the victims, the Sudanese people and the international community, including the
Council, that the Sudan seriously intends to implement the principles adopted in the
Juba Peace Agreement and resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation of
Darfur to my Office. It would give further concrete expression to the assurances of
cooperation conveyed to me in person during the recent historic visit of my Office
to Khartoum. It would also signal that the Sudan is genuinely committed to the path
of justice.
My Office stands ready to work collaboratively with the Sudan as it charts its
way towards accountability for the atrocity crimes alleged to have been committed
in Darfur.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to stress that the outstanding ICC
arrest warrants against Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun, Mr. Abdel Raheem
Muhammad Hussein and Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain remain in full force.
To date, my Office has not received any official confirmation by the competent
authorities of the Sudan on what actions they intend to take in relation to the
remaining ICC suspects, who, with the exception of Mr. Banda, are reportedly in
their custody.
I take this opportunity to appeal to the Council and, through it, to the
authorities of the Government of the Sudan, to intensify dialogue with my Office
in relation to those outstanding warrants. While fully respecting the principle of
complementarity, we must ensure that all the ICC suspects are brought to justice
through fair, objective and independent proceedings — either before the Court or
in Sudanese courts — and guided by the requirements of the Rome Statute. The
Council can play a decisive role in expediting that process and ensuring the Sudan’s
full, prompt and tangible cooperation with the ICC, consistent with its international
obligations. The victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur deserve to finally see real
progress in the pursuit of justice.
I would like to acknowledge and express appreciation for the productive
cooperation between my Office and other States in Africa, Europe and beyond
in relation to our investigative activities on the Darfur situation. The support
and cooperation of all States in the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005)
is essential for the success of my Office’s investigations, particularly in the case
against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. The progress my Office has been able to make to date,
despite the significant challenges we face, would not have been possible without the
principled cooperation of a number of States, including some of those who sit on the
Council. Allow me to express my sincere gratitude for that unwavering support.

4/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

I must also express my heartfelt thanks and respect to the inspirational
witnesses, victims and other individuals and organizations who continue to do
everything in their power to pursue justice and accountability for crimes in Darfur.
Despite the many challenges faced by my Office in the course of its work, we
remain undeterred by any obstacles to the pursuit of justice for victims in the Darfur
situation, including political interference.
My recent mission to Khartoum and related high-level meetings represent a
turning point in the Office’s formal relationship with the Government of the Sudan.
During those meetings, a number of officials at the highest level assured me that
the Sudan’s commitment to justice in Darfur was genuine and that the presence of
my delegation in Khartoum was a demonstration of that. I do not doubt the sincerity
of those words, but they must now be matched with concrete action, starting with
unimpeded access for my investigators to witnesses, crime scenes and other evidence
in Darfur.
My next report on the Darfur situation will be submitted in June 2021. It will
be my last report to the Council as Prosecutor of the ICC. In that final report, I hope
to be in a position to brief the Council on the activities that my Office has conducted
on the ground in Darfur. Before then, I also hope to visit Darfur in order to engage
with victims and pay personal tribute to the courage, resilience and patience they
have demonstrated since the Council’s referral first ignited their hopes for justice
15 years ago. Access to justice is what the victims expect, and it is what the Sudan,
with the support of the Council, must immediately facilitate.
The developments in the Sudan give renewed hope for justice and accountability
in Darfur. Those hopes must not be dashed. Those promising developments also
convey a clear message — the politics that aims to undermine the progressive
movement towards greater accountability for atrocity crimes has a limited shelf life,
because it goes against the currents of modern history and the quest and need of
humankind for a more just world.

20-175495/26

S/2020/1192

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her written report and her
very enlightening briefing to the Security Council.
Today I would like to touch upon three points: the very encouraging
developments in recent months in the fight against impunity in the Sudan; the
importance for the Sudanese authorities now cooperating concretely with the
International Criminal Court (ICC); and the role that Belgium has played in support
of the Court during its mandate on the Security Council.
First of all, my country welcomes the concrete measures taken by the Sudan
in favour of justice and accountability since the most recent Council meeting in
June (see S/2020/538) with Prosecutor Bensouda. Having repealed the legislative
provisions that prevented any cooperation with the ICC, the Sudanese authorities
have made concrete commitments on transitional justice in the framework of the
Juba Peace Agreement. In addition to the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission and a special court for Darfur, the parties committed to provide full
cooperation to the ICC in relation to suspects for whom arrest warrants have
been issued.
Since then, a formal dialogue has been initiated with the Office of the Prosecutor.
The official delegation visit to Khartoum in October, led by the Prosecutor, provided
an opportunity for talks at the highest level, where the Government of the Sudan
expressed its firm commitment to work with the Office.
Secondly, I would like to call on the Sudanese authorities to give concrete
expression to their strong commitments by lending practical cooperation to the
ICC, in accordance with their international obligations as defined in resolution 1593
(2005). In furtherance of the principle of complementarity enshrined in the Rome
Statute, that means doing everything possible to ensure the effective implementation
of the judicial process, whether in The Hague or in the Sudan, with the support of
the ICC, if necessary.
Belgium understands the particular situation in which the Sudan finds itself
in this transitional period. Nevertheless, the ongoing proceedings concerning
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman require the Office to have access to Sudanese territory as soon
as possible in order to contact key witnesses and collect additional evidence. My
country therefore encourages the Sudan to expeditiously conclude a memorandum
of understanding with the Office of the Prosecutor and to respond to its requests
for assistance. We also invite United Nations missions and agencies to facilitate the
Office’s activities in the field to the best of their ability.
In the context of continuing violence against civilians, including women and
children, it is more crucial than ever that the Sudan and the international community
as a whole — including the Security Council, which has referred the matter to the
ICC — mobilize to ensure justice for the victims of the most serious crimes in Darfur
and the rest of the Sudan.
I would like to conclude by stressing the paramount importance of the support
of the Security Council and its member States for the Court. As the focal point for
the ICC in the Security Council, Belgium, together with the other States parties
that are members of the Council, has ensured that the Court’s interests are defended
and promoted, including by securing the Organization’s essential cooperation in
6/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

the context of peacekeeping operations. We have also taken every opportunity to
reiterate our unwavering support for the ICC as an independent and impartial judicial
institution. My country therefore continues to deplore the application of sanctions
against the Court and, more particularly, against its Prosecutor and the members
of his Office. Those measures hinder the proper functioning of the ICC and are
unacceptable. Belgium therefore once again calls on the United States to reconsider
those measures. Rest assured that we will continue to stand ready to act and to assist
the Court, even beyond the Security Council.

20-175497/26

S/2020/1192

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I listened carefully to the briefing given by Prosecutor Bensouda, and I welcome
Ambassador Siddig, Permanent Representative of the Sudan, to this meeting.
The Sudan’s peace process and political transition have made important
progress. China welcomes the formal signing of the Juba Peace Agreement between
the Sudanese transitional Government and the relevant parties, which is a crucial
step in the Sudan’s transition process and an important opportunity for the country
to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace. China encourages the signatories to
earnestly fulfil their commitments and promote the full implementation of the
Agreement and calls on the parties that have not signed it to join the peace process as
soon as possible. We hope that all parties will work together to realize the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the Sudan.
China notes that the Prosecutor and other officials of the International
Criminal Court have been unilaterally sanctioned. Many countries, including many
members of the Security Council today, have condemned that. China has always
opposed unilateral sanctions that are inconsistent with international law. At the same
time, it hopes that the International Criminal Court will strictly follow the principle
of complementary jurisdiction in its work, truly respect national judicial sovereignty
and avoid interference in the internal affairs of other countries. Regarding issues
involving the Sudan, the legitimate and reasonable demands of the Sudanese
Government and the African Union should be taken seriously, and the sovereignty of
the Sudan and the opinions of the Sudanese Government should be fully respected.

8/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex IV
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
[Original: Spanish]
We are grateful for Prosecutor Bensouda’s briefing this morning. As always,
it is a pleasure to receive her reports and to discuss the progress made by her Office,
which is crucial in the fight against impunity.
The Dominican Republic applauds the Juba Peace Agreement signed in
October. To be able to hold our last meeting as non-permanent members of the
Security Council on this subject with such welcome news for the Sudanese people
fills us with satisfaction. We urge the signatory parties to the Agreement to implement
it efficiently and without delay. The Agreement must become the basis for a hopeful
future leading to the progress of a people who have already suffered enough.
There can be no peace without justice. We therefore welcome the openness
that the Agreement proposes in the relations between the Sudanese authorities and
the International Criminal Court. That new phase of collaboration will undoubtedly
be essential to bring justice to the victims of the terrible acts committed in the Sudan
as a result of the protracted conflict.
We acknowledge the efforts made by the authorities in the Sudan to receive
Prosecutor Bensouda in Khartoum and urge the Sudanese Government to follow
up the interesting results of that visit, especially by responding to the requests
made by the Prosecutor to clarify decisive aspects of the case against the accused
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
We are pleased to see progress in the cases against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman
and Mr. Al-Bashir and urge the Government of the Sudan to cooperate so that the
remaining outstanding arrest warrants can be successfully executed.
Furthermore, we regret the Prosecutor’s reports on the deterioration of the
security situation in Darfur. Intercommunal clashes, attacks against civilians by
unidentified armed men, attacks on displaced persons camps, violence and rape of
women and girls are exacerbating the chaos and blocking Sudanese society from
living in peace under the rule of law.
We urge the parties to the conflict to continue working for peace. Death,
displacement, hunger and sexual abuse have no place in a Sudan that is on the road to
progress, whose resilient people carry the weight of war on their shoulders but look
forward to a tomorrow free of guns and fighting.
Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its support for the work of
Prosecutor Bensouda and her team, as well as that of the other offices of the
International Criminal Court, whose work is essential if the Security Council is to
fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and security, as provided by the
Charter of the United Nations.

20-175499/26

S/2020/1192

Annex V

Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for her report and briefing.
Let me start by reaffirming Estonia’s unwavering commitment to promoting
respect for international law and the rules-based international order. Estonia
reaffirms its full confidence in the Court as an independent and impartial judicial
institution, and expresses strong support for the work of the Court and its Prosecutor.
The ICC has a particular role in eliminating impunity and ensuring justice for the
victims of the crimes enshrined in the Rome Statute and has the right to do so
without impediment.
In the first place, Estonia would like to highlight some of the positive
developments that have taken place in the Sudan during the latest reporting period.
We welcome the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on
3 October and the importance that it affords to cooperation with the ICC, including
full and unlimited cooperation with regard to suspects for whom ICC arrest warrants
have been issued.
Estonia further commends the steps taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to
enhance dialogue with the Government of the Sudan, in particular the Prosecutor’s
visit to the Sudan in October and the Government’s firm commitment — expressed
during that visit — to work with the Office in the interest of the victims, as well
as the beginning of a formulation of a memorandum of understanding between the
Government and the Court.
At the same time, Estonia remains concerned about the security situation in
Darfur. We condemn the killing of, and all violence perpetrated against, civilians,
especially women, children and displaced persons. That must stop and the perpetrators
must be brought to justice.
We also hear the concerns of the Darfuri people regarding the impending
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
we urge the Sudan to step up its civilian protection capacities in order to prevent a
security vacuum in the region. We hope that the Sudan will be cooperating closely
with the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan to help
to build those capacities.
We recall the time-tested truth that peace cannot be achieved without justice.
We welcome the voluntary surrender of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also
known as Ali Kushayb, in the Central African Republic in June. We further take note
of the plans of the Office of the Prosecutor to carry out vital investigative activities
in the Sudan at the earliest opportunity and recognize the challenges related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Estonia calls on the Sudan to follow through on meaningful cooperation with
the ICC. In order to ensure implementation of obligations arising from the resolution
1593 (2005), we call on the Sudan to grant the ICC full, prompt and unimpeded access
to its territory. We further call on the Sudan to work with the Court to apprehend and
hand over the remaining four suspects to the ICC to be tried for crimes committed
under the Rome Statute.
In conclusion, we see time and time again that in any peace process, the
rebuilding of a resilient society needs to include the elimination of impunity. In the
name of ensuring justice for the victims of crimes committed, we remain expectant
and hopeful that by the next reporting period there will be concrete positive steps
taken in that direction.

10/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex VI
Statement by the Legal Adviser of France to the United Nations,
Diarra Dime Labille
[Original: French]
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and presentation, which once again
confirms the relevance of the mission entrusted to the International Criminal Court
in Darfur. The fight against impunity is one of the key elements of the transition in
the Sudan, which France actively supports. Indeed, the prosecution and conviction of
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes contribute to the restoration of democratic
life and reconciliation in the country. We cannot emphasize enough that without
justice, the building of a just and lasting peace in the region is not possible.
The Office of the Prosecutor must therefore be able to exercise its prerogatives
without hindrance or obstruction. We welcome the legislative initiative of the Sudan’s
Sovereign Council, which allows for better cooperation with the Court, and the Juba
Agreement for Peace in the Sudan , which also provides for stipulations to that
effect. The conclusion expected shortly of a memorandum of understanding between
the Court and the Sudanese authorities will complete the legal framework necessary
for the implementation of that new initiative. We are therefore delighted that the
Prosecutor was able to visit Khartoum in October for the first time in 10 years.
Those positive developments should now lead to concrete progress on the ground, in
response to the Court’s requests.
First of all, access for investigators in Darfur, under satisfactory security
conditions, must be quickly and freely granted. Such access is essential if the Court
is to fulfil its mandate and bring justice to the victims of crimes against humanity
and war crimes. France takes note of the progress of the proceedings in the case
against Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, and
calls on the Sudanese authorities to welcome the Court’s requests for cooperation.
Secondly, while complementarity remains a cardinal principle, the execution
of the four outstanding arrest warrants is crucial. France welcomes the continued
dialogue between the Court and the Sudanese authorities in order to examine all the
possibilities offered by the Rome Statute.
Lastly, the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur has deteriorated over
the period covered by the report, marked by the death of some 100 civilians and
the displacement of tens of thousands of people, the vast majority of them women
and children. We encourage the Sudanese authorities to continue to implement their
national plan for the protection of civilians, today with the support of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and tomorrow with the assistance
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan, particularly
with regard to reporting on human rights violations and strengthening the capacity
of the Sudanese police.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms the violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, in particular gender-based and sexual violence,
the victims of which are mostly minors. We are pleased that, under the leadership
of Prosecutor Bensouda, the prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes has
become a priority for her Office.
A permanent and universal criminal court is more necessary than ever to
bring the perpetrators of the most serious crimes to justice and to break the cycles
of impunity and violence at work in too many crisis situations. The International

20-1754911/26

S/2020/1192

Criminal Court is the cornerstone of the fight against impunity at the international
level. It plays an essential role within the multilateral system.
France reaffirms its full support for the Court, which must be able to act
independently and impartially within the framework defined by the Rome Statute.

12/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex VII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of Germany to the
United Nations, Mathias Licharz
There is a relationship between respect for human rights and the incidence of
mass atrocities and war crimes. Respect for human rights is the best way to prevent
those atrocities. It is particularly important today, Human Rights Day, that we remind
this organ to ensure respect for human rights.
Another way to prevent mass atrocities is accountability. In that respect,
Germany welcomes the progress made in the pursuit of justice for victims of the
most severe crimes and atrocities in Darfur. The Juba Peace Agreement, which was
signed in October, not only paved the way towards sustainable peace in the Sudan
but also opened the door to full and unlimited cooperation with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and reaffirmed the Sudanese commitment to resolution 1593
(2005). Germany especially welcomes the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission in relation to Darfur and, likewise, of a special court for Darfur crimes.
Germany encourages the Sudanese authorities to implement concrete first steps to
ensure accountability at the national level as soon as possible. Practical cooperation
with the International Criminal Court also remains important.
In line with the principle of complementarity, it is indeed the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute crimes under the Rome Statute.
Germany encourages the Sudan to continue its efforts in support of justice for the
victims. However, if crimes under international criminal law do not fall under the
Sudan’s national jurisdiction, it also needs to fully cooperate with the United Nations
and the ICC. Those obligations were recently reaffirmed in the Juba Agreement for
Peace in the Sudan, specifically the obligation to arrest and surrender suspects for
whom arrest warrants have been issued.
Finally, we once again call on the States Members of the United Nations, in
particular the members of the Council, to keep up their support for the International
Criminal Court as a key element of our common fight against impunity. We ask them
to respect the independence of the Court and abstain from undue interference. We
call on those who have not yet joined the Rome Statute to do so.

20-1754913/26

S/2020/1192

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations, Muhsin Syihab
Let me join others in thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing. Indonesia
notes the thirty-second report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the situation in Darfur.
As the Sudan marches towards peace and stability, Indonesia believes that
the country’s commitment to pursue justice and accountability remains a critical
element of its transition.
My statement will therefore focus on three key issues.
First, public confidence in the legal system is crucial. In that connection, we
welcome the historic Juba Peace Agreement and the Government of the Sudan’s
national plan for the protection of civilians. We now need to focus on implementing
those instruments.
To that end, public confidence in the legal system, especially law enforcement,
is critical. Indonesia is concerned at the growing lack of public confidence in the
legal system, especially among internally displaced persons.
Indonesia welcomes the Sudan’s commitment to establishing a truth and
reconciliation commission in relation to Darfur, as enshrined in the Juba Agreement
for Peace in the Sudan. It is an important step to restore confidence in the overall
transition. Furthermore, we call on the Government of the Sudan to work together
with all legitimate stakeholders in Darfur to nurture public confidence in the
legal system.
Secondly, we stress the need to strengthen the Sudan’s legal system. Indonesia
once again emphasizes the importance of the Sudan’s effective leadership of its
transitional process, including with regard to the pursuit of justice and accountability.
We commend the Sudan’s effort to improve the effectiveness of its legal
system, including by establishing a special court for Darfur crimes — a testament
of the Sudan’s constructive approach to improving its legal system — and we look
forward to its further cooperation, especially with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, in that regard.
Thirdly, it is important to bolster the Juba peace agreement. The efforts to
pursue justice must go hand in hand with wider efforts to sustain peace in Darfur.
While peace cannot be complete and sustainable without justice, justice cannot
prosper in the absence of peace. That requires credible efforts by the parties to
achieve and maintain reconciliation and uphold the peace agreement.
Actions taken by the international community must not hamper efforts to fully
implement the peace agreement, especially with regard to bringing in all parties
outside the peace agreement. We expect that everyone — nationally, regionally and
internationally — will work together to strengthen the implementation of the historic
peace agreement.
In conclusion, Indonesia is confident that by working together to enhance
the Sudan’s national legal system, there can be further progress towards peace and
stability in the Sudan. I therefore reaffirm Indonesia’s long-standing support for
lasting peace and stability in the Sudan.

14/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to welcome the holding of this briefing devoted
to the examination of the thirty-second, semi-annual report on the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Darfur and congratulate the Prosecutor,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on her briefing to the Council.
Since the last briefing of the Office of the Prosecutor to the Council on 10 June
(see S/2020/538), the Sudan has made efforts and encouraging progress in its quest
for justice for the victims of atrocities committed in Darfur.
We therefore welcome the adoption in July by the Sudan’s Sovereign Council
of several legislative amendments, including the repeal of criminal law provisions
that prevented cooperation with the ICC.
The signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan in October by
representatives of the Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front
and other movements in the country, in which the parties agreed to cooperate fully
with the ICC in relation to individuals subject to arrest warrants, is an important
development that we welcome.
My delegation therefore notes the adoption by the parties of several measures
relating to the appearance of wanted suspects before the ICC, the facilitation of
investigations in which they do not intend to interfere and the guarantee of security
for victims and witnesses. We also note that the decision to establish a Darfur truth
and reconciliation commission, as well as a special court for the crimes committed
there, can only serve to complement the objectives of the ICC.
My delegation encourages continued dialogue between the Sudanese
authorities and the ICC, within the framework of the principle of complementarity
with national judicial institutions.
It is indeed important that the Court continue its activities with complete
independence and impartiality in order to ensure that the persons prosecuted and
the suspects can exercise their fundamental rights, including the right to a fair trial.
We regret the violations of children’s rights, in particular those involving killing,
mutilation and sexual violence, especially against girls, as noted in the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and a follow-on presence (S/2020/1115), dated 13 November.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the establishment of a regular and
constructive dialogue between the Government of the Sudan and the ICC with regard
to the drafting of a memorandum of understanding on facilitating the operations
of the Office of the Prosecutor in the Sudan and reiterates its congratulations to
Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office on their efforts and dedication to the fight
against impunity.

20-1754915/26

S/2020/1192

Annex X
Statement by the Senior Counsellor of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations, Maria Zabolotskaya
[Original: Russian]
The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan provides a unique opportunity
to ensure long-term stabilization and a transition to progressive development in the
Sudan. The authorities are ready to address the root causes of conflicts, including
the conflict in Darfur, and progress has been made in the implementation of the
peace agreement.
Khartoum has to solve the difficult tasks of restoring the country’s
economy and implementing peacebuilding initiatives, with the help of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has succeeded in reaching its
goals. We believe it is necessary to proceed with the closure of the peacekeeping
operation in line with the time frames stipulated in resolution 2525 (2020).
The situation in Darfur has not undergone any significant negative changes.
Intercommunal clashes in some states due to transhumance-related circumstances
have not changed the overall situation. In addition, the well-coordinated and prompt
reaction of the authorities to those developments, as well as the active national
strategy for the protection of civilians, on which Sudanese representatives have
regularly updated the Council, once again proves the willingness of Khartoum to
comprehensively overcome the root causes of conflict. We can only welcome such
a stance.
Against that positive backdrop, we note that it has been 15 years since the
Security Council entrusted the International Criminal Court (ICC) with the task of
holding accountable all those who have committed crimes in Darfur. Those 15 years
have not brought any progress, however. On the contrary, the work on the Darfur file
has exposed the incompetence and political bias of the ICC, which for the sake of
achieving short-term goals, has attempted to distort the effective norms of customary
international law concerning the immunity of heads of State. In the meantime, in the
absence of the celebrated “Hague justice”, the Sudanese people have decided to take
ownership of the situation and we can only support them in so doing.

16/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Permit me to extend our appreciation for their remarkable work to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and her team.
We also thank her for today’s presentation of the thirty-second report to the
Security Council, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Since the Prosecutor’s last report in June (see S/2020/538), we have witnessed
considerable progress by the Sudanese transitional Government in its efforts to
restore democracy, peace and stability in the country. That progress includes, inter
alia, the conclusion of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October and
the Sudan’s commitment to usher in a new era with the special political mission of
the United Nations — the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in Sudan.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes those positive developments
unfolding in our sister nation. The Juba peace agreement, which comprises provisions
to promote human rights, the rule of law, transitional justice and reconciliation, as
well as a scope for greater cooperation with the ICC, could be a pioneering instrument
to transform the lives of all Sudanese people. In that respect, it is essential that the
agreement be implemented comprehensively and in a timely manner.
Despite those notable advances, we remain concerned about the dire
humanitarian and economic situation confronting the Sudan, which has been
exacerbated by climate change and the coronavirus disease pandemic. We encourage
the transitional Government and all international partners to decisively address
those vexing issues. Intercommunal violence, together with grave violations against
the most vulnerable groups, including women and children, are also very disturbing.
We condemn those atrocities and call on the Sudanese authorities to renew their
efforts to ensure that all perpetrators are held accountable and brought to justice. We
also call on the international community, especially international donors, to renew
their support to the Sudan and to increase their contribution to the humanitarian
response plan.
As champions of a robust international legal system, it is incumbent on us
all — both States parties and non-State parties to the Rome Statute — to comply
strictly with our international obligations. In that context, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines encourages greater cooperation between the Sudan and the ICC,
particularly in ensuring that the Office of the Prosecutor executes its mandate without
hindrance. We note with gratitude the transitional Government’s decision in July to
amend legislation to repeal the criminal laws that had prevented cooperation with
the ICC, as well as its commitment to conclude a memorandum of understanding
with the ICC. The visit to Khartoum by the Office of the Prosecutor in October
is also laudable. We are encouraged by those developments and stress that a
strengthened relationship between the Sudan and the ICC augurs well for the respect
of international criminal justice.
We underscore that cooperation and the principle of complementarity are sine
qua nons for the ICC. As such, we emphasize that the ICC’s jurisdiction can only be
invoked in the case of the State’s inertia to prosecute alleged perpetrators. To that end,
we look forward to enhanced cooperation and the application of complementarity,
in accordance with the Rome Statute, to ensure that the four outstanding ICC arrest
warrants in the Sudan are resolved.

20-1754917/26

S/2020/1192

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands resolute in its condemnation of the
grave injustice against the ICC and its officials through unilateral coercive measures
in the form of sanctions. It is our view that those unilateral measures are unjustifiable,
flagrantly violate our international rule-based system, seek to undermine the work
of the ICC and must be withdrawn.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its commitment to the ICC and repeats
its call for non-State parties to the Rome Statute to become members of the ICC.

18/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations, Xolisa Mabhongo
At the outset, allow me to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive briefing on the situation
in the Sudan.
South Africa continues to support the full implementation of resolution 1593
(2005), pursuant to which the situation in Darfur was referred to the Prosecutor of
the ICC to investigate war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We are encouraged by the progress made in terms of the ongoing efforts to
ensure justice for the victims of the Darfur conflict, particularly the developments in
the ICC case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, including the opening of the confirmation
of charges hearing in February 2021. The questioning of Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Hussein by the International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur regarding
crimes committed in Darfur is also promising.
The Sudan’s commitment to full and unlimited cooperation with the ICC
and the emphasis on the commitment to resolution 1593 (2005), as set out in the
Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, are commendable. Such commitments were
already initiated during the first visit by the Prosecutor to the Sudan in mid-October
and further cooperation between the Sudan and the Court is welcomed.
South Africa ardently supports the principle of complementarity and
encourages all States to develop their legal systems to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes. South Africa therefore welcomes the establishment of a truth
and reconciliation commission in relation to Darfur and a special court for Darfur
crimes. An essential component of justice is that it be carried out and witnessed. The
establishment of the truth and reconciliation commission and special court will not
only ensure accountability for crimes committed but also that justice is witnessed by
the victims in the Sudan.
While South Africa is encouraged by the significant progress that the Sudan
has made, we remain concerned at ongoing reports of continued deaths and violence,
as well as reports by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
of human rights violations related to children.
We urge all stakeholders in the Sudan to engage in constructive dialogue in
order to restore peace and stability in the country. In that regard, the support of all
stakeholders within the international community remains vital for both national and
regional stability.

20-1754919/26

S/2020/1192

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her valuable briefing and for her Office’s thirty-second report,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). I also salute her tireless efforts throughout her
tenure to combat impunity for the most serious crimes.
Tunisia welcomes recent developments during the reporting period, which
have been conducive to peace, justice, reconstruction and national reconciliation
in our sister country, the Sudan. In that regard, we commend the Juba Agreement
for Peace in the Sudan, signed between the Sudanese parties on 3 October, which
constitutes a comprehensive post-conflict road map, particularly in the areas of
combating impunity, addressing past violations, preventing future recurrences and
establishing a smooth and peaceful transition in an environment of political and
social harmony.
We are optimistic about efforts to bring about justice for victims in Darfur
and a comprehensive reconciliation among the Sudanese people in the light
of the arrangements provided for in the Juba peace agreement and based on the
various domestic, national and international justice mechanisms, including the
transitional justice process, with the support of the international community and the
Security Council.
We welcome the steps taken to establish a new relationship of cooperation
and complementarity between the International Criminal Court and the Sudanese
authorities, based on constructive engagement and mutual respect in order to
achieve the common objectives of ensuring accountability for the terrible crimes
in Darfur, preventing their recurrence and ensuring the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005).
We expect that relationship to take into account the requirements and context
of the transitional stage by providing the Sudanese authorities with the time and
resources needed to deal effectively with the alleged atrocities, thereby translating
the Rome Statute’s principles of cooperation and complementarity into a genuine
and objective reality.
Tunisia expresses its satisfaction with the stated commitment of the Sudanese
authorities to ensuring accountability and the rule of law, as reflected during the
Prosecutor’s visit to Sudan from 17 to 20 October — the first of its kind — and at her
meetings with senior Sudanese officials.
We hope those discussions lead to productive follow-ups that will enable the
Court’s investigators to travel throughout Sudanese territory with adequate safety
and security precautions in support of ongoing investigations and prosecutions,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and will ensure evidence-based accountability
and access to witnesses and the affected local communities. We welcome the draft
memorandum of understanding planned between the parties for that purpose.
Tunisia stresses that the best way to promote accountability in Darfur is by
promoting dialogue and enabling national processes premised on both the primacy
of domestic jurisdiction and the need for international justice.
We look forward to further advancing dialogue between the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Court and the Sudanese authorities to explore the possibilities and
20/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

options available under the Rome Statute with a view to burden-sharing, harmonizing
efforts and building the capacities of Sudanese judicial agencies.
In that regard, we welcome the agreement by the Sudanese parties to establish
a special court to address the terrible crimes in Darfur and the gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated since 2002. We also
welcome the role of the African Union in supporting the smooth implementation of
measures for that special court.
We stress that optimism about the prospects for the imminent transitional
stage in the Sudan should not mask the enormity of the challenges, which require
that the international community redouble its efforts. The Sudanese authorities need
assistance during this sensitive period, especially in the area of capacity-building
and genuine Sudanese ownership of the transitional stage so that peace and justice
can be mutually reinforcing and the foundations of democracy can be laid.

20-1754921/26

S/2020/1192

Annex XIV
Statement by the Minister Counsellor and Legal Adviser of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Chanaka Wickremasinghe
I would like to start by thanking the Prosecutor for her thirty-second report
on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The continued work
of the Prosecutor and her team is an important part of the efforts towards ensuring
accountability for the most serious crimes committed in Darfur. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) also has an important role to play in global efforts to end
impunity for those crimes of international concern and the United Kingdom fully
supports its efforts to hold perpetrators to account and achieve justice for victims
in Darfur.
Since the Council was last briefed on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), we have continued to see the Government of the Sudan
make welcome progress in implementing key reforms to ensure that justice and
accountability are delivered across the country. Those include the repeal of criminal
law provisions that had prevented cooperation with the ICC, as well as legal reforms
on women’s and children’s rights.
Here, I would like to draw particular attention to the first visit of the ICC’s
Chief Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to Khartoum — a historic moment for the
new Sudan. The cooperation between the Court and the Sudanese authorities is a
clear demonstration of the importance that the transitional Government has placed
on the pursuit of justice for victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur, as is the recent
Juba Peace Agreement, which pledges the signatories’ preparedness for full and
unlimited cooperation with the ICC concerning persons for whom arrest warrants
have been issued.
While it is right that we recognize and applaud the progress that has been
made, the United Kingdom acknowledges that this is one of many steps in the
process of ensuring justice and accountability are served and that issues of concern
remain. As the Prosecutor details in her report, the security situation in Darfur
deteriorated during this period, with spikes in violence resulting in the deaths,
injury and further displacements of civilians. The continued persistence of human
rights violations and incidents of sexual violence, particularly against children, is
concerning and unacceptable.
I echo the statement to the Council by my country’s Permanent Representative
on Tuesday (see S/2020/1183), and I call on the Government of the Sudan to build
on the progress already made and intensify its efforts to improve judicial systems
and rule-of-law institutions as part of the implementation of the national plan of the
Sudan for protecting civilians after the exit of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (see S/2020/429, annex).
Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor and her team for their continued
dedication and work with regard to the situation in Darfur during this reporting
period. The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the Office of the Prosecutor since
the surrender of Ali Kushayb to continue its investigative activities to strengthen
and reinforce that case. We urge the Government of the Sudan to continue its work
with the ICC and swiftly facilitate the Office’s request for support for such efforts,
including access to Darfur.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the United Kingdom’s support for the welcome
commitments that the Government of the Sudan has made to ensuring justice and
accountability for the historic crimes committed not only in Darfur but also across
22/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

the Sudan. We urge the Sudan to build on that progress as it continues to implement
the goals of the transition. We stand ready to assist as part of our wider commitment
to supporting the people of the Sudan.

20-1754923/26

S/2020/1192

Annex XV
Statement by the Deputy Legal Adviser of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Julian Simcock
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
her briefing.
Despite the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
are being felt everywhere, we are heartened to see continued positive developments
in the Sudan over the past year. We have been encouraged by the concrete steps
that parties in the Sudan have taken to build a more stable, secure and human
rights-respecting future. We are particularly pleased that the Sudan’s civilian-led
transitional Government, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and other groups signed
a landmark peace agreement aimed at ending almost two decades of conflict. This
important step forward, alongside the transitional Government’s implementation of
justice and accountability measures, including the formation of a special court in
Darfur to try atrocity crimes, can help to address decades of violence committed
with impunity against Darfuri victims. It will also increase the prospects for a just
and enduring peace across the Sudan.
The sound of celebration in the streets as the Government welcomed rebels
back to Khartoum is a sign that the Sudanese people are tired of war and conflict
and are ready to move forward. Genuine accountability would be a positive step for
the Sudan, a clear break from the past and a clear demonstration of its commitment
to freedom and justice.
The United States will continue its efforts to deepen diplomatic relations with
the new Sudanese Government and support the ongoing peace negotiations with
several other armed opposition groups. We will continue to encourage them to use
a survivor-centred approach during the negotiations and ensure that the voices of
women, young people and other groups that have borne the brunt of the Al-Bashir
regime’s violence are heard. We must ensure that the crimes of the Al-Bashir era are
not forgotten or ignored. In particular, we applaud the Sudanese women who were
on the front lines to promote human rights and good governance, often at great risk
to their personal safety.
The United States supports the Sudan’s efforts to uphold democratic values,
strengthen an independent justice system and pursue legal reform to ensure equality
for all, regardless of gender, religion or ethnicity. We will continue to encourage
open, inclusive national dialogues about how transitional justice mechanisms can
facilitate truth, justice, reconciliation and healing during the Sudan’s fragile and
ongoing political transition.
There are few in the Sudan who deserve to face justice more than Omar
Al-Bashir. Although we are encouraged by his recent conviction for financial
corruption, we believe more needs to be done to pursue justice and accountability,
specifically with regard to his alleged responsibility for acts of genocide committed
in Darfur and other atrocities committed throughout the country.
As we have said for more than a decade, there will be no lasting peace in the
Sudan until there is genuine accountability for all the crimes committed during the
long years of conflict. The Darfur conflict, which killed an estimated 300,000 people,
led to the displacement of millions more and entailed rampant sexual violence and
the looting and burning of homes, demands justice. There are still almost 2 million
internally displaced persons in Darfur. Those responsible for the crimes committed
in the conflicts in Darfur and the Two Areas must be held accountable for their

24/26

20-17549

S/2020/1192

misconduct. We must also ensure that those who oppose the Sudan’s efforts to
address its painful past have no power to hijack the Sudan’s future.
The United States has historically been, and will continue to be, a strong
supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for victims of atrocities through
appropriate mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face justice, but we
must also be careful to recognize the right tool for each situation.
I must reiterate our long-standing and principled objection to any assertion of
ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not party to the Rome Statute, absent
a Security Council referral or the consent of such States. Our concerns regarding the
ICC and the situation in Afghanistan are well known.
Our position on the ICC in no way diminishes the commitment of the United
States to supporting accountability for atrocity crimes, violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights.

20-1754925/26

S/2020/1192

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing. I welcome His Excellency
Ambassador Omer Mohamed Ahmed Siddig, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Sudan, to this meeting.
Viet Nam maintains its previously stated position on the Sudan, including as
was expressed at the Council’s meeting on Tuesday, 8 December (see S/2020/1183).
We welcome the recent historic developments in the country, particularly the signing
of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October. We commend the
continued efforts of the Government in that regard. It is critical that the Sudanese
parties continue to fully implement the peace agreement so as to bring about lasting
peace and development in the country. We also look forward to the full and timely
operation of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan to support the country’s transition in this critical period.
At the same time, we are concerned about the reports of the increasing
number of civilian casualties, including many women and children, over the past
few months due to intercommunal violence. We call on the Government to take
appropriate measures in addressing that issue, including acts related to violations of
international humanitarian law.
Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position that the State has the primary
responsibility for the implementation of international humanitarian law and the
prevention and suppression of serious criminal acts, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and the crime of aggression. While attaching importance to the
establishment of accountability for violations of international humanitarian law and
serious criminal acts, we maintain that it should be carried out in accordance with
the fundamental principles of international law, including respect for the State’s
independence and sovereignty.
In that regard, we take note of the thirty-second report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

26/26

20-17549
