UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/25
23 May 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3378th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 May 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in
Liberia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the members:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Liberia dated 18 May 1994 (S/1994/588).
"In this connection, the Council notes with satisfaction the full
installation of the Council of State of the Liberian National Transitional
Government (LNTG), as well as indications that the transitional government
has begun to assume its responsibilities and functions throughout the
country.
"The Council commends the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) and the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for their contributions
to the demobilization and disarmament efforts in Liberia, a critical
requirement of the Cotonou Agreement.
"The Council notes with concern, however, the continued fighting among
and within factions. Political differences and renewed violence among and
within certain factions have caused the disarmament process to come to a
virtual halt. The ongoing hostilities make it very difficult for UNOMIL to
accomplish critical elements of its mandate and prevent the peace-keeping
troops of the Cease-Fire Monitoring Group of the Economic Community of West
Africa States (ECOMOG) from carrying out their functions regarding
disarmament and demobilization, a situation which directly threatens the
ability of the parties to maintain the timetable outlined in the Cotonou
Agreement and the communiqué of 15 February 1994.
"In the light of these developments, the Council calls upon the
parties to resolve their differences within the forum of the transitional
government and the Cotonou Agreement, to end any hostilities and to
accelerate the pace of disarmament with the aim of bringing it to a
successful conclusion, all of which are crucial to creating suitable
conditions for elections. The Council wishes to remind the parties of the

94-22516 (E)

230594

/...

S/PRST/1994/25
English
Page 2

importance it attaches to the holding of those elections on
7 September 1994.
"The Council reaffirms its intention to review the situation in
Liberia again on or before 30 June 1994 including the role played by
UNOMIL, such review to include whether sufficient progress has been made in
implementing the revised timetable of the Peace Agreement to warrant
continued UNOMIL involvement, in particular, the effective operation of the
Liberian National Transitional Government, progress in carrying out
disarmament and demobilization, and preparations for the holding of
elections on 7 September 1994. In accordance with the terms of its
resolution 911 of 21 April 1994, the Council requests the Secretary-General
to prepare options by 30 June 1994 regarding the future implementation of
UNOMIL’s mandate and its continued operations.
"The Council reminds the parties that the ultimate responsibility for
the success of the peace process in Liberia rests with them and with the
Liberian people. It urges them to respect fully the terms of the Cotonou
Agreement and reaffirms its expectation that the parties will continue to
make every effort to achieve a lasting peace in Liberia."

-----
