S/2018/623*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2018
Original: English

Comprehensive approach to mine action
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
Security Council resolution 2365 (2017), adopted on 30 June 2017, was the first
stand-alone resolution on mine action. Its adoption by the Council reaffirmed the
criticality of mine action to the peace and security agenda, humanitarian emergency
response and sustainable development while also recognizing the positive
contribution that mine action makes to stabilization and sustaining peace.
2.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request, made by the Security
Council in resolution 2365 (2017), that the Secretary-General report on the
implementation of the resolution within a year. It provides an overview of the United
Nations response to the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices, and of significant developments and trends in mine
action. Covering the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 April 2018, the report draw s on
data and analysis provided by the United Nations Mine Action Service and other parts
of the United Nations system, including peace operations, as well as by Member
States.

II. Significant developments and trends
3.
Instruments of international law continued to provide a bulwark against the
proliferation of explosive weapons during the reporting period. Afghanistan ratified
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects and the five Protocols thereto, in particular Protocol V, which
establishes a State’s responsibility to assist with the clearance of explosive remnants
of war resulting from a conflict in which it participated. The State of Palestine became
the ninety-fourth High Contracting Party to Protocol V, while Benin and Sri Lanka
joined the Convention on Cluster Munitions. The universalization of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, an important cornerstone of international
humanitarian law, was bolstered by the joining of Sri Lanka and the State of Palestine
in December 2017, which brought the number of States parties to an encouraging 164.
On 18 September 2017, Algeria destroyed its last anti-personnel landmines, fulfilling
its obligation under the Convention.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 July 2018.

18-08829* (E)

120718

*1808829*

S/2018/623

4.
Unfortunately, active conflicts continue to add to the existing contamination of
land with explosives, offsetting the clearance efforts of the United Nations, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other partners. The International
Campaign to Ban Landmines, in its publication Landmine Monitor 2017, recorded
8,605 casualties from mines, explosive remnants of war and victim-operated
improvised explosive devices, more than twice as many as the 2014 figure. 1 At least
2,089 of those casualties were killed. The total comprised mostly casualties recorded
in armed conflicts in Afghanistan, Libya, Ukraine and Yemen. Given the severity of
the conflicts in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and the difficulty of gathering
accurate data during active conflicts, it is probable that the actual number of casualties
is much higher.
5.
It is not known exactly how many improvised explosive devices are emplaced
or produced. However, improvised explosive devices are responsible for the recent
worldwide rise in casualties from explosive ordnance. Landmine Monitor 2017
recorded 1,805 casualties from victim-operated improvised explosive devices, which
are explosive weapons produced in an improvised manner and designed to explode
from the presence, proximity or contact of their victim. That represents the highest
annual total of such casualties since Monitor reporting began in 1999. 2 Moreover,
research suggests that victims of improvised explosive devices are several times more
likely to die or suffer multiple amputations than landmine victims. 3 In 2017,
Afghanistan experienced a monthly average of 170 victims of mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices — its highest recorded monthly
average since 2001. In particular, the overwhelming majority of victims of explosive
remnants of war were children. Victim-operated improvised explosive devices were
responsible for 10 per cent of all civilian casualties in Afghanistan.
6.
I continue to be alarmed at the urbanization of armed conflict, with the majority
of civilian casualties from the indiscriminate use of explosive devices now occurring
in urban centres. Residential areas in several affected States continue t o be littered
with vast amounts of explosive remnants of war, including improvised explosive
devices. In Iraq, the density, complexity, variety and quantity of explosive remnants
of war, including unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive devices,
encountered in Mosul, particularly the Old City, is unprecedented. Until this
unconscionable level of contamination is cleared, urgent humanitarian response
efforts will be hampered and civilians cannot safely return home. Given the extent of
contamination and the amount of rubble and debris, it is estimated that the clearance
process will take at least 10 years to complete.
7.
Hostilities in the Syrian Arab Republic, which is suffering one of the most
devastating conflicts of modern times, continued unabated during the reporting
period. Between January 2015 and February 2018, an average of 162 explosives
incidents per day were reported in the country. Nearly half of all conflict -related
injuries in the Syrian Arab Republic resulted from such incidents 4. Explosive weapons
continued to be used indiscriminately and systematically in populated urban and rural
areas, particularly affecting internally displaced persons and those voluntarily
returning to unsafe areas. The decontamination of those areas from unexploded
ordnance and improvised explosive devices is a vital first step in making villages and
cities safe for return. Limited access to communities in need, caused in part by
ongoing hostilities in the country and the presence of explosive ordnance, impeded
__________________

See http://www.the-monitor.org/media/2615219/Landmine-Monitor-2017_final.pdf.
Ibid.
3
See http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/bmjopen/7/7/e014697.full.pdf.
4
See “Physical rehabilitation needs and services for persons with injuries and disabilities ”,
Humanity and Inclusion, issue brief — Syria (April 2018), available at
https://hi.org/sn_uploads/content/HI_IssueBrief_Syria_-_REHABILITATION_april2018.pdf.
1
2

2/13

18-08829

S/2018/623

mine action responses and forced humanitarian organizations to suspend activities on
multiple occasions to ensure the safety of their personnel.
8.
The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine has led to widespread explosives
contamination in that part of the country, posing a significant risk to the population.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights noted that
during the period from 16 August 2017 to 15 February 2018, more than twice as many
civilians were killed by remaining explosives as were killed owing to active
hostilities. 5
9.
Even when active hostilities decrease in intensity, and for years and often
decades after they have ceased, landmines and explosive remnants of war continue to
pose a threat to civilians. For example, despite the fact that a ceasefire was signed in
Cambodia more than 25 years ago, 2017 was the first year to witness a full month
without any recorded casualties from landmines or unexploded ordnance.
10. The impact of landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices is not limited to civilians. Peacekeeping operations are increasingly mandated
to operate in dangerous and complex environments. In November 2017, I appointed
Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz (retired) of Brazil to propose
practical and effective recommendations to reduce the number of fatalities and
injuries among peacekeeping personnel. Significantly, in his report, he highlighted
the fact that the use of small arms, improvised explosive devices, vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devices and landmines resulted in the majority of fatalities
among peacekeepers.
11. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) operates in an asymmetrical threat environment in which United
Nations peacekeepers and Malian defence and security forces are regularly targeted
with improvised explosive devices. Since 2014, MINUSMA has had the highest
fatality rates of any United Nations peace operation, which has prompted the Mission
to adopt a more robust posture and implement a series of measures to enhance its
ability to deter and counter the threats. The complexity of attacks and the quantity of
explosives used in Mali increased in 2017, and the emplacement methods have
become more effective; those trends are likely to worsen in the future. A notable spike
in the monthly rate of improvised explosive device incidents in Mali since November
2017 could, if sustained, see the number of incidents in 2018 nearly double compared
with the previous year. While improvised explosive device attacks are targeted
principally at security forces, the number of civilian victims has been increasing
steadily as the threat has moved into the more populated areas of central Mali.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 2365 (2017)
12. In resolution 2365 (2017), the Security Council expressed grave concern over
the serious and lasting threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices not only to civilians, but also to peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel. Seeking action, the Council called upon Member States, the
United Nations system, relevant institutions and other stakeholders to continue
making progress in protecting civilians, increasing the threat mitigation capacity of
peacekeepers, enhancing mandate planning and delivery, sustaining peace,
strengthening national capacities and promoting effective partnerships. This section
highlights efforts made in the implementation of the resolution during the period from
1 July 2017 to 30 April 2018.
__________________
5

18-08829

See OHCHR quarterly reports on the human rights situation in Ukraine, available at
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Countries/ENACARegion/Pages/UAReports.aspx .
3/13

S/2018/623

Protection of civilians
13. Preventing and resolving conflicts and building sustainable peace are my
overarching priorities for the protection of civilians. Where preventing conflict or
sustaining peace fails, we must make every effort to protect the lives, human rights
and dignity of civilians caught up in conflict or its aftermath. Mine action protects
civilians by mitigating the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices, including by assessing the risks of such devices and
clearing their homes and communities, providing risk education and raising risk
mitigation awareness, assisting victims with services and rehabilitation and making
roads accessible again to communities and for the voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.
14. The Territory of Western Sahara, where both sides of the 1,465-km berm that
divides the area are contaminated with landmines and explosive remnants of war,
remains one of the most heavily mined areas in the world. During the reporting period,
the Mine Action Service cleared contamination from more than 5 km 2 of land,
enabling the nomadic and local populations living in the area to move freely with
their livestock and allowing United Nations military observers to monitor the
ceasefire between the Royal Moroccan Army and the Frente Popular para la
Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro Military Forces.
15. By prioritizing survey and clearance activities, peace operations serve to protect
civilians by removing the immediate threat as well as by enabling the mobility of
mission personnel, including peacekeeping troops. The United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei cleared more than 360 km of roads during the reporting
period, allowing for more patrols by peacekeepers and facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Cleared land allowed the mission to establish addition al
peacekeeping bases and team sites, thereby increasing its ability to achieve mandate
objectives. As a result, a more robust mission presence contributed to a decrease in
the number of violent incidents.
16. Clearance is also a key activity in the process of liquidating peacekeeping
operations. As the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) was
drawing down in advance of its closure on 15 October 2017, the Mine Action Service
was called upon to destroy the expired and unserviceable ammunition of repatriating
military and police units, and to clear a site that had been used for the demolition of
expired ammunition and explosives. That support was essential for MINUSTAH to
ensure future use of the site without risk to civilians. Similar action undertaken for
the closure of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire on 30 June 2017 led to
the inclusion of such necessary support in the Department of Field Support mission
liquidation manual.
17. In areas where hostilities are ongoing or clearance activities have not yet been
completed, the risk posed to civilians by explosive remnants of war can be reduced
by making the population aware of the threat and encouraging behaviour that reduces
the risk to people, property and the environment. In Somalia during the reporting
period, 50 new community liaison officers were deployed to deliver risk education
messages promoting safe behaviour in areas where civilians are at risk. Those
officers, of whom 60 per cent were recruited from at-risk youth and 9 per cent were
female, reached civilians, including humanitarian workers and State officials, in 263
communities. Of those receiving risk education, 40 per cent were female.
18. In Darfur, risk education teams reached out to local communities in village
squares, places of worship, schools and camps for internally displaced persons.
Children were specifically targeted, as they constitute the majority of casualties from
explosives. To reach nomads, who are particularly vulnerable to the threat posed by

4/13

18-08829

S/2018/623

explosive ordnance, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) also provided risk education along traditional grazing routes. In total, risk
education teams in Darfur conducted 1,685 separate sessions, reaching more than
100,000 persons since July 2017, including 22,500 men, 20,000 women, 35,000 boys
and 28,500 girls. An additional 500,000 persons, of whom more than 47 per cent were
children, were educated by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
partners in Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, which are affected by the Boko
Haram terrorist group. UNICEF also provided risk education to more than 1.8 million
civilians in Yemen, which has recently seen large-scale contamination with explosive
remnants of war.
19. For displaced persons, multiple exposures to accurate information on explosive
threats are needed well in advance of any decision to return home. Mine action actors
in Iraq coordinated the content of risk education materials within the mine action area
of responsibility of the Protection Cluster as well as with the Government of Iraq, to
ensure that the messaging delivered was consistent while avoiding duplication of
efforts. Where access to education is delineated by gender, the Mine Action Service
works specifically with female risk education volunteers to spread lifesaving
educational messages to women, who play a critical role in instilling safe behaviour
among their children and peers.
20. The United Nations supports Member States in integrating victim assistance into
broader national policies, plans and legal frameworks related to disability, health,
education, employment, development and the reduction of poverty. In Libya, the Mine
Action Service coordinated with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to organize the first workshop on victim assistance for Libya, held in
Tunis in July 2017. Libyan and international stakeholders from the health, education
and mine action sectors discussed their strategies, roles and responsibilities to addres s
the needs of people injured by explosive weapons in the country, leading to a
commitment by the Libyan Mine Action Centre to facilitate the development of a
Libyan-owned victim assistance strategy.
21. The United Nations also provides support to victims of landmines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, as well as to their families and
communities. UNAMID partnered with a local non-governmental organization to
identify 50 victims for targeted assistance with income generation and so cial
reintegration in Darfur, including by setting up small-scale commercial activities such
as grocery shops, animal husbandry and water vending. Improving the socioeconomic
position of survivors helps to reintegrate victims into their communities by enab ling
them to contribute to the economic development of their societies, in keeping with
the imperative of the Sustainable Development Goals to “leave no one behind”.
Protecting peacekeepers
22. More than 100,000 men and women working in United Nations peace operations
risk their lives to improve those of others. In 2017, 59 of them lost their lives as a
result of malicious acts involving the use of explosive devices, and 150 more were
injured. Ensuring the safety of peacekeeping personnel must be a top priority, and
providing them with the right training, knowledge and equipment to mitigate the
threat posed by explosive weapons is an important part of that commitment.
23. In Mali, MINUSMA has sustained more than 350 casualties since its creation in
2013, of whom 65 were killed as a result of attacks using explosives, which have
increasingly included improvised explosive devices. To better prepare troops for
operations in a high explosive threat environment, the Mine Action Service has
implemented a comprehensive improvised explosive device threat mitigation
framework. It consists of tailored predeployment and in-theatre training and
18-08829

5/13

S/2018/623

mentoring, technical and strategic advice and the provision of specialized equipment,
including metal detectors with ground-penetrating technology, remotely operated
robots and mine-protected vehicles. To strengthen capacity among troop-contributing
countries and promote sustainability, during the reporting period more than 100
national experts were trained to deliver predeployment training. Once deployed,
troops continue to receive specialized in-theatre training and mentoring to support the
gradual application of the required tactics, techniques and procedures. This
comprehensive approach has helped to reduce the rate of MINUSMA casualties from
improvised explosive devices by 50 per cent since 2016. It has also increased the
ability of MINUSMA troops to detect improvised explosive devices before
detonation, from a device detection rate of 11 per cent in 2014 to a rate of 40 per cent
in the first months of 2018. With MINUSMA remaining the most frequently targeted
mission, these efforts save lives and improve mission mobility and mandate
implementation.
24. In Somalia, comprehensive threat mitigation efforts have also yielded posi tive
effects. During the reporting period, the Mine Action Service trained more than
15,000 troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in improvised
explosive device threat mitigation and another 800 troops in specialized search
techniques, thereby increasing the capacity of AMISOM to operate in high-risk
environments. The Mine Action Service also provided specialized equipment,
including metal detectors and explosive ordnance disposal suits. Advisory materials
distributed in Amharic, English, French and Somali reached peacekeepers in more
than 100 field locations, and AMISOM teams surveyed more than 6,000 km of roads.
Civilians as well as peacekeepers throughout the AMISOM area of operations were
protected through the searching and securing of 680 buildings and 13 km 2 of open
area during the reporting period, including with the help of 34 explosive detection
dogs. This package of measures contributed to the decline in the number of AMISOM
casualties per improvised explosive device incident from 2.42 in 2015 to 1.26 in 2016
and 1.10 in 2017.
25. In the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), where landmines and other explosive remnants of war continue to pose a
threat to peacekeepers, the mission safely disposed of more than 1,000 anti-personnel
mines during the reporting period and provided safety briefings to approximately 600
United Nations military and civilian personnel. Nearly 4,000 members of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) received similar training.
Mine action in United Nations response planning and reporting
26. United Nations operations are quicker and more effective, and lives are saved,
when the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices is considered from the earliest stages of planning and programming.
In Darfur, UNAMID and the United Nations country team have jointly prepared for
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees, including through the
surveying and clearance of explosive remnants of war from abandoned areas. This
practice has served to protect those coming back to their homes and has validated the
concept of safe return for those still waiting to go back. During the reporting period,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) also consistently included
provisions for mine action in planning the establishment and closure of operating
bases and protection-of-civilians sites, ensuring the surveying and clearance of the
areas and improving the safety of future occupants.
27. The threat posed by mines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices, and the need for mine action, were reflected in the majority of relevant
Humanitarian Response Plans in 2017 and 2018. Clearance facilitated humanitarian
6/13

18-08829

S/2018/623

access to populations in need, and risk education was delivered to more than 80 per
cent of targeted beneficiaries in both Afghanistan and the Syrian Arab Republic. Data
on explosives contamination assists in defining protection needs, and detailed
information on known explosives contamination, where available, enables the
humanitarian community to gain critical situational awareness, which increases the
safety of its activities.
28. The Government of Libya and the United Nations have fully integrated mine
action into their consultations on the United Nations strategic framework for the
biennium 2019–2020 as part of a renewed partnership towards a more sustainable
path to development, prosperity, peace and security. Mine action considerations have
also been taken into account in the preparation of the Humanitarian Response Plan
for 2018 and the planning of emergency assistance in the country.
29. Reporting on the scale of the problem and the activities undertaken to address it
has been incorporated into periodic reports to the Security Council on peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well as thematic reports such as those on
the protection of civilians. Information on incidents and threat mitigation activities is
broken down by location, gender and age where possible, to provide for a better
understanding of the impact on the population and better prioritization of clearance
activities and risk education.
Sustaining peace
30. In 2016, in General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016), the twin resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
Member States stressed that sustaining peace was imperative to preventing the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict. Mine action
programmes, by facilitating the reconstruction of public services, fostering
sustainable development and preventing weapons and explosive material from being
harvested for use by armed groups, are an essential first step towards an environment
of peace and stability, underscoring the criticality of mine action to the security development nexus.
31. Mine action allows for progress on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development by contributing to peaceful and inclusive societies and effective
institutions (Goal 16.1) as well as accelerating progress towards the achievement of
several others of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. The cultivation of
contaminated land, to alleviate poverty and prevent hunger (Goals 1 and 2), can occur
only after that land has been cleared of explosive remnants of war. Children in post conflict settings can return to school to receive a quality education (Goal 4) only after
explosives contamination has been removed. Access to clean water and affordable
energy (Goals 6 and 7) have a chance only if relevant infrastructure is made safe
before it is restored to working order. In recognition of the role that mine action plays
to support sustainable development, I welcome efforts by affected States, including
Afghanistan and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, to adopt a mine-actionspecific national goal or indicator.
32. By providing quick peace dividends to conflict-affected communities, mine
action leads to critical confidence- and trust-building, even across conflict lines.
Given the impact of mine action as an early post-conflict gain, it is essential that
consideration be given to it, including relevant mine action provisions, in peace
agreements during the earliest stages of negotiations. In the 2016 Agreement on the
Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and the Cessation of Hostilities and the Laying
down of Arms between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo demining was recognized as a
prerequisite for post-conflict rural development and as possible employment for
18-08829

7/13

S/2018/623

ex-combatants undergoing socioeconomic reintegration. With support from the
United Nations and other partners, including through the Peacebuilding Fund, the
demining organization Humanicemos Desminado Humanitario increased its capacity
to reintegrate ex-combatants through employment in the mine action sector. The
project is aimed at reintegrating up to 146 people, with women accounting for 20 per
cent of participants. Helping to remove the landmines that they participated in laying
is also a notable way for ex-combatants to provide reparation to victims.
33. During the reporting period, the United Nations facilitated talks and other
contacts between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities on a settlement
agreement. As part of a package of confidence-building measures, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus cleared priority minefields agreed to by the leaders of
both sides, highlighting the positive role that mine action plays in building confidence
between parties negotiating peace agreements. The Mine Action Service provided
training and advice on areas contaminated with landmines and explosive remnants of
war and on assistance in metal detection to members of the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus, enabling the Committee to contribute to the overall process of
reconciliation between the two communities in a safe manner.
34. Mine action in the Central African Republic has facilitated the implementation
by MINUSCA of community violence reduction and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes with armed groups, in support of the political process,
through the safe destruction of weapons and ammunition. The Mine Action Service
supported the Central African national authorities, through the provision of
infrastructure and training, in safely managing and storing weapons and ammunition.
Such support is critical to facilitating the progressive redeployment of the defence
and internal security forces throughout the country and paving the way for the
eventual exit strategy of the United Nations peacekeeping presence. This increased
national capacity was a deciding factor in the approval of requests for exemptions to
the arms embargo, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2399 (2018), that were
submitted to the Security Council during the reporting period.
Strengthening national capacity
35. The safety and security of civilians is the responsibility of Member States, and
the United Nations assists Member States where requested in building their mine
action capacity to fulfil that responsibility.
36. In Afghanistan, the United Nations has worked to enhance the technical and
support capacity and strategic direction and coordination functions of the national
Directorate of Mine Action Coordination. With the transfer of more than 100 United
Nations national staff to the Directorate, it now has the capacity to manage the Afghan
mine action programme. The United Nations now plays a supporting role, providing
technical and management advice and assisting the Directorate in developing national
mine action standards in line with the International Mine Action Standards, to which
all government implementing partners must adhere when performing mine action
operations in the country.
37. In cooperation with other partners, the United Nations provided essential
support for the establishment of an independent and accountable Somali Explosive
Management Authority to coordinate, manage and regulate mine action efforts in
Somalia. Under the Badbaado (Protection) Plan for explosive-hazard management in
Somalia, which is aimed at compliance with the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention
by 2022, the Government of Somalia has taken full ownership over the Information
Management System for Mine Action and improved its understanding of the impact
of explosives contamination on communities.

8/13

18-08829

S/2018/623

38. The gradual building of explosive ordnance disposal capacity within the Somali
Police Force will be critical in the lead-up to the presidential elections in 2021. The
Mine Action Service enhanced the operational capacity of the Somali police during
the reporting period by training and advising explosive ordnance disposal personnel
in Mogadishu, Kismayo and Dhuusamarreb and by equipping newly trained explosive
ordnance disposal teams with robots and specialized suits for explosive ordnance
disposal, as well as with vehicles. Assistance in developing a comprehensive weapons
and ammunition management system in line with sanctions obligations, including the
necessary legal frameworks, policies and procedures, is designed to allow for a partial
lifting of the arms embargo currently in place and has allowed the Government of
Somalia to improve its reporting to the Security Council.
39. Iraqi mine action authorities, which have a wealth of mine clearance experience,
are increasingly focusing on the response to improvised explosive devices, which are
frequently found in liberated areas. In Anbar province during the reporting period, the
United Nations provided advice and training on the identification, marking and
disposal of improvised explosive devices, and the programme is being expanded to
Ninawa and Kirkuk provinces. Such capacity is particularly important in areas where
people are returning to their houses and communities, serving as a prerequisite for
reconstruction and development activities.
Partnership
40. To optimize the results delivered by mine action activities as well as the use of
donor funds, the United Nations cooperates with a number of trusted partners at the
global and national levels. In February 2018, the Mine Action Service planned and
coordinated the 21st annual International Meeting of National Mine Action
Programme Directors and United Nations Advisers at the Palais des Nations in
Geneva. This annual meeting brings together Member States, national mine action
authorities, the United Nations, civil society, academia and the private sector to share
best practices, strengthen partnerships and initiate new collaborations. The theme of
the meeting, “Advancing protection, peace and development”, highlighted the critical
role of mine action in humanitarian action, peacebuilding and the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
41. Following the signing of a memorandum of understanding by the African Union
Commission and the Mine Action Service in April 2017, the United Nations and the
African Union further strengthened their partnership in mine action. The United
Nations Office to the African Union continued to provide technical guidance for the
implementation of the African Union Mine Action and Explosive Remnants of War
Strategic Framework and supported the Union’s ammunition safety management pilot
project, carrying out interventions in Guinea-Bissau and Malawi. The Mine Action
Service and the African Union jointly published a safety handbook on landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, in five languages. The
handbook was distributed to African Union member States and to peace support
operations in Mali, Somalia, Abyei and Darfur to educate soldiers and raise awareness
of the threat posed by explosive devices.
42. In humanitarian emergencies, cooperation between United Nations entities and
non-governmental organizations through the mine action area of responsibility of the
Global Protection Cluster ensures a more integrated, accountable and effective mine
action response. The systematic integration of mine action into humanitarian planning
and appeals, where relevant, allows for the factoring of risks related to explosive
threats into all humanitarian operations, especially in new emergencies when a
country-level area of responsibility may not have yet been activated.

18-08829

9/13

S/2018/623

43. In Myanmar, the cooperation of 10 ministries and more than 40 national and
international civil society actors and United Nations agencies has led to an
environment that is increasingly conducive to mine action as well as enhanced
practical coordination. Illustrating the benefits of such coordination for the
beneficiaries of mine action activities, the jointly developed mine risk education
toolkit has enabled more than 321,000 at-risk persons to be educated through
consistent messaging.

IV. United Nations coherence in mine action
44. The Mine Action Service chairs the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine
Action, 6 ensuring coherent approaches to supporting affected States and joint
assessments of threat situations, and mainstreams mine action into broader
humanitarian, human rights, disarmament and development frameworks. The Group
is currently developing the next strategy for United Nations mine action, which will
come into effect on 1 January 2019.
45. United Nations responses in the field also reflect this inter-agency framework
for coordination and coherence. In support of stabilization in Iraq, the Mine Action
Service, which implements most of its projects through the United Nations Office for
Project Services, works closely with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to synchronize mine action taskings with recovery and rehabilitation
priorities. Detailed conflict analysis undertaken by UNDP as part of its Funding
Facility for Immediate Stabilization ensures that mine action interventions directly
support stabilization outcomes. As a result, in liberated areas of Iraq, mine action
efforts are centred on the surveying and clearance of key infrastructure sites that
facilitate safe return. In the Mopti region of Mali, in response to a spike in the number
of improvised explosive device attacks in early 2018, the Mine Action Service
provided specific risk awareness training for drivers of humanitarian convoys. The
training mitigated the threat of those attacks, lessening their impact on operations and
the disruption of vital humanitarian assistance to vulnerable communities.
46. Mine action is also recognized as an integral part of the humanitarian emergency
response in the Syrian Arab Republic, where an estimated 8.2 million people live in
areas affected by explosives incidents and 13.1 million need humanitarian aid. The
mine action subcluster of the Global Protection Cluster brings together 29 mine action
partners in regional humanitarian hubs, operating as a forum for the coordination of
activities to reduce the impact of explosive devices on civilians and humanitarian
workers in the Syrian Arab Republic. For example, during the reporting period,
UNICEF and Cluster partners provided risk education to a total of more than 1.3
million beneficiaries, with the majority educated by UNICEF.
47. In Iraq, men make up the majority of casualties from explosive devices, as they
are often the first to return to liberated areas and are more likely to be involved in the
assessment, clean-up and reconstruction of destroyed buildings. This is just one
__________________
6

10/13

The 12 departments and offices of the Secretariat and specialized agencies, funds and
programmes that constitute the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action are: the United
Nations Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Em powerment
of Women, the United Nations Office for Project Services, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme and the World Health
Organization. The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the World Bank are
observers.
18-08829

S/2018/623

example that highlights the need to apply a gender lens in the planning, programming
and evaluation of mine action activities. The United Nations Gender Guidelines for
Mine Action Programmes provide valuable guidance for field programmes and
partners, and I am pleased to note that they are currently being reviewed and updated
to ensure that they are well adapted to the new challenges and best practices identified
in the field.
48. The Mine Action Service maintains a rapid response and technical support
capacity, which deploys experts and specialized equipment to address acute threats or
support national counterparts through needs assessments, training and advice at the
request of United Nations humanitarian and development entities. In November 2017,
at the invitation of the Humanitarian Coordinator, experts were deployed to Burkina
Faso to assess the explosive threat associated with Boko Haram in the northern part
of that country. The resulting recommendations aimed at reducing the risk will be
implemented in 2018, pending the allocation of adequate resources. Experts were also
deployed to Afghanistan, Cameroon, Nigeria, South Sudan, the Sudan, the State of
Palestine and the Territory of Western Sahara, where they have improved United
Nations mine action programme delivery, enhancing coordination with key partners
and local authorities and improving their capacity.
United Nations response to the threat posed by improvised explosive devices
49. As noted above, United Nations peacekeepers, Member State security forces
and civilians are increasingly targeted by non-State actors using improvised explosive
devices, and the United Nations is responding effectively in the field.
50. In addition, at Headquarters, programmatic, operational and technical guidance
is being developed to address the threat faced by peacekeeping personnel. The Mine
Action Service coordinated the development of the United Nations improvised
explosive device disposal standards on the basis of extensive consultations. The
standards, which came into effect in June 2018, complement the Explosive Ordnance
Disposal Military Unit Manual and the handbook on mitigating threats from
improvised explosive devices. Combined, these provide a comprehensive and
complementary package of guidance for use in the predeployment and in-mission
training of peacekeeping contingents.
51. As part of its capability development project on improvised explosive device
survivability, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is developing an annex to
the United Nations Peacekeeping Missions Military Engineer Unit Manual focused
on search capability, an improvised explosive device technical exploitation policy and
relevant threat mitigation courses.
52. In my initiative “Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament”,
which I presented on 24 May 2018, I noted the threats posed by improvised explosive
devices and their consequences for many areas of work of the United Nations. I
support greater coherence in a whole-of-system approach to improvised explosive
device threat mitigation. Under the leadership of the Mine Action Service, the United
Nations will promote strengthened and coherent inter-agency coordination with
respect to improvised explosive devices.

18-08829

11/13

S/2018/623

V. Observations
53. Landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices are a
deadly threat that persists long after conflict has ended and disproportionately affects
civilians. Indiscriminate, these weapons do not distinguish between the boot of a
soldier and the foot of a child. The disadvantage and suffering that they cause must
never be underestimated.
54. Although their detrimental effects continue to be experienced even in countries
where the guns fell silent decades ago, much of the worrisome rise in casualties occurs
in countries experiencing active conflict. To reverse the upward trend in casualties
from landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices,
preventing and resolving conflict and ensuring sustainable development on the basis
of respect for human rights must remain our shared priority. Parties to conflict have
a special responsibility in this regard.
55. The increased use of improvised explosive devices, combined with higher levels
of technological sophistication, constitutes a growing menace to the safety and
security of civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers alike. I welcome the
completion of the United Nations improvised explosive device disposal standards as
an important step to adapt the United Nations response to evolving threats and
conduct its interventions in a safer and more cost-effective manner. In my Agenda for
Disarmament, I have noted the need for a whole-of-system and coherent approach to
improvised explosive devices, to enable the United Nations to be more effective and
integrated in its response. As such, the Agenda stipulates that, under the leadership of
the Mine Action Service, United Nations entities will promote greater coherence and
strengthening of inter-agency coordination on improvised explosive devices. In the
same vein, I urge troop-contributing countries to better prepare peacekeepers for the
conditions and threats that they face in their deployments. I fully support the action
plan to improve the security of peacekeepers, which reflects the commitment to
implementing several measures recommended by General Santos Cruz to increase
risk awareness, improve training and build the capacity of uniformed personnel to
mitigate explosive threats, particularly the threat posed by improvised explosive
devices. My initiative “Action for Peacekeeping”, announced in March 2018, is aimed
at strengthening the mutual commitment of the Secretariat and Member States to
addressing these urgent needs.
56. Given the increases in contamination as well as casualties from mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, it is paramount that mine action
considerations remain at the forefront of any planning efforts with respect to United
Nations responses. To ensure its inclusion where relevant, I urge the mainstreaming
of mine action into relevant country-specific discussions and the planning and
mandates of United Nations responses.
57. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development reflects the recognition that
peace is paramount for the achievement of development goals. Member States
acknowledged that there could be no sustainable development without peace and no
peace without sustainable development. Mine action is a precursor to peace as well
as to sustainable development, and has been shown to provide important practical
contributions to the building of trust between parties, to the benefit of communities
on both sides of conflicts. I urge the inclusion of mine action in ceasefires and peace
agreements, where appropriate.
58. I continue to encourage affected Member States to improve their national mine
action management, and I encourage them to seek the assistance of the United Nations
as well as that of Member States. I thank those Member States that have implemented
measures to mitigate the risk posed by explosive devices to their citizens, including
12/13

18-08829

S/2018/623

by acceding to or ratifying relevant international instruments, as well as those
Member States that have assisted affected States in their mine action efforts.
59. As the upward trend in casualties shows, we cannot afford the luxury of
complacency. The Portfolio of Mine Action Projects, which highlights worldwide
funding needs for essential activities such as clearance, risk education and victim
assistance, has a total funding requirement for 2018 of $661 million. I urge Member
States to contribute more to mine action, whether through their own efforts, through
political support or through sustainable and predictable contributions to the Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action.
60. Security Council resolution 2365 (2017) constitutes an important milestone in
our collective struggle to address the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices. Mine action should continue to have a high
place on our agenda. I encourage the annual consideration of mine action by the
Council, on the basis of a report on the implementation of the resolution.

18-08829

13/13
