A /72/PV.37

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

37th plenary meeting

Monday, 30 October 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Perera
(Sri Lanka), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/349)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/342,
A/72/372 and A/71/372/Corr.1)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.3)
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): With
regard to the matter under discussion, I would like to
state that combating impunity is inarguably a noble
objective as we strive to attain justice. We support
this intention and are working to achieve it within the
framework of the United Nations. Achieving justice is
the primary responsibility of relevant national judicial
bodies, in accordance with their domestic mandates
and jurisdictions.
While we are deliberating on the report (see
A/72/349) of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
we should like to recall that the relationship between
the United Nations and the ICC should take into
account the separate and independent nature of the two
bodies and the absence of an organic or structural link
between them. It is a source of great concern that some
States parties to the Rome Statute are attempting to
make the General Assembly into a General Assembly
for the States Parties to the Rome Statute.

In rejecting this trend, which is made crystal-clear
in the annual periodic draft resolution on the ICC report
(A/72/L.3), my delegation is expressing its decisive and
clear-cut opposition to it. Time and again, the draft
resolution’s sponsors propose numerous new paragraphs
to advance loose interpretations that do not reflect the
letter and spirit of the Relationship Agreement, but
rather improperly advance the distinct and transparent
objective of empowering a Court that claims to be
independent and characterized by the specificity of
its jurisdiction.
In the light of a Statute that proposes a legal
framework for the Court, we in the Sudan have constantly
expressed our position in the informal meetings on the
draft resolution on the report of the Court and will
continue to do so. Furthermore, we call for abiding by
the scope and framework of the relations between the
United Nations and the Court, with no expansion or
excessively broad interpretation of the relationship.
The relationship should therefore continue without
any attempt by the Court to lay claim to universality.
The mandate of the United Nations, its agencies and
organs is clear, and any attempt to deviate from it will
sidetrack the Organization from its goals and modus
operandi, while also seriously endangering it and its
activities, given the lack of consensus about the Court
and the Rome Statute.
The relationship between the ICC and the Security
Council is a flagrant form of politicization of the Court’s
work. There should be no link between a judicial organ
supposedly meant to administer international justice

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35526 (E)

*1735526*

A/72/PV.37

and a political organ that is influenced by political
interests, when it is that organ that refers certain
countries’ situations to the Court and spares other
countries from having to appear before the Court. This
reflects the conflict between justice and the rule of law.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court (A/72/342) should
respect the letter and the spirit of the Relationship
Agreement without trying to integrate the International
Criminal Court into the United Nations system.
This runs counter to the nature and the scope of the
Relationship Agreement. We are concerned about the
ICC’s interference in the work of the Secretariat and
the Court’s attempts to direct Secretariat staff in their
dealings with Member States, which merely expect
reports from the Secretariat on respect for their rights.
The work of the Court and of the administrative
system is not within the bounds of the law, which
reflects the Court’s willingness to gain legitimacy
by any possible means, which is a flawed and weak
approach, not only because of its contradictory Statute
but also owing to the corrupt and nepotistic practices
at work within the Court. The Court is undermining
international law as it is in breach of numerous
international treaties, in particular the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 and the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961.
Further, in terms of immunity, the Rome Statute runs
counter to international law. The fact that the Court
does not have recourse to transitional justice, which
violates the principles of peace and reconciliation, is a
contradiction that in the end fuels wars and disputes in
Africa. The Statute’s articles give full authority to the
Prosecutor to preside over national prosecutions, and
the Prosecutor can withdraw the right to investigate.
We therefore have nothing to do with the Court and
call on all States to reconsider the Statute and the
contradictory practices to which it gives rise.
The report of the International Criminal Court
before the Assembly today states that, since the Statute
came into force 15 years ago, the Court has considered
only 25 cases, of which only five have been completed.
We all wish to prevent heinous crimes and to combat
impunity, but at this rate, how can that be achieved? It
certainly cannot be done through the politicization of
justice and the use of double standards.
2/25

30/10/2017

I would like to add that the Court’s foremost flaw
is how it has paved the way for voluntary contributions
to its budget. Donations, including from civil-society
organizations and individuals, fund the majority of
the Court’s budget today, and it is well known that
the European Union (EU) underwrites the lion’s share
thereof. Now, when the observer of the European Union
refers only to African States in the examples from the
Court he cites (see A/72/PV.36), is that a coincidence?
That is the question. For us, it is clearly not a coincidence.
Otherwise, the EU observer would have also mentioned
cases of States before the Court pursuant to sub-articles
(a) and (c) of article 13 of the Rome Statute, and not
just those referred to the Court by the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter, as he did. In addition,
the States whose situations have been referred to the
ICC are both African States. I need not say more.
We know that the Court was founded mainly to
respond to humankind’s suffering resulting from the
crime of aggression — the worst international crime.
The suffering that led directly to the establishment of
the Court, as some speakers before me have mentioned,
was first addressed in 1947, two years after the end
of the Second World War and its tragedies, which
were unprecedented in human history, at which time
the General Assembly agreed in principle to develop
a system of international justice. Our issue is not to
respond to it politically or diplomatically but as a matter
of conscience. The question is whether we will one day
see the Prosecutor of the ICC agree to investigate one
of the States mentioned by the EU this morning. Will
the Security Council one day refer a case to the ICC
without recourse to article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute?
This is the ethical and legal question to which we need
a response.
Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for its report to the
General Assembly (see A/72/349) and congratulate it
on its contribution to the fight against impunity and for
promoting respect for the rule of law. I also join speakers
before me in expressing my thanks to the President
of the ICC, Judge Silvia Fernández de Gurmendi, for
presenting the report and for her efforts aimed at making
the Court a more effective institution. As this is her last
time participating in the work of the General Assembly
in that capacity, Brazil takes this opportunity to thank
her for her long-standing commitment to the causes of
human rights and international criminal justice.
17-35526

30/10/2017

(spoke in English)
As a proud founder of the ICC, Brazil is pleased
to see that the Court continues to gain strength as the
first permanent tribunal established to help to end
impunity for the most serious international crimes. As
an instrument for ensuring that those accused before it
are judged with fairness and full respect for their rights,
the ICC is a vehicle for justice and peace.
I am pleased to recall not only that all South American
countries are parties to the Rome Statute but also that
Latin American and Caribbean States represent the
second-largest regional group among States parties, the
first being the Group of African States. It is important
to stress that any misperception of bias or selectivity
in the Court’s activity will be definitively dispelled
only by advancing the universality of the Rome Statute,
thereby expanding the Court’s room to operate. This is
particularly relevant when one considers that, so far,
a number of important international actors are not yet
parties to the Statute.
As for the outcomes of the 2010 Kampala Review
Conference, the activation of the amendments regarding
the crime of aggression in 2017 will represent a major
contribution to completing the international criminal
justice system. It will give additional meaning to the
prohibition of the use of force, thereby fostering a more
stable, just and democratic world order.
The workload of the Court continues to increase
significantly. In this context, I recall my delegation’s
concern regarding the financing of Security Council
referrals. This issue is structural in nature and lies at
the very core of the relationship between the Court and
the United Nations, particularly the General Assembly.
Once again, we reiterate our call for implementation
of article 13 of the Relationship Agreement and of article
115 (b) of the Rome Statute, which provide guidance
in the sense that such costs should be met — at least
partially — by funds provided by the United Nations
and not fall solely upon the parties to the Rome Statute.
It is equally important to highlight that, as laid out in
Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
General Assembly has the exclusive responsibility to
consider and approve the budget of the Organization.
The proper funding of Security Council referrals would
enhance the credibility of both the Court and the United
Nations. To date, the budget allocated for the Court in
relation to these referrals amount to approximately

A/72/PV.37

€58 million, but the current situation is neither fair
nor sustainable.
The report of the International Criminal Court
contains a number of recommendations aimed at
improving the relationship between the Security
Council and the Court. Brazil concurs with the
assessment that a more structured dialogue between
them on issues of mutual interest — both thematic and
situation-specific — would be beneficial. Through its
jurisprudence, the Court has accumulated significant
knowledge on issues such as children and armed
conflict, women and peace and security, and the
protection of cultural property.
Cooperation between the Security Council sanctions
committees could also be improved, especially with
regard to travel bans and the freezing of assets. Brazil
also notes that certain United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been providing the Court with muchneeded support in the field, always in accordance with
their mandate and basic principles.
Brazil notes with appreciation that providing
justice for victims remains an essential component
of the daily work of the Court. We welcome the
reparations procedures that are ongoing in different
cases and the fact that the Trust Fund for Victims has
assisted more than 450,000 persons with physical and
psychological rehabilitation as well as with material
support. We commend efforts to enhance the protection
of witnesses, including through relocation agreements,
and we stress the positive role of cooperation through
strengthening national capacities.
The quest for peace and justice is always
challenging, and this challenge is inherent to the search
for a more just and cooperative world order. Let us not
fall into the trap of operating with false dichotomies
that seem to oppose peace to justice and sovereignty to
accountability. We should instead focus on the shared
values that bring the General Assembly together and
which have made the first permanent, treaty-based
International Criminal Court a reality. Brazil remains
firm in its commitment to the Rome Statute and the
cause of justice that motivated its creation.
Ms. Krasa (Cyprus): It is a privilege to address the
General Assembly. My delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (see A/72/PV.36) and would like to deliver some
additional remarks.

17-355263/25

A/72/PV.37

It is our strong conviction that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) contributes greatly to the overall
goal of the United Nations of working towards a more
peaceful and just world, thereby serving the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Court continues to rely on the indispensable support of
the United Nations and of individual Member States.
As foreseen by the architects of the Rome Statute
system, such support is crucial to its ability to fulfil
its mandate. In this respect, we support the further
strengthening of the relationship between the United
Nations and the Court in order to adjust to new and
emerging common challenges.
We warmly thank President Fernández de
Gurmendi for presenting the report of the Court (see
A/72/349). As the report reflects, the Court had yet
another full year in terms of judicial proceedings,
investigations,
preliminary
examinations
and
institutional developments. We welcome the significant
progress made with regard to reparations for victims.
We are especially pleased to note that the
Governments of the Gambia and South Africa have
rescinded their notifications of withdrawal, and we
regret that the withdrawal of Burundi has come into
effect. We are further pleased to note that Argentina,
Chile, the Netherlands and Portugal notified their
consent to be bound by the amendments on the crime
of aggression. We look forward to the next Assembly
of States Parties for the Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression to be activated, in accordance with
the consensus decision reached at the Kampala Review
Conference, thereby fully realizing the Rome Statute as
originally drafted.
Cyprus is pleased to have served from October
2013 until the end of 2016 as a focal point for the
promotion of universality of the Rome Statute. It
remains committed to the collective responsibility of
all State parties towards this end. We firmly believe
that universal ratification is the only way to effectively
address jurisdictional gaps and other current challenges
and shortcomings. We would take this opportunity to
call upon all States not yet parties to the Rome Statute
to ratify it. Within this framework, in July, our Foreign
Minister joined the President of the Assembly of States
Parties and other Foreign Ministers in a video campaign
promoting ratification.
Cyprus appreciates the Court’s important mandate
in ensuring accountability for the war crime of the
4/25

30/10/2017

destruction of cultural property. The protection of
cultural heritage was one of the priorities of our
recent chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe, which culminated in the
conclusion of the Nicosia Convention on Offences
related to Cultural Property, which was opened for
signature in May. The Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC participated in two events that took place under
the auspices of the Cyprus chairmanship, in Strasbourg
and New York in January and February, respectively,
and which focused on strengthening the international
legal framework for the protection of cultural heritage.
Moreover, our Permanent Mission in New York is
currently preparing the launch of an informal group
of friends for cultural-heritage protection, which
will take a multifaceted approach thereto, including
using the international criminal justice angle, by
supporting existing initiatives, resolutions and
relevant organizations.
In closing, my delegation would like to reiterate
its commitment to and unequivocal support for the
Court. At the same time, we express our readiness to
engage in a constructive dialogue with States parties
and States non-parties alike. We remain committed to
the consolidation and reinforcement of international
criminal justice and are pleased that the Court
fully recognizes its own responsibility in terms of
continuously improving its operations and increasing
its efficiency and effectiveness.
Mr. García Reyes (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the President of the International
Criminal Court for the annual report of the Court
on its activities in 2016 and 2017 (see A/72/349). We
also welcome the publication by the United Nations of
the manual of best practices for cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, which has contributed to further strengthening
cooperation between the two institutions. We cannot
miss this opportunity to thank and congratulate Judge
Fernández de Gurmendi for her years of dedication to
the Criminal Court.
We know that the support and cooperation of the
senior management of the United Nations regarding
the Court are of the utmost importance, as is the active
participation of the current Secretary-General and his
team. We hope that such cooperation is maintained,
since it is through that type of actions that the work
of the Court can be strengthened and demonstrate its
crucial performance at the international level.
17-35526

30/10/2017

We have noted and welcomed the information
according to which the Court continues to explore
opportunities to increase its working collaboration
with its main United Nations partners, through, inter
alia, regular round-table meetings between the United
Nations and the Court to discuss practical cooperation
arrangements, best practices, lessons learned and
new challenges. For that reason, my delegation awaits
with interest the next meeting, expected to take place
this December.
Let me recall that in October 2012, when
Guatemala assumed the presidency of the Security
Council, it convened an open debate (see S/PV.6849),
considering that structured dialogue between the Court
and the Council on issues of common interest, as well
as on issues regarding specific situations, could and
can improve compliance with the obligations created
through the referrals by the Council and contribute to
the fight against impunity.
We know that the Court and the Security Council
have different functions, but we consider them
complementary with regard to addressing the most
serious crimes of concern to the entire international
community, as outlined in the Rome Statute. Therefore,
we believe that it is necessary to increase cooperation
between the Court and the Security Council in order
to unite efforts and contribute to the prevention of
such crimes, which undermine peace and security.
Additionally, it is necessary to encourage efforts to
combat impunity for such crimes. We believe that it is
opportune to maintain periodic exchanges between the
Council and the Court, independently of the informative
meetings on the referred situations.
Cooperation is one of the fundamental pillars
on which the proper functioning of the Court rests.
Therefore, the firm commitment of States parties is
crucial for increasing the capacity of the Court so as to
ensure accountability for crimes commited, bring about
justice and provide reparations to victims, as well as to
help prevent future crimes of this sort, in accordance
with the spirit of the Rome Statute.
In order to better adapt to the new challenges
facing the United Nations and the Court, the States
parties to the Rome Statute and the membership of
the United Nations should strive to strengthen their
cooperation and continually reaffirm the relevance and
importance of international criminal justice in order to

A/72/PV.37

ensure the rule of law and maintain international peace
and security.
In that vein, we cannot forget to mention the
important draft resolution contained in document
A/72/L.3, which the General Assembly will vote
on today, and which my delegation co-sponsored. It
highlights that the International Criminal Court is an
independent permanent judicial institution, which,
by the adoption of its Statute, has a unique historical
significance. Having said that, we call upon the United
Nations membership to approve the draft resolution,
since it promotes the vital role that the Organization
plays in international peace and justice, and thus to
again cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (see A/72/PV.36)
We thank President Fernández de Gurmendi for
her report (see A/72/349) and her ongoing service to
the International Criminal Court (ICC). We welcome
the opportunity for continued dialogue to discuss
the contributions of the Court and the international
community to international criminal justice. It is in
our common interests to identify challenges, reflect on
possible solutions and find practical ways to advance
accountability for the most serious crimes committed.
We note the steady increase in the Court’s
workload. The Court is currently dealing with more
cases and situations than ever, covering now most of
the regions of the world. We acknowledge the Court’s
first decision to authorize an investigation of crimes
in Europe, specifically in Georgia, demonstrating
that no perpetrator can expect impunity for the most
serious international crimes, regardless of where they
occur. The increasing number of cases and situations
also demonstrates that many States entrust their hopes
for justice and accountability to the Court. That is
testimony to the good work that the Court has done.
We note the important judicial developments that we
have seen in the past year. We acknowledge specifically
the judgment in the case of Bemba et al., concerning the
situation in the Central African Republic, and the start
of the trial in the case of Dominic Ongwen. Those cases
importantly express the Court’s intolerance towards
sexual violence as a tactic of war and its commitment to
hold accountable those committing those acts. We also
acknowledge the Court’s first conviction for crimes
related to the destruction of cultural heritage and the

17-355265/25

A/72/PV.37

first conviction for offences against the administration
of justice relating to witness tampering.
However, the increasing workload also creates
challenges for the Court to remain efficient and
effective. Therefore, we encourage the Court to further
streamline its administrative and judicial processes
and make more efficient use of its resources. We
also encourage the Court to continue exploring the
possibilities of using new technologies and developing
and implementing meaningful performance indicators
in order to improve efficiency.
In order for the Court to perform its mandate
efficiently, effective national and Security Council
cooperation is crucial. We note with concern that
arrest warrants are outstanding for 15 individuals and
that last year the Court again had to deliver decisions
finding failure by a State to comply with its obligations
to cooperate with the Court. It is regrettable that since
2009, Omar Al-Bashir has still not been arrested and
surrendered to the Court. We call upon all States and
the Security Council to take appropriate action to fully
cooperate with the Court and bring those perpetrators
to justice in order to end impunity.
The ICC is the only permanent international court
established in order to put an end to impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes of international
concern, and thus to contribute to the prevention of
such crimes as well as to the progressive development
of international criminal law. Now, as we reach the
twentieth anniversary of the Court, it is high time to
make full use of the international justice that the Rome
Statute offers.
The international community already agreed, in
1998, that the Court should also have jurisdiction over
the crime of aggression. With 34 States parties already
having ratified the Kampala amendments on the crime
of aggression, we look forward to a decision to activate
the relevant Court jurisdiction during the sixteenth
session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute, to be held here in New York in December.
While acknowledging the different interpretations of
some legal provisions, we should not forget the main
message that civilized countries have agreed upon,
namely, that aggression is never acceptable. We should
have confidence in international law and its fair and
impartial application by the ICC.
Estonia is a long-standing supporter of the ICC.
We consider that the fight against impunity for the
6/25

30/10/2017

most serious crimes is critical to ensure a fair and
just society, by holding perpetrators accountable and
ensuring justice for victims. The existence of the ICC
is a clear message that the crimes specified in the Rome
Statute will not be tolerated and will not go unpunished.
Mrs. Carnal (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Preventing wars and safeguarding peace are the
foremost objectives of the United Nations. The
Charter stipulates that Members shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force.
That provision is one of the most fundamental rules of
the international legal order, yet it has proved difficult
to translate those words into action. Armed conflicts
between States remain a sad reality.
This year States parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) have an opportunity
to strengthen the application of the prohibition of the
use of force. At the upcoming session of the Assembly
of States Parties they will decide on the activation of
the Court’s jurisdiction on the crime of aggression.
That crime covers acts of aggression that amount to a
manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
Punishing that crime could contribute to avoiding and
sanctioning extreme forms of wars of aggression.
The activation of the jurisdiction of the Court is in
the core interest of the United Nations and its Member
States. The Security Council will have an additional
instrument in its toolbox. It will be able to demand that
an aggressor back down, or else refer the situation to the
ICC. States would benefit from enhanced protection,
as aggressive leaders would fear prosecution and
punishment for acts of aggression.
The definition of the crime of aggression has been
discussed for decades. In 2010 in Kampala, States parties
to the Rome Statute reached a clear compromise and
adopted it by consensus. It would be a mistake to bring
that compromise into question now. Rather, more than
70 years after the judgments delivered at Nuremberg
and Tokyo, it is high time to make acts of aggression a
punishable crime. Switzerland therefore calls upon all
States parties to the Rome Statute to support the simple
activation of the jurisdiction, in accordance with the
consensual outcome reached in Kampala.
Earlier this year, the Secretary-General highlighted
that the ICC and the United Nations both strive to
maintain international peace and security and to ensure
that the rule of law prevails. Indeed, the Court makes it
possible to pursue a broad set of objectives of the United
17-35526

30/10/2017

Nations and its Member States. That holds particularly
true for Sustainable Development Goal 16. Given its
deterrent effect and ability to deal with the past, the
ICC complements the work of national judicial systems
and actors in the rule of law at the international level.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the fact that the Court
works closely with States and the United Nations, as
shown in this year’s report of the Court (see A/72/349).
Regrettably, atrocity crimes are often committed
outside the jurisdiction of the ICC. The inability of the
Court to act in such situations is a stark reminder of
the need to continue promoting the universality of the
Rome Statute. Switzerland strongly regrets Burundi’s
withdrawal from the Statute and encourages the
Government to reconsider that decision. In contrast,
we welcome the decisions of South Africa and the
Gambia to remain States parties. Switzerland calls on
all States that have not yet done so to join the Rome
Statute. Only a universal International Criminal Court
can act as a safety net to ensure justice for victims all
over the world.
Ms. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay expresses its gratitude for the excellent report
of the International Criminal Court (see A/72/349),
as well as to its President, Ms. Silvia Fernández de
Gurmendi, for the clarity with which she presented it
(see A/72/PV.36). It is important to note that the Court
received 4,725 applications during the reporting period.
The Court represents a milestone in the
international community’s fight against impunity and
the commission of the most serious crimes against
humankind and the integrity and rights of persons. The
development of international awareness of the need to
end atrocities against human beings, both individuals
and groups, and to maintain international peace and
security were the reason for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court. Abuses and acts of
violence, failure to respect international humanitarian
law, slavery and many other atrocity crimes must cease,
and the International Criminal Court, through its latent
judgment, exercises a certain degree of control over
those crimes.
The importance of the Court’s establishment and
the mission for which it is responsible leads us to
support all actions that would improve its management.
In that regard, we remind States parties to the Rome
Statute of the need to cooperate with the Court so as
to enable it to perform its duties. Furthermore, we urge

A/72/PV.37

States to become parties to the Statute by ratifying it
and its amendments.
Uruguay is convinced that cooperation among
States and with the Court is fundamental for the
fulfilment of the Court’s objectives and for it to be able
to put an end to impunity for those who commit the
heinous acts classified in the Statute of the Court.
Uruguay recognizes the efforts the Court is
undertaking, as set out by its President, to improve its
procedures and performance. The Court, having been
established only a short time ago, requires the full
cooperation of States in its proceedings going forward,
including through cooperation, the provision of
information, compliance with the measures requested,
insight and support for the conduct and completion
of proceedings.
We need to bear in mind the work, independence
and impartiality of the judges and of the Court as a
whole. We must also remember that the Court plays a
role subsidiary and complementary to that of national
jurisdictions. In that regard, States are responsible
for implementing the law and assuming the primary
jurisdiction that is theirs. The Statute clearly sets
out that the Court may not act while proceedings are
under way in the territory of a State party, suspending
its activity in such cases. The Rome Conference, in
adopting the Statute and in establishing and defining
the crimes to which it would apply, helped codify the
development of international law, which has led, and
should continue to lead, States to incorporate those
norms in their respective legislations.
For Uruguay, the fight against crimes against
humankind, war crimes, genocide and aggression is
of the utmost importance. We therefore also consider
important the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over
the crime of aggression. We would like to reiterate that
accountability for the commission of such grave crimes,
no matter who committed them, must continue to be
a priority objective for the international community.
Strengthening the work of the Court is therefore
essential. In that connection, I would like to remind the
Assembly that Uruguay, in its support for the work of
the Court, has put forward an excellent candidate for
judge in Ms. Ariela Peralta.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/72/PV.36). We would like to
add a few remarks in our national capacity.

17-355267/25

A/72/PV.37

We welcome the presentation by President Fernández
de Gurmendi (see A/72/PV.36), and we support the
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which has proved its efficiency by promoting the rule
of law and putting an end to impunity for perpetrators
of the most serious crimes.
Following our decision to accept the jurisdiction
of the Court, we cooperate closely with the Office of
the Prosecutor, whose representatives visited Ukraine
twice during the reporting period. We commend the
continuation of the examination of the situation in
Ukraine by the ICC. We particularly appreciate the
preliminary conclusions by the Office of the Prosecutor
stating that the international armed conflict between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation began when Russia
deployed its armed forces in parts of the Ukrainian
territory and that the law of international armed conflict
continues to apply to the ongoing state of occupation.
With regard to eastern Ukraine, the Office is
undertaking a detailed factual and legal analysis of
the Russian authorities’ ongoing support for the illegal
armed groups. Such support includes equipment,
financing and personnel, as well as general direction
in planning the actions of the illegal armed groups in
a manner that indicates exercise of genuine control
over them. Apparently it is due to this that the Russian
Federation decided not to become a party to the Rome
Statute, which it had previously signed.
In that connection, we would like to recall that
the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the
Russian Federation, recognized by resolution 71/205,
and Russia’s illegal actions in Donbas represent acts of
aggression. We welcome the ratification of the Kampala
amendments on the crime of aggression by 34 States
parties. We look forward to a decision of the Assembly
of States Parties to activate the Court’s jurisdiction in
this matter in the coming months.
While recognizing the importance of the promotion
of universal participation in the Rome Statute, we support
all efforts aimed at raising awareness and understanding
of the functioning of the Court. Moreover, in order to
ensure the universality of the Court’s jurisdiction, we
need to promote close cooperation by States as a direct
response to crimes under the Rome Statute.
We know how difficult it is to bring those
responsible for the most serious crimes to justice, owing
to a lack of cooperation with the ICC. In that regard,
8/25

30/10/2017

we are convinced that the international community
must enhance its support to ICC efforts to combat
impunity and ensure the right to justice for all victims
of such crimes.
Ukraine actively participated in the Preparatory
Committee on the Establishment of an International
Criminal Court. In 2000, Ukraine signed the Rome
Statute, and my country was the first State not party
to ratify the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court. The Ukrainian
Parliament’s adoption of a constitutional amendment
last year paved the way for the ratification of the Rome
Statute. All of the relevant State authorities are actively
involved in developing implementing legislation to
that end.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize again the
importance of cooperation by States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute, the United Nations and other
international and regional stakeholders with the ICC to
enable it to carry out its activities.
Finally, yet importantly, Ukraine, as in previous
years, co-sponsored a draft resolution (A/72/L.3)
prepared and introduced by Mexico this morning (see
A/72/PV.36). We believe that its adoption by consensus
will demonstrate our common strong support for the
ICC and our determination to fight against impunity
and thereby contribute to the prevention of the most
serious crimes.
Mr. Ly (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to warmly thank Ms. Silvia Fernández de Gurmendi,
President of the International Criminal Court, for her
leadership at the head of the Court and for presenting
the report on its work (see A/72/349). Under her
presidency, the Court will have made enormous
progress in streamlining its work and improving the
effectiveness of that work. As she presents her final
report as President of the Court, she can be proud
of the great work she has accomplished with great
rigour, professionalism, independence and courtesy
throughout the years. She has the eternal gratitude of
States parties, victims and the whole of humankind. I
would also like to pay tribute to all those who, within
the Court and elsewhere, commit themselves on a daily
basis to ensuring that victims of mass crimes have
the right to justice. Senegal remains convinced that a
world of peace and stability means justice for all and
reiterates its commitment to work with all stakeholders
to that end.
17-35526

30/10/2017

The consideration of the report of the International
Criminal Court today reflects the importance of that
institution in the global fight against impunity and in
respect for the rule of law. The work of the Court during
the period under consideration does indeed show that
the first and only permanent international court in
charge of prosecuting mass crimes makes a significant
contribution to delivering justice to millions of victims
around the world and has given affected populations the
feeling that all of humankind has heard their cries.
There can be no more eloquent testimony than the
record of 25 cases that have come before the Court
to date. The Office of the Prosecutor has conducted
10 preliminary examinations all over the world, in
addition to the active phase of reparations undertaken
by the Trust Fund for Victims. All that leads me to say
that, slowly but surely and irreversibly, the universality
of international criminal justice is making progress.
Senegal invites all States to provide the necessary
assistance and cooperation to the Court so that it can
continue to fulfil its mandate in an optimal manner.
On 8 December 2014, three years ago, at the time
of his election as President of the Assembly of States
Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, Mr. Sidiki Kaba — then Minister for Justice, now
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal — called for
us to rise to the challenge of cooperation, universality,
complementarity and strengthening relations among
States parties. Actions and steps forward have been
taken in that direction, but we must admit that we
have many challenges yet to overcome. Nonetheless,
by demonstrating our resolve and determination in
combining our efforts, we can arrive at our goal.
Together we will work towards ever-closer crosscutting, multilateral and multifaceted cooperation that
is constantly being strengthened to win the fight against
impunity and build a more peaceful, prosperous and
fairer world. Together, we will work for the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute and for the integration
of those norms into the domestic law of States so that
all victims throughout the world, wherever they live,
have an equal and fair chance of obtaining justice.
Together, we will work towards complementarity by
strengthening national judicial systems so that they
can judge even the most serious crimes that strike
our collective conscience, to ensure that peace reigns.
Together, we will work to breathe new momentum
into the relations between the Court and all regions

A/72/PV.37

of the world, particularly Africa, through a frank and
constructive dialogue in the Assembly of States Parties.
As the great philosopher Kierkegaard said, “It is
not the path which is the difficulty; rather, it is the
difficulty which is the path.” Let us never forget that
it is through difficult situations that we inscribe the
greatest causes of humankind.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): My delegation
is grateful to the President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for the report (see A/72/349) introduced
for consideration today. We applaud the Court for its
ability to cope with the heavy workload during the
reporting period.
The ICC was created based on the notion that
impunity must be challenged and that persons found
guilty of committing serious crimes must be punished.
We therefore welcome the appreciable progress
recorded by the Court in the fight against impunity
and crimes against humanity. We commend the Court
for its significant contributions to the development of
substantive and procedural international criminal law.
We also appreciate the essential contributions of the
Court to the promotion of the rule of law.
We have studied the report closely and observed that,
since the start of its operations, the Court has opened
a total of 25 cases and conducted investigations in 10
situations: the Central African Republic I and II, Côte
d’Ivoire, Darfur in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Georgia, Kenya, Libya, Mali and Uganda.
In addition to its investigations, the Office of the
Prosecutor is conducting 10 preliminary examinations
in some countries, among which is Nigeria.
As indicated in the report, the Office of the
Prosecutor analysed information on a variety of
crimes allegedly committed in different contexts,
including alleged sexual and gender-based crimes
in the armed conflict between Boko Haram and the
Nigerian security forces. The Office has also gathered
information on Nigerian national proceedings relating
to eight potential cases identified by the Office and has
exonerated Nigeria of the allegations arising from the
2011 elections. Nigeria will continue to support the ICC
as it continues its preliminary examination process.
Recently, we had the honour to welcome the chief
Prosecutor of the ICC. We appreciate the Prosecutor’s
meetings with civil-society organizations and victims
of alleged Rome Statute crimes committed in Nigeria.

17-355269/25

A/72/PV.37

We congratulate the Court for the successful
handling of its first case involving the destruction
of cultural property, namely, attacks on historic
monuments in Timbuktu, Mali, which was the Court’s
first case involving an admission of guilt by the
accused. That will serve as a good precedent for the
Court in handling similar cases.
Nigeria joins other Member States in commending
the decisions of the Gambia and South Africa to return
to the Court. As a committed member of the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, we wish to reaffirm our commitment
to the Court and the fight against impunity for Rome
Statute crimes. We also believe that the Court represents
an international mechanism for ensuring justice for all.
Nigeria wishes to emphasize that it has no intention
of pulling out of the ICC. However, we will continue
to work in concert with States parties of the ICC
towards improving the working methods of the Court
for a fairer and more efficient delivery of its mandate
in the service of humankind and equitable justice.
Nigeria believes that a strengthened and reinvigorated
ICC, as a symbol of the international criminal justice
system, has an important role to play in offering solace
to victims of heinous, despicable and dastardly crimes.
We have a collective duty to this generation and to
future generations to give a voice to the voiceless and
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are brought
to justice.
We welcome the ongoing support and cooperation
that the Court receives from the senior leadership of
the United Nations. We commend the support of the
previous Secretary-General and equally appreciate
the supportive engagement with the Court of the
current Secretary-General and his team, and we hope
that the close collaboration will be sustained. The
crucial cooperation of the Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and Legal Counsel as the interface
between the Court and the United Nations is also
highly appreciated. As the main forum for diplomacy,
the United Nations presents a unique medium for
promoting the Rome Statute issues and considerations
for greater understanding.
Nigeria
welcomes
the
Court’s
ongoing
cooperation with States, non-State parties, regional
organizations, national bar associations and other
relevant stakeholders. We also wish to express our
gratitude for the generous contributions from the
10/25

30/10/2017

European Commission, the Netherlands, Norway and
the International Organization of la Francophonie that
have enabled the Court to conduct nine high-level and
technical events during the reporting period.
Conferences and seminars are important forums
where participants benefit from the exchange of
ideas and information and have an opportunity
to better understand issues. In that connection,
seminars — such as the one in Addis Ababa with African
States parties — are necessary, as they become veritable
avenues for addressing the areas of misunderstanding
between African States and the Court.
We call on non-States parties to become signatories
to the Rome Statute in order to enhance the universality
of the Court and to enable it to function effectively in
the fight against impunity.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the President of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for presenting a comprehensive report (see A/72/
PV.36). We take note of the ICC’s increased workload
and the corresponding demand in the level and scope
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
ICC. We are pleased to once again co-sponsor the
draft resolution entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court” (A/72/L.3).
Bangladesh considers the Court’s hearing and
verdict in its first case involving the destruction of
cultural property, as well as admission of guilt by the
accused, to be a significant development. We appreciate
the report furnished on the situations and cases under
the Court’s jurisdiction, the ongoing investigations
into 10 cases and the proceedings with reparations for
victims in four cases (see A/72/349). It is also useful
to have an overview of the preliminary examinations
being conducted by the Office of the Prosecutor.
One of the most compelling narratives emanating
from the ICC is the significant number of victims
it has been supporting through its determination of
reparations and also through its Trust Fund for Victims.
We underline the need for a sustained flow of resources
to that Trust Fund from States parties, philanthropic
organizations, foundations and individuals, among
others. We thank the Trust Fund in particular for
announcing the launch of a victims assistance
programme in Côte d’Ivoire.
Bangladesh attaches great importance to addressing
sexual and gender-based violence during armed conflicts
17-35526

30/10/2017

and to ensuring accountability and justice for such
crimes committed by both State and non-State actors.
We recall the first conviction for sexual violence by the
Court last year in what is also its first case involving
command responsibility. Bangladesh reaffirms its
readiness to share its national experience in ensuring
justice for victims of rape and other forms of sexual
violence committed during our war of independence
in 1971, and the renewed judicial and administrative
efforts made in recent times to promote due recognition
and reparation for such victims.
We stress that the cooperation, assistance and
support of State parties to the Rome Statute, as well
as of other States, remain critical for discharging the
ICC’s mandate in a sustained and meaningful manner.
We reiterate the importance of recognizing the ICC’s
mandate and competence through the United Nations
system with a view to acknowledging its valuable
contribution to international peace, the rule of law, and
peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
We underscore the Security Council’s continued
support for the effective functioning of the Court,
including for the cases referred to the Court by the
Council. As a lead contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we will continue to extend
the necessary cooperation to the Court in the mission
areas where our peacekeepers and military observers
are deployed.
Bangladesh attaches high importance to the
primary responsibility of national jurisdictions to
investigate and to prosecute the crimes defined in the
Rome Statute. We fully endorse the recommendations
for the possible inclusion of issues related to the Rome
Statute in legal and judicial reform programmes
supported by the United Nations in the context of
development assistance for the rule of law. That would
be particularly important to States that are not party
to the Rome Statute and that have been alleged to have
committed atrocity crimes against their own civilians.
The ongoing violence and the forcible displacement
being pursued by the Myanmar security forces
against the Rohingya in Rakhine state reinforce the
overriding importance of adhering to the principles
of the Rome Statute, including in the context of a
fledgling democracy. The international community,
especially the Security Council, has a responsibility to
seek accountability for what the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has termed a textbook

A/72/PV.37

example of ethnic cleansing in Rakhine state. In a
recent statement, the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide and the Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect emphasized
that those implicated in the commission of the reported
atrocity crimes must be held accountable, whatever
their status. It is critical that the Myanmar authorities
allow access to the United Nations fact-finding mission
as an important first step in that regard.
As a State party, Bangladesh remains committed
to the promotion of the universality and the full
implementation of the Rome Statute. We thank two
States parties for reversing their decision concerning
their notifications of withdrawal from the Rome
Statute. The ICC cooperation seminars and other
cooperation arrangements with relevant international
and regional organizations should also contribute to the
universalization agenda.
Bangladesh underscores the need for appropriate
capacity-building support, through training and the
sharing of knowledge, for national jurisdictions of State
parties, pursuant to the principle of complementarity. In
that context, we reiterate the need to consider budgetary
support for internships and visiting professional
programmes for applicants from States parties
representing developing and least developed countries.
We reiterate that due attention should be given to
ensuring equitable geographical representation for
staffing at the Court, especially at the professional level.
Bangladesh looks to the forthcoming session of
the Assembly of States Parties for constructive and
pragmatic decisions, including on the activation of the
Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression. We
thank those delegations that have actively contributed
to taking forward the intersessional work.
To conclude, we reiterate the need to uphold
solidarity among States parties and the integrity and
credibility of the legal and judicial proceedings of the
Court in the overarching interest of fighting impunity
for internationally defined crimes wherever and by
whomsoever they are committed.
Mr. Oña Garcés (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Ecuador expresses its appreciation
to the President of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Silvia Fernández de Gurmendi, for her presence
at the meeting this morning (see A/72/PV.36) to
present the report of the International Criminal Court

17-3552611/25

A/72/PV.37

30/10/2017

on its work carried out in 2016 and 2017, contained in
document A/72/349, issued on 17 August.

amendments will mark a historic milestone in the
history of international criminal justice.

Ecuador has consistently defended the role of the
International Criminal Court in the maintenance of
international peace and justice as an essential component
of conflict prevention and of reparations to the victims
of the most serious crimes. On this occasion, we
reiterate our support for the Court as a mechanism with
unique characteristics to fight impunity. We call for all
States present in the Hall to also lend their support so
that the Court can effectively and concretely exercise
its jurisdiction over persons and its competence with
respect to the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community.

In addition, we believe that it is necessary to
strengthen the mechanisms for obtaining resources
and invigorating the cooperation of the international
community with regard to the Trust Fund for Victims, to
the extent that the Fund assists the work of the Court on
a fundamental element of justice, that is, the protection
of victims and reparations for the crimes dealt with in
the Rome Statute.

Certainly that is the least that should be done
when history has witnessed past and present events
that have made children, women and men victims
of unimaginable atrocities that deeply shock the
conscience of humankind, as stated in the preamble to
the Rome Statute. Indeed, the crime of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression,
which are subject to complementary jurisdiction, can be
appropriately judged if there is universal accession by
States to the Statute and if States provide the necessary
cooperation to the Court.
In that regard, for Ecuador, the universality of the
Rome Statute must be an irrevocable objective that
will enable us to achieve genuine universal criminal
justice that ensures the fight against impunity and
allows for the due punishment of those who commit
the most serious crimes affecting the international
community. However, the universality of the Statute is
not just full membership of the International Criminal
Court, but also the guarantee that all cases involving
the commission of crimes subject to the jurisdiction of
the Court are tried without double standards, without
exceptions based on political or economic interests
and without the use of different parameters to measure
the same situations. To ensure such independence, it is
essential that the International Criminal Court have the
necessary financial resources to carry out its work and
that any reduction in expenses not affect crucial areas
of the Court’s functioning.
We also believe that the strengthening of
international criminal justice requires the acceptance
of the Kampala amendments, adopted in 2010. Ecuador
is in the process of ratifying those amendments.
We believe that the entry into force of the Kampala
12/25

We also wish to reiterate our position with regard
to the principle of complementarity with the Court.
We attach particular importance to complementarity,
since it is a mechanism that allows States to cooperate
in the fight against impunity and has something
of singular importance, namely, national capacitybuilding. Through complementarity, the International
Criminal Court supports national legislations; it is not
a substitute for them.
Finally, my delegation would also like to express its
support for the efforts of the United Nations system to
improve the channels of cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and other organs of the Court. We call
on Member States to provide all possible support for
the fulfilment and execution of the orders issued by the
relevant authorities of the International Criminal Court.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (see A/72/PV.36).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would also like
to join others in expressing gratitude to President
Fernández de Gurmendi for her presence in the Hall
today and wishes to compliment her for her outstanding
presentation (see A/72/PV.36). The annual report of
the International Criminal Court (see A/72/349) gives
a clear overview of the considerable work done in the
reporting period and of the challenges ahead.
Given the great importance of the topic at hand,
allow me to briefly address the following three issues:
the fight against impunity, the current challenges facing
the Court, and the universality of the Rome Statute.
First, the Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
deeply committed to the fight against impunity for
the most serious international crimes. In that light, we
welcome the fact that the threshold of 30 ratifications
of the crime of aggression amendments has been met,
17-35526

30/10/2017

which enables the Assembly of States Parties to activate
the Court’s jurisdiction on the crime of aggression at
its upcoming session. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
attaches great importance to a clear decision of the
Assembly of States Parties in that respect, as it will
constitute a fundamental step towards ensuring
accountability and ending impunity.
While underlining the Court’s essential role in the
fight against impunity for all core international crimes,
we would like to stress that the primary responsibility
for ensuring accountability continues to lie with States,
as follows from the principle of complementarity. In
order to maintain a functioning system of international
criminal justice, thereby promoting international peace
and justice overall, it is important to stress the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute the
crimes as defined in the Rome Statute. The adoption
of national legislation in order to effectively implement
the Statute is of critical importance. To put it in simple
terms: justice begins at the national level, and not in
The Hague.
That brings me to the second point I want to
address. As the report sets out clearly, the International
Criminal Court is confronting a tremendous workload.
In dealing with the many challenges, with that heavy
workload and high expectations, the Court should be
able to depend upon the States parties in a number
of ways. First, the financing of the Court needs to
be adequate. We cannot expect more from the Court
without ensuring that it has sufficient means to meet
those increasing expectations. Secondly, as the Court
has itself repeatedly underlined, it inevitably has to rely
on the States parties for the enforcement of its decisions
and judgments. The Rome Statute clearly lays down the
obligations of the States parties to support and facilitate
the work of the Court throughout the various stages
of its judicial proceedings. In that respect, various
forms of voluntary cooperation, such as the conclusion
and implementation of framework agreements on the
relocation of witnesses and the execution of judgements,
constitute a vital contribution to the effective and
efficient functioning of the Court.
As the Court is more occupied than ever and
confronts an impressive number of trials, appeals,
investigations by the Prosecutor, preliminary
examinations
and
continent-crossing
situation
investigations, it is imperative for States parties to assist
the Court. That relates not only to their contributions
to the regular budget, but also to the need to intensify

A/72/PV.37

their voluntary cooperation with the Court. Without
that cooperation, the Court will be unable to effectively
exercise its mandate.
Thirdly, I would like to address the issue of the
universality of the Rome Statute. The International
Criminal Court embodies norms and values that are
both fundamental and universal. On that basis, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to reiterate the
importance of the ratification of the Rome Statute by all
States Members of the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome the decisions taken by those countries
that reversed their previously announced intention to
withdraw from the Rome Statute.
We commend the various organs of the Court for
their comprehensive efforts to promote a meaningful
and constructive dialogue with those and other States
parties. We express our hope that the positive signals and
expressions of trust in the Court’s fundamental mission
will resonate throughout the international community.
We believe that next year’s milestone — the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute —
will provide a unique opportunity to emphasize the
crucial relevance of the Court and advocate for more
global support.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands and, more
specifically, The Hague, as the international city
of peace and justice, are the proud hosts of the
International Criminal Court. As we approach the
twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute, let us work
together in promoting the universality of its mission.
Let us strengthen our cooperation in facing presentday challenges, which unfortunately pose threats to the
maintenance of international justice. The fight against
impunity is more pressing than ever. Strengthening
cooperation among States parties, but also between
States parties and with the Court, is of paramount
importance in that regard. Securing global justice is,
after all, our joint responsibility.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (see A/72/PV.36). In addition, I would like to add
a few remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, let me thank the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Silvia
Fernández de Gurmendi, for the report on the activities
of the Court (see A/72/349). My delegation wishes
to recognize her dedication, which has been pivotal
in guiding the Court during uneasy periods of its

17-3552613/25

A/72/PV.37

30/10/2017

existence. We also thank the President of the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute, Mr. Sidiki Kaba,
for his role and leadership in this critical period.

Court’s activities and ongoing investigations in the
country. I would like to recall some of the key aspects
of the ongoing cooperation with the ICC.

This year’s report features several important
achievements of the Court, including the first case
involving the destruction of cultural property as an
attack against historic monuments and buildings.
That case marked the first precedent in the Court’s
proceedings of the admission of guilt by the accused.
The ongoing discussions on the activation of the Court’s
jurisdiction concerning the crime of aggression are of
critical importance, and we would like to commend
the facilitator for the able stewardship and for all the
efforts made. Georgia has ratified the amendments to
the Rome Statute on the crime of aggression and looks
forward to the decision in December of the Assembly of
States Parties on its swift activation.

Georgia has been the victim of international crimes
since the 1990s — and notably in August 2008, when
thousands of civilians were targeted in a repeated wave
of ethnic cleansing and other heinous crimes. At the
national level, Georgia has carried out investigations
of an unprecedented scale. The investigation team
interviewed more than 7,000 witnesses and carried out
crime-scene inspections in over 30 inhabited areas.
Where evidence was inaccessible due to the Russian
occupation of the Georgian territories, the crime scenes
were examined through satellite imagery.

Preventing the most heinous crimes that threaten
the peace, security and well-being of the world is
vital to upholding the rule of law at the international
level, based on the principles of international law and
the common values of humankind that both the Court
and the United Nations share. While we approach
the twentieth anniversary of the creation of the ICC,
sadly the world continues to witness crimes of an
unspeakable scale and gravity. The establishment of
the International Criminal Court set a new paradigm.
Accountability is important to build a future free of
violence by avoiding the recurrence of conflicts and
repetition of violence, as well as to ensure justice for
victims of mass atrocity crimes.
Georgia reaffirms its commitment to the work
undertaken by the Court in accordance with its
mandate. Effective and comprehensive cooperation and
assistance by States are indispensable for the Court to
carry out its activities successfully, more so given the
Court’s complementary role to that of national criminal
jurisdictions. Georgia has been cooperating with the
Court ever since the ICC Prosecutor announced the
start of the preliminary examination of the 2008 war in
Georgia, on 14 August 2008. As an enabling factor for
the full-fledged cooperation with the ICC, Georgia has
put in place adequate implementing legislation for the
Rome Statute at the national level.
Moreover, on 26 July 2017, the Registrar of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Herman von Hebel,
on behalf of the Court signed an agreement with the
Government of Georgia in Tbilisi to facilitate the
14/25

Despite our continued efforts, our ability to carry
out additional necessary investigative measures in
the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions at this stage is
hampered by the illegal foreign occupation. In those
circumstances, the request of Prosecutor Bensouda
and the subsequent decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I
to authorize an investigation into all crimes under the
Rome Statute committed during the 2008 international
armed conflict between the Russian Federation and
Georgia have been recognized as important steps in
acknowledging the ordeal suffered by the victims.
The same Chamber decision stated that an
international armed conflict existed between Georgia
and the Russian Federation between 1 July 2008 and
10 October 2008. Pre-Trial Chamber I further noted
that the consistent pattern of deliberate killing, beating
and threatening civilians, detention, looting properties
and systematic destruction of Georgian houses
took place. As the Prosecutor emphasized, we hope that
the investigation will lead to establishing the truth and
bringing justice to the victims who suffered so terribly
during the conflict.
Georgia will continue to strongly support the Court
in its critical work and stands ready to further strengthen
cooperation with all States parties in reaching the goals
of ending impunity, upholding justice and achieving
sustainable peace.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia): The Plurinational State of Bolivia would like
to express its gratitude for the report (see A/72/349)
on the activities of the International Criminal Court
submitted by its President, Judge Silvia Fernández de
Gurmendi (see A/72/PV.36), and we thank her for her
leadership at the head of the Court.
17-35526

30/10/2017

The Bolivian State, which respects international
law, abides by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Rome Statute
and recognizes the importance of the principles of
complementarity and cooperation with the International
Criminal Court. Bolivia had an active part in the
establishment of the Court, and in its development
through the Assembly of States Parties since its signing
of the Rome Statute in 1998.
Bolivia takes due note of the course of jurisdictional
activities completed and the tasks the Court undertakes
to consolidate its complex institutional organization
and to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
work of the various organs of which it is composed. We
acknowledge the Court’s progress in resolving its cases
and the increase in new investigations, which could lead
to a greater caseload at a pace gradually consolidating
the principles of international criminal justice.
The discovery of truth through the gathering of
evidence and witness testimonies in very diverse
cultural contexts is a complex task that requires the
full cooperation and complementarity of judicial
systems, both from the States that are requesting the
jurisdiction of the Court and from the United Nations
through support in the cases that are referred by the
Security Council.
In the cases referred by the Security Council, it
will be necessary to study, within the Council, the need
to supplement the Court’s budget to cover the costs of
investigations, trials and possible victim reparations. In
that context, we note the need for greater coordination
and cooperation among the Court, the Security Council
and the wider United Nations to achieve the common
objectives of international peace and security.
At the end of its first 15 years of existence and nearly
20 years since the signing of the Rome Statute, the Court
has shown its ability to solve complex cases in sensitive
areas. The scope of the Statute is still being tested
today, and the difficulties of an unprecedented model
of universal criminal justice for a multipolar, diverse
and plural world are being overcome labouriously.
The International Criminal Court is part of a
global undertaking that affects all States. Its mission
is consonant with strengthening international criminal
justice and the values it embodies: peace and security,
respect for human rights, guarantees of due process,
protection of victims and the end of impunity. In that

A/72/PV.37

connection, we call for its universality and urge those
States that are not yet party to join it.
It is appropriate to repeat that it is not possible to
leave unpunished those who committed, or continue to
commit, crimes affecting the international community.
All States, whether they are party to the Court’s Statute
or not, have the primary responsibility for taking
action and contributing to the prevention and trial of
such crimes. The International Criminal Court, acting
independently and effectively, using the best methods
of cooperation and complementarity with States, is
vital to guarantee universal criminal justice.
Mr. Pérez de Nanclares (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, I have the honour of addressing the General
Assembly on an issue that Spain considers to be of the
utmost importance. The fight against the most serious
international crimes constitutes, without any doubt, an
essential element in maintaining international peace
and justice. It is also an imperative flowing from
the principle of the rule of law, which is inherent to
the international legal system. Fighting impunity,
prosecuting the criminals who commit such crimes
and ensuring justice for the victims must be permanent
goals for the whole international community.
Besides endorsing the speech delivered by the
observer of the European Union (see A/72/PV.36),
I would like to highlight the work undertaken by the
International Criminal Court (ICC). That work is
detailed in the report (see A/72/349) covering the
period from 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017, which
was presented this morning by the President, Judge
Fernández de Gurmendi (see A/72/PV.36). To her,
the judges, Prosecutor Bensouda and the rest of the
Court’s personnel we express our most sincere thanks.
We also thank the Mexican delegation for its work in
the promotion and coordination of the draft resolution
(A/72/L.3), which Spain has co-sponsored.
Since the very beginning of the preparations for the
Rome Statute, Spain has been a strong advocate of the
role assigned to the ICC in the difficult task of fighting
impunity with the tools of the international rule of law.
We also played a very active role at the 2010 Kampala
Conference. Accordingly, the Kingdom of Spain
submitted its instrument of ratification of the Kampala
amendments quite early, on 24 September 2014. There
is no doubt that my country will maintain its traditional
firm and sincere support to the work of the Court.

17-3552615/25

A/72/PV.37

At the present time, we are all perfectly aware of
the existing disagreement regarding the activation of
the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression.
The consensus compromise reached at the Kampala
Conference, reflected in articles 8 bis, 15 bis and 15 ter,
allowed for the adoption of the text of the amendments
and the successful conclusion of the Conference. Now
that the threshold of the 30 ratifications needed for
its entry into force has been surpassed, the Assembly
of States Parties will be responsible for adopting the
decision to activate the jurisdiction of the Court.
However, the underlying problem has re-emerged.
Different positions have emerged as to whether the
focus is on article 15 ter, paragraph 3, or on article
121, paragraph 5. They reach diametrically opposed
conclusions. That makes it extremely difficult to
forecast the result of the next session of the Assembly
of States Parties, to be held in December.
In that connection, Spain would like to commend
Austria’s work as facilitator and advocate above all for
reaching a desirable consensus within the Assembly of
State Parties. Moreover, we also stand for the need to
comply with what was agreed in Kampala. That is why
the decision to be finally adopted should not imply the
reopening, de facto or de jure, of the negotiation of what
was agreed in Kampala, already ratified by 34 States.
Without going into specific figures, which have
already been mentioned repeatedly by the speakers
who preceded me, I would like to underline four of the
positive aspects of the work carried out by the Court in
the past year.
First is the extension of the geographic scope of
the Court’s action, which encompasses four continents:
America, Africa, Asia and Europe. The fight against
impunity for international crimes knows and should
know no borders.
Secondly, we must commend the influence of the
Court on State-level proceedings against the crimes
under its jurisdiction. There have been various instances
in which, pursuant to the principle of complementarity,
the Court has not exercised its jurisdiction because of
the intervention of national jurisdictional bodies.
Thirdly, we welcome the consolidation of the role
of the Trust Fund for Victims, which, as the observer
of the European Union said this morning, constitutes
an essential pillar of the work of the International
Criminal Court.
16/25

30/10/2017

Lastly, we applaud the Court’s first conviction
for offences against the administration of justice, in
accordance with article 70 of the Rome Statute, as well
as the consideration given to the attacks on historic
monuments and buildings.
Despite the undoubtedly positive assessment of the
overall work of the Court, there are at least four aspects
that require a critical assessment.
The first is the withdrawal of Burundi. Our
ambition is for the number of State parties of the Statute
to continue increasing, without any withdrawals. In
that regard, we must welcome the fact that South Africa
and the Gambia reconsidered their initial decisions to
withdraw from the Statute.
The second aspect that has become a source of
some concern pertains to collaboration between the
Court and the Security Council. We believe that the
report of the Court clearly identifies the elements
where improved collaboration is desirable. Those
elements point towards sanctions approved by the
Security Council and its reaction, or lack thereof, to
the notifications of non-collaboration sent to it by the
ICC. We believe that we should take serious note of the
report of the Court and act accordingly.
A third element to be underlined is the fact that we,
the States, must act in appropriate fashion. Cooperation
with the Court and the proper execution of its decisions
is vital to achieve the necessary credibility of the
system. In that regard, particular attention should be
paid to the arrest of suspects.
Finally, we believe that we must also draw attention
to the need for the Court to carry out its work effectively
and efficiently, based on good governance and
transparency. That in no way precludes our recognition
of the notable efforts and advances that the Court has
achieved recently.
Spain wishes to conclude by underscoring the
vital importance of the Court in the maintenance
of peace, justice and the rule of law through the
effective fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes committed against humanity, while reiterating
the firm commitment of our country to pursue that
commendable objective.
Mr. Okaiteye (Ghana): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Secretary-General for
their comprehensive report on the activities of the Court
17-35526

30/10/2017

for the period 2016/2017, as reflected in the report of
the Court (see A/72/349).
Ghana attaches great importance to the work of the
International Criminal Court and its role in ensuring
accountability for crimes, providing justice to victims
and helping to prevent future crimes. In recognition of
the relevance of international criminal justice for the
rule of law and international peace and security, Ghana
remains committed to the Rome Statute and wishes to
take this opportunity to pledge its unwavering support
for the Court and its activities. Ghana’s democracy is
strongly rooted in respect for the rule of law, and we
believe that the culture of impunity for atrocity crimes
should have no place in the twenty-first century.
The targets established under Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals provide additional
reasons why international criminal justice issues must
be mainstreamed within the framework of the rule of
law at the national and international levels, and we
support the views expressed in the report in that regard.
My delegation welcomes the highly valuable
cooperation that the ICC maintains with the United
Nations and efforts to strengthen the linkages between
the mandates of the United Nations and the Court. We
very much encourage the further strengthening of that
engagement at the working level. We also encourage the
Court to explore opportunities for c1oser engagement
with regional organizations, in particular with the
African Union, which has a strong peace and security
agenda. While the Court and the Security Council have
different roles in addressing grave crimes, those roles,
as rightly indicated in the report, are complementary.
We therefore look forward to increased cooperation
and complementarity between the two bodies in order
to improve the implementation of obligations, enhance
crime prevention and effectively combat impunity.
As indicated in the report, the primary
responsibility of national jurisdictions to investigate
and prosecute crimes defined in the Rome Statute,
and strengthening their capacity to do so effectively,
remains critical to ending impunity for international
crimes. Consequently, development assistance for
building capacities in international investigations and
prosecution and for the incorporation into national
legislation of Rome Statute crimes and principles and
national processes for cooperation with the Court are
an important area of activity.

A/72/PV.37

My delegation takes note of the heavy workload
of the Court in the period under review. With a total
of 25 ongoing cases and investigations in 10 situations
and other preliminary examinations, that is evidence
that the Court is more relevant today than ever. In the
light of that fact, we wish to call on States parties to
seriously consider the issue of complementarity as one
of the options to be explored in addressing the overload
of the Court’s work. We call for capacity-building at the
national level so that national courts can take ownership
of some of the trials. Certainly, the independence of
those national courts should be paramount in the
capacity-building efforts in order to ensure that fair
trials are held.
My delegation wishes to commend the Court for
its activities relating to reparations and assistance
provided through the Trust Fund for Victims, as
reflected in paragraphs 117 and 118 of the report. That
will help to assuage the suffering of victims and give
succour to their dependants. We urge States parties
to continue to support the Fund and to sustain the
assistance programmes.
In view of the importance Ghana attaches to
those issues, the Government has decided to present
the candidature of Ms. Henrietta Joy Abena Nyarko
Mensa-Bonsu for election as a judge in the ICC in
the upcoming elections in December. Suffice it to say
that Ms. Mensa-Bonsu has all the qualities that States
parties are looking for in the judges of such an eminent
Court. We believe that she will be an asset to the Court
if elected.
We will remain actively engaged in efforts to
strengthen the role of the Court as an integral part of
the international legal system and to promote broad and
strong support for its important work.
Mr. Trujillo (United States of America): We thank
President Fernández de Gurmendi for her update of the
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
from 1 August 2016 through 31 July 2017.
The United States remains deeply committed to
accountability for atrocity crimes, and we continue
to support myriad international, regional, hybrid and
domestic mechanisms that work in pursuit of that goal.
Among those options, we have long believed and stated
that justice is most effective when it is delivered at the
local level. We would call on the ICC and States to
respect genuine domestic efforts to promote justice for
atrocity crimes.

17-3552617/25

A/72/PV.37

As we look across the landscape of international
justice, we see countries taking on that important task,
and the United States welcomes the progress they have
made. In the Central African Republic, personnel have
been appointed to the Special Criminal Court to begin
the work of ending impunity for mass atrocities in that
country. Since May, the Head International Prosecutor
as well as national and international magistrates,
prosecutors and investigators have been named. We are
also encouraged by the work of the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers, which continues to ready itself for the
indictments from the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. In
the past year, a roster of judges, along with the President
of the Court, was selected, and the judges convened and
adopted rules of procedure and evidence.
In addition to those positive steps in domestic
systems, the United States is pleased to see advancements
in a number of regional and hybrid efforts to end
impunity for atrocity crimes. For example, in November
of last year, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia upheld the convictions of Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan for crimes against humanity, finally
bringing a measure of justice for the victims of murder,
persecution and other inhumane acts in Cambodia
decades ago. In South Sudan, the African Union is
working with the South Sudanese Government to
prepare for judicial processes of accountability, taking
steps to establish a hybrid court to prosecute those
responsible for atrocities committed in that country.
For institutions like these, there is still much work to be
done, but every step forward is a welcome one.
In that vein, the United States has supported building
a foundation for accountability through documentation
of atrocities that help domestic courts deliver justice. In
Iraq, for example, the United States supported Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017), adopted last month,
requesting that the Secretary-General establish an
investigative team composed of international and Iraqi
experts, headed by a special adviser, to support Iraqi
domestic efforts to hold the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) accountable by collecting, preserving
and storing evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount
to genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Information gathered by the team could be used by
Iraq, and, with the approval of the Security Council,
other Member States, on the territory of which ISIL
has committed acts that may amount to genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, may request the
team to collect evidence of such acts. The resolution
18/25

30/10/2017

further encourages other Member States to provide
appropriate legal assistance and capacity-building to
the Government of Iraq in order to strengthen its courts
and judicial system. Taking timely steps to gather
evidence for potential use in criminal prosecutions will
be particularly important, as we know that over time
material and witness testimony may be more difficult
or impossible to obtain.
The United States has for years supported Syrian
non-governmental organizations that are documenting
human rights abuses and international humanitarian
law violations in Syria, as well as the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry, which was
established in 2011 by the United Nations Human Rights
Council with a mandate to investigate all human rights
violations in Syria. The United States has also strongly
supported the call for accountability in numerous
Security Council resolutions and supported the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to
investigate chemical-weapon attacks.
In the past year, we have supported the international
community in taking efforts one step further with the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic, established through
resolution 71/248, in December 2016. Its mandate is
to consolidate and analyse evidence of violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses and violations
of human rights law, including evidence generated
by the Committee on Information, non-governmental
organizations and others, and to prepare files in order
to facilitate fair and independent criminal proceedings
in the appropriate forums. That can be an important
step forward to support investigations and prosecutions
of perpetrators of atrocities in Syria.
As those and other efforts demonstrate, it is
through multiple institutions and mechanisms that the
international community can fight to end impunity
for those crimes that shock our common conscience.
As the United States considers these issues and how
they relate to the ICC moving forward, I would recall
that we have serious concerns with respect to the crime
of aggression amendments, which we believe contain
dangerous ambiguities regarding basic issues, such as
which States and what conduct would be covered by
the amendments. As we have said consistently, we
believe that such issues should be clarified before any
decision is taken by the ICC States parties to activate
the amendments. Taking concrete steps to do so will
17-35526

30/10/2017

help ensure that States are able to join together when
necessary to take action to prevent atrocities and
safeguard collective security.
In conclusion, as long as minorities in Burma
are persecuted and murdered, as long as civilians are
attacked with chemical weapons in Syria, as long as
South Sudanese children are abducted and forced into
combat and as long as people are being tortured and
disappeared in Burundi, States cannot stand by idly.
Those who are responsible for atrocities must face
consequences for their actions in accordance with
international law. Steadfast in our commitment to
pursue justice for the world’s worst crimes, the United
States will continue our work towards that end.
Mrs. Pino Rivero (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba takes note of the report of
the International Criminal Court (see A/72/349) and
expresses its commitment to the fight against impunity
for crimes that affect the international community.
Several issues — such as the international situation
characterized by armed conflicts, foreign interventions
to the detriment of the principles of international law,
which directly affects the people, and the attempts
to withdraw from the Rome Statute by some of its
members — positively demonstrate once more the
need for an autonomous international institution of
jurisdiction, which would lead the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes against humankind.
However, based on what is stipulated in articles
13 (b) and 16 of the Rome Statute, which demonstrate
the ample powers bestowed upon the Security Council
in relation to the work of the International Criminal
Court, the reality is that the Court is far from being an
independent institution. Apart from undermining the
essence of that organ’s jurisdiction, this issue violates
the principle of independence of judicial bodies and
the transparency and impartiality of the administration
of justice.
The referrals made to the Court by the Security
Council, which are included in the Court’s report,
confirm that negative trend, to which our country has
made reference on various occasions. We reiterate once
again that, in the referral processes of the Security
Council, international law is constantly violated,
evidencing a selective policy towards developing
countries, in the name of a supposed fight against
impunity. That is why Cuba reiterates its position in
favour of the establishment of an international criminal

A/72/PV.37

jurisdiction that is impartial, non-selective, effective,
fair, complementary to national justice systems
and genuinely independent, and therefore free from
subjugation to political interests that might erode
its essence.
The delegation of Cuba reiterates that the
International
Criminal
Court
cannot
ignore
international treaties and the principles of international
law. The Court must respect the principle of law
with respect to the consent of a State to be bound by
a treaty, as provided for in article 11 of part II of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, of 23 May
1969. Cuba wishes to reiterate its serious concern
about the precedent set by the decisions of the Court
to initiate judicial proceedings against nationals of
States non-parties to the Rome Statute that have not
even accepted the jurisdiction of the Court, pursuant to
article 12 of its Statute.
The International Criminal Court must report to
the General Assembly on its activities in accordance
with the Relationship Agreement. Although Cuba is not
a party to the Criminal Court, it is willing to continue
to actively participate in negotiation processes related
to the Court, and especially on the draft resolution
on the report of the International Criminal Court that
the General Assembly adopts every year, which must
reflect the positions of both States parties and States
non-parties to the Court.
Cuba reaffirms its determination to fight impunity
and maintains its commitment to international criminal
justice, to the principles of transparency, independence
and impartiality and to the unrestricted application of
and respect for international law.
Mrs. Betham-Malielegaoi (Samoa): Samoa wishes
to convey its sincere appreciation to President Silvia
Fernández de Gurmendi for her commitment and for the
achievements she has brought about during her tenure
as Judge and President of the International Criminal
Court. We also thank her for the warm sentiments she
expressed with regard to Samoa.
Samoa welcomes the constructive report on the
International Criminal Court (see A/72/349) and is
pleased to be one of the sponsors of draft resolution
A/72/L.3. Samoa notes with satisfaction that there are
now 124 States parties to the Rome Statute and further
welcomes the fact that, as of now, 34 States parties
have ratified the Kampala amendments on the crime of
aggression. Like other States parties, Samoa hopes that

17-3552619/25

A/72/PV.37

the sixteenth session of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute will bring about the activation of
the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, as
agreed in Kampala in 2010.
Samoa wishes to reiterate its unwavering support
for the Court and its full commitment to the principles
of the Rome Statute and the rule of law, as Samoa has
continually demonstrated through its actions. Indeed,
by hosting the President of the International Court
during the forty-eighth Pacific Island Forum, held in
Apia in September, Samoa clearly demonstrated its
faith in the Court by facilitating the universality of the
Rome Statute.
In that regard, Samoa calls upon States Members of
the United Nations, especially small island developing
States like our own, which have no military capacity
and remain dependent on the rule of law, to consider
ratifying the Rome Statute as part of their national
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 16.
For Samoa, being a State party to the Rome Statute
virtually ensures the protection of its nationals and
further provides protection against impunity and the
perpetrators of heinous crimes.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Judge Silvia Fernández de Gurmendi, for
her report to the General Assembly (see A/72/349). I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on cooperation between the United Nations
and the ICC (A/72/PV.342). The State of Palestine
welcomes the crucial support of the United Nations for,
and cooperation with, the ICC as well as the ideas put
forward to further that cooperation, including through
regular exchanges between the Court and the Security
Council on the ongoing crimes being examined by
the Court.
There can be no doubt that robust international
justice is indispensable to international peace and
security. Born in reaction to the horrors of our
century — from the Second World War and the
Holocaust to the genocides in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia — the International Criminal Court is
humankind’s pledge to prevent the recurrence of such
atrocities. The ICC is the embodiment of our belief that
there are crimes for which there can be no immunity and
that it is the common responsibility of all humankind
to hold those who commit such crimes accountable if
States are unwilling or unable to do so. As such, the
20/25

30/10/2017

universality of the Court is of the utmost importance,
and in that regard we welcome the decisions of both
South Africa and the Gambia to reverse their decisions
to withdraw from the Court. We call on all States to
join the ICC to fulfil the long-overdue promise of a
universal Court that would ensure that atrocity crimes
do not go unpunished.
The States parties to the ICC therefore have a duty
not to delay any further the granting of jurisdiction
to the Court over the worst form of the illegal use of
force, the crime of aggression. The suppression of
acts of aggression is of such importance that it stands
among the purposes of the United Nations enshrined in
Article 1 of the Charter. As long as we are not willing to
hold accountable those responsible for the commission
of the crime of aggression, we will be failing in our
responsibility to help prevent such crimes in the future.
The State of Palestine had the honour to be the
thirtieth State to ratify the amendment on the crime
of aggression, thereby helping to fulfil one of the two
criteria for the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction
over that crime. At the upcoming session of the
Assembly of States Parties of the ICC, and 20 years
after the adoption of the Rome Statute, States parties
will have an opportunity and the responsibility to
activate the Court’s exercise of jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression. They must do so in a way that is
fully consistent with the letter and spirit of the Kampala
compromise, which includes specific provisions
regarding the jurisdiction of the Court in relation to
the crime of aggression. States parties also must not
attempt to further restrict the jurisdiction of the Court
in relation to this most serious crime.
The State of Palestine has pledged its full
cooperation with the Court and acted accordingly since
it joined the ICC. It submitted a declaration accepting
the Court’s jurisdiction over the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, which led to the opening
by the Prosecutor of a preliminary examination of the
situation in the State of Palestine. The State of Palestine
submitted extensive communications to the Court with
respect to the crimes committed by Israeli officials
in relation to illegal settlements and their associated
regime and the attacks against the civilian population,
notably in the Gaza Strip during the summer of 2014.
Palestine has the utmost respect for the independence
of the Court. However, it is clear that all Courts have
an obligation to ensure justice is neither delayed nor
17-35526

30/10/2017

denied. The ICC has a heightened responsibility in
situations where crimes are ongoing so as to prevent
their recurrence. In the past three years, during
which the preliminary examination in the situation in
Palestine has been under way, Israel has intensified the
pace of its crimes, notably in relation to settlements.
Israeli leaders have confessed not only to being aware
of the existence of such crimes, but also to their intent
to commit them and to continue doing so relentlessly, as
demonstrated in 2017, when settlement announcements
have more than tripled compared to 2016.
Given the overwhelming prima facie evidence of the
commission of crimes by Israeli officials in Palestine,
and given that those crimes are among the most
documented in recent history, and taking into account
their recurrence and intensification, their gravity, their
impact on international peace and security and their
link to both colonialism and apartheid, two of the
most condemned phenomena under international law,
including international criminal law, Palestine remains
an important test for the credibility of the Court, a
test that the Court cannot afford to fail. We also call
on the Prosecutor to ensure that the language used by
her Office does not depart from the legal language
grounded in all relevant instruments of international
law, while avoiding language that could be seen as
rooted in political considerations.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the State of Palestine stresses that the
establishment of the ICC was a historic step towards
entrenching the international rule of law. Preserving
and empowering the Court is of the utmost importance
to ensure protection for future generations and to fulfil
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.
We all have a responsibility to address the
discrepancy between the vital mandate of the ICC and
its too-limited resources. Palestine also underlines the
important role of civil society and calls on host States
and other States to act decisively in addressing any
threats against organizations or persons cooperating
with the Court.
Finally, the State of Palestine declares its solidarity
with all victims of atrocities, and it pledges to support
the Court in its endeavour to ensure justice for those
victims and save others from such atrocities. The
universality and efficiency of the ICC are paramount if

A/72/PV.37

we are to honour our commitment to those victims and
the cause of justice and humanity.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/72/L.3.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft resolution,
may I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation reaffirms its commitment to fighting
impunity and to the administration of justice through
national judicial bodies that are capable and competent
and in a position to uphold their national jurisdictions
and administer justice at the national level. That is
the responsibility of national jurisdictions, without
interference or custodianship by any external party. For
that reason, we clearly and utterly reject any dealings
with the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Sudan is not a State party to the Rome Statute,
which established the ICC, or the Court itself. We also
reaffirm that we have no obligation to either pursuant
to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Furthermore, we consider the ongoing attempts by
some States parties to the Rome Statute to make the
General Assembly an Assembly of States Parties to that
Statute to be unlawful. The Court is a separate entity;
it does not enjoy any organic relationship with the
United Nations.
The obligations of States parties in no way involve
States non-parties. Therefore, draft resolution A/72/L.3
has no bearing on the Sudan, and, when adopted, it will
be given no consideration whatsoever by the Sudan.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before action is taken
on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.3, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. For the Assembly’s information, the
draft resolution has been closed to e-sponsorship.

17-3552621/25

A/72/PV.37

30/10/2017

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

There is a need to recognize that they do not mirror the
de facto situation, both within and around the Court.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/72/L.3, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Ecuador,
El Salvador, France, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Senegal, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom, Uruguay, Vanuatu and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

We have expressed our vision of the work of the
ICC on several occasions. Unfortunately, last year did
not give us any grounds to reconsider that evaluation.
For example, with respect to some of the sentences
issued during the fifteenth year of the ICC, enormous
resources had to be spent, and the effectiveness of
the Court has been demonstrated in only one case:
in 2011, the Court granted swift legal support for the
bombing of Libya. But when reporting on the issue of
civilian victims of the NATO bombing of Libya, the
ICC Prosecutor stated that nothing had been done to
investigate the crimes allegedly committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.3?
Draft resolution A/72/L.3 was adopted (resolution
72/3).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of resolution 72/3, may I remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation is committed to the
international rule of law and to fighting impunity. As
part of the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals, our country
was present at the birth of international criminal justice.
Unfortunately, since the International Criminal Court
(ICC) started its work, it has not shown itself to be a
worthy successor to those two tribunals by living up to
the importance of that endeavour.
Once more, we are disappointed that the text of
the draft resolution on the report of the International
Criminal Court, just adopted as resolution 72/3, was
yet again updated with nothing more than technical
amendments. We consider it high time to change the
approaches used to draft it. The document should fully
reflect the positions of the States that are non-parties
to the Rome Statute of the ICC. The resolution has
turned into an artificially preserved selection of hopes
and aspirations that the international community has
imposed on the new judicial body since its establishment.
22/25

The Court continues to ignore the norms of
customary international law on the immunity of officials
of States that are non-parties to the Rome Statute. As
a result, well-known concerns have been shared by a
number of States in Africa and by the African Union,
and we share those concerns. It is symbolic that they
recently gave rise to the first official withdrawal of a
State from the Rome Statute of the ICC.
We agree with the assessments voiced here, both in
the past and throughout this year, regarding the double
standards, selectivity and politicization that the ICC
allows in its work. It is not surprising that, in the light
of this nature of the Court’s work, the Ukrainian and
Georgian delegations decided to abuse the rostrum of
the General Assembly to voice their usual allegations.
The position of Russia with respect to the work of
the ICC, specifically on Ukraine and Georgia, is well
known, and I will not repeat it.
The reputation of the Court is undoubtedly
deteriorating. We have drawn attention to this month’s
information in the media about abuses that were
allowed by current and former staff members of the
Prosecutor’s Office, including the former Prosecutor of
the ICC during the investigation of the Libyan issue. We
would further like to point out the inadequate reaction
of the Court on that issue.
In conclusion, there are many problems facing the
Court; we will not list all of them. However, the main
points are as follows: there is not even a single situation
that we can recall where the ICC truly facilitated
stabilization, the curbing of violence or improvement of
the situation for the population. Particularly indicative
17-35526

30/10/2017

in that regard are the many years of work on cases
referred to the Court by the Security Council.
In the light of what I have said here, our delegation
could not support the technical update of the text and
dissociates itself from the consensus on resolution 72/3.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of resolution 72/3.
Before giving the floor to speakers in exercise
of the right of reply, may I remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first statement and to five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to make this statement in exercise of our right of
reply to the statement of the representative of Estonia,
which was audacious enough to mention the Sudan
and His Excellency President Al-Bashir. It is rather
shocking to consider that the representative of Estonia
works in diplomacy, as he mentioned our President’s
name without giving his title. I would remind him that
the Sudan was one of the first sub-Saharan States to
gain independence in Africa.
With regard to the relationship between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council,
it is just political and has nothing to do with justice.
It is an example of the use of selectivity and double
standards, which implies an effort to undermine the
political independence and integrity of the Sudan. I am
sure that the representative of Estonia is aware of this
and of all the different related aspects.
The representative of Estonia’s statement was
unacceptable and runs counter to diplomatic custom.
In his statement, he attacked the Sudan, its people,
its Government and its President. Estonia appears to
be speaking on behalf of the International Criminal
Court and is taking the place of some administrator
of international justice. I think that Estonia should
really focus on its own domestic issues without giving
sermons to anyone else. Indeed, it is only Africa that
is the subject of these sermons. When we look at the
situation in other parts of the world, it is silence that
prevails, as if those countries are beyond criticism
when it comes to justice.
We are not a State party to the ICC. We have no
obligation whatsoever to the Court, in line with the

A/72/PV.37

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. We are
concerned about the fight against impunity. We want
to achieve justice as a noble objective, but without
politicization, selectivity or subordination to other
Powers. My country therefore expresses its rejection
and condemnation of the statement made by the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Maung (Myanmar): My delegation takes the
floor in exercise of the right of reply to respond to the
statement made by the representative of Bangladesh.
The Government of Myanmar is committed
to a sustainable solution for peace, stability and
development for all communities within Rakhine
state. The Government of Myanmar is determined to
implement the commitments we made to working until
progress and success have been achieved. Rather than
rebutting criticism and allegations with words, we will
show the world our true intentions by our actions and
deeds. Since 25 August, when the terrorist attack took
place in northern Rakhine state, we have many positive
developments there. Some of the more significant ones
are the following.
The Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, led by
former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
delivered its final report on 24 August. The Government
has given the report its sincere consideration with a
view to carrying out the recommendations as to the
situation on the ground to the fullest extent and within
the shortest time frame possible. A Ministry of Labour
committee has been established to ensure that the
recommendations are implemented expeditiously, and
an advisory group, including three eminent figures
from different regions of the world, will also soon
be established.
With regard to the current humanitarian situation
in Rakhine state, the Government has identified
three main tasks to be undertaken promptly, namely,
repatriation and the provision of humanitarian
assistance to returnees, resettlement and rehabilitation
of all displaced communities, and the establishment
of sustainable peace, stability and development in
Rakhine state. To implement the tasks, the Office of
the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine was
launched on 15 October. This is a partnership among
the Government, the people, the private sector,
local non-governmental organizations and civilsociety organizations, development partners, United

17-3552623/25

A/72/PV.37

Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations. On 17 October, the Committee for the
Union Enterprise, chaired by the State Counsellor, was
established in order to oversee the operation of the
Enterprise. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management is now working with the
Government of Myanmar to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all displaced persons.
Myanmar is collaborating with donor countries of
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
to provide assistance expeditiously and in accordance
with humanitarian principles. We continue to maintain
our cooperation with the United Nations. The UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, recently visited Myanmar and met with the
leadership of the country. He also had the opportunity
to see first-hand the situation on the ground in Rakhine
state. We are also harvesting the paddy fields that were
abandoned by those taking refuge in Bangladesh. We
have asked the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
assist in harvesting, drying and providing storage for
the paddy fields. The fields will be kept for refugees
in their names so that they can claim them upon
their return.
The Myanmar and Bangladesh authorities are
working on the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons on the basis of the 1993 agreement
between the two countries. A delegation headed by the
Minister for Home Affairs of Bangladesh was recently
in Myanmar for discussions on the issue of repatriation
and border security cooperation. During this visit, two
memorandums of understanding on the establishment
of border liaison posts and security, cooperation and
dialogue were signed. Other bilateral engagements
are ongoing.
We have beenquite surprised to witness Bangladesh’s
approach to the issue within United Nations forum. This
leads me, therefore, to question whether the Bangladesh
delegation has the genuine desire to solve the issue
rather than to enflame it. The challenges we face in
finding a sustainable solution on the issue of Rakhine
state cannot be overcome overnight. The sincere and
genuine cooperation of the international community is
crucial. No one can fully understand the situation of
our country the way we do, and no one desires peace
and development for our country more than we do. We
24/25

30/10/2017

wish for all interested parties to be part of the solution,
not part of the problem.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation disassociates
itself from any consensus regarding resolution 72/3,
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”.
I recall that the Syrian Arab Republic was one
of the first countries to actively contribute to the
negotiations on the Rome Statute, establishing the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and one of its
first signatories. However, in the face of the outcomes
of the Court’s selective implementation of the notion
of justice, my country, Syria, decided to disassociate
itself from that body, which has become a deficient
and biased institution that undermines the noble
notion of justice and serves the whims and interests
of certain countries, ultimately evolving into a tool
to undermine international relations, the principles of
international law and the purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In their statements today, some delegations have
touched on the situation in my country and raised
issues that are irrelevant to the item under discussion
today. They have called for so-called justice and an end
to impunity in Syria through referral of the situation in
Syria to the ICC and by asking the State to cooperate
with the so-called International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The
statements I allude to — I refer in particular to those
made by the representatives of Denmark and the United
States — ignored the substantive criticism that we have
heard in the past and again today from some countries
about the ICC and its deliberately deficient mandate,
which is limited to certain countries and issues. Today,
those countries ignored the specific reasons that
compelled some States to withdraw from the Rome
Statute and the Court.
The political hypocrisy that we continue to see
today is manifested in statements of some Governments
concerning international justice and calling for the
implementation of a virtual ICC mandate on the
situation in Syria, whereas those same countries have
signed bilateral agreements with the Government of
the United States of America in order to give United
States soldiers immunity from prosecution before the
17-35526

30/10/2017

ICC. As members are aware, ever since the signing
of the Rome Statute and the establishment of the
Court, the United States has made diplomatic efforts
to reach bilateral agreements with other States, giving
immunity to United States soldiers. This has resulted
in the achievement of many bilateral agreements to
grant such immunity to United States soldiers. We are
sorry to hear representatives in many forums, including
the Assembly today, speak of referring the situation in
Syria to the ICC, while their own countries have signed
bilateral agreements with the United States to grant
immunity to the soldiers of the United States army
under the mandate of the Court.
As for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, the Syrian Arab Republic and other
Member States refuse to recognize the Mechanism or
any mandate thereof, as it only reflects the distortion
of the notion of universal jurisdiction and abuses that
jurisdiction in the General Assembly. It is a grave
violation of the provisions of Articles 2 and 12 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
others that specify the powers of the General Assembly.
I wish to cite here an example of a grave legal
breach in the establishment of the Mechanism, which
was granted powers and authorities that belong mainly
to the national prosecutory and judicial bodies of each
country. The Charter of the United Nations grants the
General Assembly no power or authority related to
prosecution or criminal investigations. Consequently,
the General Assembly does not have the mandate to
establish a body that enjoys powers and authorities that
the General Assembly itself does not enjoy, let alone to
establish such a Mechanism. Such authority is enjoyed
exclusively by the Security Council.
Once again, I call on all members of the Assembly
to read document A/71/799, which contains the
text of a letter from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the Secretary-General, highlighting the grave legal
breaches in resolution 71/248, which established the
illegal Mechanism. Syria calls on Member States to
disassociate themselves from the Mechanism and to
refrain from providing it with support or finance, given
the fact that 80 per cent of its funding is provided by
the Government of a State that does not recognize the

A/72/PV.37

United Nations designation of the Al-Nusra Front as a
terrorist body and that continues to finance and arm the
Al-Nusra Front. Therefore, a mechanism that is being
funded by the same source that finances terrorism
cannot be international, impartial or independent. It is
a distortion of the notion of universal jurisdiction.
It is no longer acceptable for the Governments
of certain States to use justice — one of the noble
purposes of humankind — as a tool to interfere with the
internal affairs of other States. It is no longer acceptable
for justice to be a mere tool for the most powerful
to exercise their power over the weak. We therefore
call on the Governments that frequently speak about
impunity to back up their words with actions and to hold
their country’s officials accountable for sponsoring,
facilitating and financing the transfer of thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters to my country, Syria. Everyone
believes, perhaps only implicitly, that the influx of tens
of thousands of those foreign terrorist fighters into
Syria and Iraq was the result not of individual efforts,
but rather of a well-organized scheme that operated for
years. The Governments and intelligence services of
many countries are implicated therein.
We also call on the Governments that speak out
against impunity to hold to account the forces of the
international coalition in Syria, led by the United
States, which have used internationally prohibited
weapons in Syria, including white phosphorus, killing
thousands of civilians. They have bombed schools,
bridges, infrastructure, power plants and water plants,
and destroyed the city of Raqqa. With the help of
supporting militia, they levelled the city and declared
victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS). The result was that the international coalition
forces and their supporting militia struck a deal with
ISIS whereby its fighters were moved from Raqqa to
Deir ez-Zor in order to obstruct the operations of the
Syrian Arab Army and its allies.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 76?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

17-3552625/25
