S/2021/396

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 April 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Thirty-third semi-annual report of the Secretary-General

I. Background
1.
The present report is the thirty-third semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a
review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the issuance
of my previous report on the subject, on 20 October 2020 ( S/2020/1032) and covers
developments until 1 April 2021.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation. A number
of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to
which all the political parties in Lebanon had committed thems elves. That objective
has remained the priority of my efforts.
4.
On 22 October, the President, Michel Aoun, held binding parliamentary
consultations resulting in the appointment of the former Prime Minister, Saad Hariri,
as Prime Minister-designate, with 65 votes out of 120 members of Parliament (eight
members having resigned). Mr. Hariri vowed to quickly form a Government of
non-partisan specialists, whose mission would be to implement economic, financial
and administrative reforms. Since then, there has been a sustained deadlock over the
formation of a new Government. Despite domestic and international efforts to break
the impasse, positions appear entrenched and political rhetoric has steadily
heightened.

21-05399 (E)

030521

*2105399*

S/2021/396

5.
As a result, the Government of the Prime Minister, Hassan Diab, has performed
its functions as a caretaker cabinet in the eight months since its resignation on
10 August 2020. This has aggravated the pre-existing socioeconomic crisis as urgent
structural reforms and the engagement with the Internation al Monetary Fund (IMF)
on the preparation of a comprehensive stabilization and reform programme have been
kept on hold. In a speech on 6 March, the Prime Minister warned that Lebanon was
on the brink of explosion after the collapse. In his words, the “equa tion is clear: we
cannot solve the social crisis without resolving the financial crisis; we cannot solve
the financial crisis without resuming negotiations with the IMF; we cannot carry on
negotiations with the IMF without undertaking reforms and we cannot carry out
reforms without forming a new Government”. On 12 January 2021, the World Bank
approved a loan of $246 million for a three-year emergency social safety net
programme to provide emergency cash transfers and access to social services to
approximately 786,000 poor and vulnerable Lebanese people. The Lebanese
Parliament approved the loan on 12 March. On 29 March, the Parliament passed an
advance payment of $200 million for the national electricity company to avert a total
power blackout, although the amount will reportedly cover fuel import costs for two
months only.
6.
On 2 December 2020, in Paris, France and the United Nations co-chaired a
conference in support of the Lebanese population. In the conclusions, the co -chairs
stated that participants had expressed concern about the delays in the investigation
into the blasts of 4 August 2020, the worsening socioeconomic situation and the
emerging humanitarian crisis, and “strongly recalled the importance of effective
implementation of the reforms expected by the population and the international
community”. They reiterated that there was an urgent need for Lebanese political
leaders to agree as soon as possible on the formation of a credible Government. The
reform, recovery and reconstruction framework and its financing facility (a
multi-donor trust fund) prepared by the World Bank, the United Nations and the
European Union were endorsed.
7.
On 23 March 2021, the League of Arab States called all on political factions in
Lebanon to “raise the national interest and to act to put an end quickly to the political
stalemate that is exacerbating the suffering of the Lebanese people”. The League also
affirmed its readiness to support in overcoming the deadlock.
8.
Popular frustration at the continuously deteriorating socioeconomic situation,
the restrictions imposed in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, the lack of accountability the political class is facing for the explosion that
occurred at the port of Beirut on 4 August 2020 and the stalemate in the formation of
a new Government erupted into several protests and security incidents during the
reporting period. Some were accompanied by political, sectarian -based slogans.
Starting on 25 January 2021, residents of Tripoli, one of the poorest areas of Lebanon,
protested over the course of four days and the Internal Security Forces followed by
the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed heavily to contain the situation. In that context,
on 26 and 27 January, two protestors died, with 246 protesters and 81 sec urity
personnel injured, when protesters stormed local government buildings and clashed
with security forces. On 2 March, the Lebanese pound reached a record low of 10,000
to the dollar. That day, demonstrators gathered and heavy roadblocks were erected in
Beirut, Mount Lebanon, the Biqa‘ Valley and South Lebanon. On 3 March, the
President asked the Governor of the Central Bank, Riad Salamé, to determine the
reasons that led to the rise of the United States dollar, especially in the preceding
days. The protests have continued since then, while the value of the Lebanese pound
has continued to decrease, reaching 15,000 to the dollar on 16 March.
9.
In a meeting in Beirut on 11 March 2021, members of the International Support
Group for Lebanon noted the “precipitating socioeconomic crisis” in Lebanon,
2/11

21-05399

S/2021/396

compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. They expressed concern at the increasing
tensions in the country, including the recent protests. Having recalled “with
consternation” that seven months had elapsed since the res ignation of the previous
Government, the Group reiterated its urgent call for Lebanon’s leaders to delay no
longer the formation of a fully empowered Government capable of meeting the
country’s urgent needs and implementing critical reforms.
10. The investigation into the causes and circumstances of the explosion at the port
of Beirut continued. On 10 December 2020, the judge in the case, Fadi Sawan,
announced his intention to question as suspects the caretaker Prime Minister, together
with the former Minister of Finance, Ali Hassan Khalil, and two former Ministers of
Public Works, Ghazi Zeiter and Youssef Fenianos. On 17 December, Mr. Khalil and
Mr. Zeiter requested the Court of Cassation to transfer the case to another judge. On
18 February 2021, the Court of Cassation removed Mr. Sawan from the investigation.
A new judge, Tareq Bitar, was appointed the next day. As at 19 February,
37 individuals had been charged; of those, 25 were detained. Victims and their
families have staged protests at what they perceived as political interference in the
investigation and a lack of accountability. As at 30 March, a total of 95,300
individuals had signed an online petition requesting, inter alia, a professional,
independent, transparent and timely investigation into the explosion.
11. On 4 February, Lokman Slim, a political activist and publicist known for his
critical stances in relation to Hizbullah, was found shot dead in his car near Nabatieh,
South Lebanon. Mr. Slim’s killing was condemned across the political spect rum. The
President and the caretaker Prime Minister called for the investigation into the killing
to be expedited. Some political leaders and civil society activists and organizations
expressed concern that Mr. Slim’s killing could be a prelude to a return of targeted
killings in Lebanon. Prime Minister-designate Hariri stated on 14 February that “the
series of assassinations continues, taking away the most precious people, [the] last of
whom is martyr Lokman Slim, who followed the path of Mohamad Chatah, G ebran
Tueni and Samir Kassir, the path of firm stances and freedom of thought”. Hizbullah
condemned the killing and called for the perpetrators to be found, while denouncing
accusations against the party. Shortly after Mr. Slim’s killing, protests were hel d in
Beirut, Tripoli, Sidon and Zahle.
12. The Deputy Special Coordinator, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Lebanon urged a “thorough, quick and transparent investigation and
judicial process as to bring all those responsible for this outrageous act to justice”.
Three Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council stated on 22 March that the
Government should urgently implement measures to guarantee the independence and
the impartiality of the investigation and ensure that those respon sible were identified
and held accountable, and that it should consider requesting international technical
assistance to investigate the killing of Mr. Slim. In its statement of 11 March 2021,
the International Support Group for Lebanon called for full acc ountability and justice
to be served, through credible, transparent and swift investigations of the explosion
in the port of Beirut and the killing of Mr. Slim.
13. The COVID-19 pandemic continued to significantly affect the Lebanese
population throughout the reporting period despite several lockdowns aimed at
preventing its spread. Many residents defied lockdown measures and complained of
their impact on an already strained economy. Two members of Parliament died of
complications related to COVID-19 on 31 January and 8 February 2021, respectively,
bringing the number of parliamentarians in the 128 -member Parliament down to 118;
eight members had already resigned following the explosion in the port of Beirut.
With emergency funding from the World Bank, Leban on received its first shipment
of vaccines on 13 February 2021. With additional COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility supplies, the Government aims to vaccinate at least one third of
21-05399

3/11

S/2021/396

the population, including refugees and migrant workers, by Dece mber 2021. On
23 February 2021, news that 16 individuals comprising members of Parliament and
their staff had jumped the queue to get vaccinated was met with a backlash in the
media and among the wider public. The United Nations country team has noted that
the rollout of the vaccine is slow and registrations to get vaccinated are low.
14. Surveys conducted during 2020 by the United Nations Children’s Fund indicate
that the effect of the pandemic on young people has mainly been economic, as their
salaries and working hours have been reduced and jobs have been lost.
15. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women published
its list of issues and questions in relation to the sixth periodic report of Lebanon
(CEDAW/C/LBN/Q/6). In the report (CEDAW/C/LBN/6), submitted on 27 July 2020,
Lebanon described its efforts to implement the Committee’s recommendations
contained in its concluding observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic
reports (CEDAW/C/LBN/CO/4-5) and to implement the articles of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In it s list of questions,
the Committee took note of the fact that women occupied 30 per cent of ministerial
posts in the Government and comprised 49.3 per cent of the country’s judges and
64 per cent of the country’s diplomats. It also noted, however, that wom en remained
particularly underrepresented in Parliament and on municipal councils. It asked
Lebanon to provide information on the steps envisaged to increase the number of
women in elected and appointed decision-making bodies in order to achieve the equal
representation of women and men in political and public life, including through the
adoption of temporary special measures. Specifically, the Committee inquired about
measures to introduce a system of quotas aimed at reaching a minimum of 30 per cent
representation of women in Parliament and to support the campaigning of women
candidates for elected positions.
16. The dire economic situation also had a severe impact on refugees, with 9 out of
10 Syrian refugees living in extreme poverty, which had led to m ore evictions from
homes, more gender-based violence, more child labour and more school absenteeism.
As at 31 March, there were 869,991 refugees and asylum seekers registered with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Lebanon, including
855,172 Syrian refugees and 14,819 refugees and asylum seekers of other
nationalities.
17. The number of registered Syrian refugees continued to decrease owing to returns
to the Syrian Arab Republic, resettlement to third countries, deaths and on ward
movements. The Lebanese General Security Directorate announced on 3 December
2020 that it had restarted registration for its facilitated group return movements for
Syrian refugees, which had been on hold since February 2020 due to the pandemic.
18. At an international conference on facilitating repatriation of refugees to the
Syrian Arab Republic, convened in Damascus on 11 and 12 November, the caretaker
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants and the caretaker Minister of Social
Affairs stressed Lebanon’s desire for an increase in the number of refugees returning
to the Syrian Arab Republic. They referred to the policy on returns adopted by the
Council of Ministers on 14 July 2020, which contains measures to accelerate the safe
return of displaced people to the Syrian Arab Republic. Meanwhile, deportations of
Syrians who entered or re-entered Lebanon irregularly after 24 April 2019 continued,
without the application of legal procedural safeguards (see S/2021/240).
19. The European Union and the United Nations co-chaired the fifth Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region on 29 and 30 March
2021. The international community confirmed $4.4 billion in funding to support
humanitarian, resilience and development activities in 2021 for the response to the

4/11

21-05399

S/2021/396

crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic. An additional $2 billion was pledged to support
activities in 2022 and beyond.
20. Growing tensions between host communities and Syrian refugees, driven by
competition over jobs and the scarcity of social services, at times escalated into
violent incidents. On 23 November, in Bisharri, North Lebanon, after a Syrian man
shot and killed a Lebanese man, local Lebanese people reportedly attacked Syrian s
and their homes, injuring 13 and forcing some 338 Syrian families to move. On
26 December, following a personal dispute between Lebanese and Syrian nationals in
Minniyah, North Lebanon, a local informal refugee settlement was torched, injuring
four and forcing around 90 Syrian refugee families to relocate.
21. The Patriarch of the Maronite Church, Béchara Boutros al-Rahi, in a sermon
delivered on 7 February 2021 reportedly stated that the situation in Lebanon was
collapsing and that an international conference under the auspices of the United
Nations was needed to strengthen the modern constitutional framework of Lebanon
based on unity, neutrality and permanent guarantees for the country’s existence by
preventing encroachment or any attempt to undermine the country’s legitimacy, end
the multilateral control of weapons and address the absence of a clear constitutional
authority. He reiterated that proposal on multiple occasions, insisting on the necessity
of Lebanon’s neutrality, as stated, in the Baabda declaration, among others. On
27 February, thousands of Lebanese people reportedly rallied at the seat of the
Maronite Church in support of this call for the country’s neutrality and for an
international conference. In his sermon delivered on 28 February, the Patriarch
reportedly called, inter alia, for the conference to support the Lebanese army as the
sole defender of Lebanon.
22. The Secretary General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, in a speech delivered on
16 February, stated that internationalizing the situation in that sense would harm
Lebanon and complicate the issues, would contradict the notion of sovereignty and
could be a cover for another occupation. “We very clearly reject any form of
internationalization. We consider it harmful to Lebanon and even dangerous to
Lebanon, its present and future”.
23. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. Such delineation
remains critical in order to enable proper border control and management, including
with regard to the movement of people and the potential movement of arms.
24. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain essential
to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While border delineation
is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation for Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680 (2006).
25. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
26. There was no progress on the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area. Furthermore,
neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel responded to the provisional definition of
the area contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) of 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
27. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make overflights above Lebanon during the
reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters addressed the President of the Security Co uncil
and to me dated 9 October (A/75/531-S/2020/999) and 22 February 2021 (A/75/79421-05399

5/11

S/2021/396

S/2021/182), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon, on behalf of her
Government, referred to several Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty and stated
that, in the night of 24 and 25 December 2020, off the Lebanese coast, the Isr aeli side
had fired several missiles through Lebanese airspace in the direction of Syrian
territory. In the night of 29 and 30 December 2020, according to her letter, over the
Sidon area, “Israeli Army warplanes launched several missiles at Syrian territor y”.
She added that the bombardment of Syrian territory via Lebanese airspace, in
particular, endangered the safety of Lebanese territory and civilians. In identical
letters addressed to the President of the Security Council and me dated 29 March 2021
(A/75/835-S/2021/313), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon, on behalf of her
Government, stated that on 22 March 2021, four Israeli warplanes had violated
Lebanese airspace just as air strikes were being carried out against military positions
in the city of Hama, in Syrian territory.
28. In identical letters dated 12 January addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (A/75/714-S/2021/51), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon,
on instruction from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants, stated: “Israeli
enemy aircraft, whether reconnaissance aircraft or warplanes, have violated Lebanese
airspace in a manner that is disturbing and provocative and aimed at terrorizing the
inhabitants of Lebanon in all populated areas of the country.” In identical letters dated
31 March 2021 addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me
(A/75/846-S/2021/331), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon, on behalf of her
Government, stated that, on 3 February 2021, an Israeli army Hermes reconnaissance
aircraft had violated Lebanese airspace. A large explosion, the cause of which was
unknown, had been heard as the aircraft circled over Lebanese territory, coinciding
with “intense overflight” above Lebanese airspace by Israeli warplanes. She added
that, on the same day, “Israeli army spokesman Avichai Adraee wrote on his official
Twitter page that during a routine exercise over Lebanon, anti-aircraft fire was
directed at a remote-controlled Israeli Defense Forces aircraft. The aircraft was not
hit and continued to carry out its mission as usual”, thus acknowledging the Israeli
violation of Lebanese airspace.
29. On 11 December, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon sentenced Salim Ayyash,
who had previously been convicted to life imprisonment in the Ayyash et al. case in
connection with the bombing on 14 February 2005 that killed 22 people, including
former Prime Minister Rafic Hariri, and injured 226 others. The Tribunal issued a
renewed arrest warrant for Mr. Ayyash, who remains at large and was tried in absentia.
On 12 January 2021, the prosecution, the defence and the legal representative of
participating victims filed notices of appeal. On the date of commemoration of the
assassination of his father, 14 February, Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri stated
that the ruling of the Tribunal against Mr. Ayyash would be implemented and
Mr. Ayyash would be brought to justice “no matter how long it takes”.
30. On 25 February, I extended the mandate of the Tribunal for a further period of
two years starting 1 March 2021, or until the cases before the Tribunal are completed,
or available funds are exhausted, whichever comes first. The extension was granted
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1757 (2007). Within the indicated
two-year mandate period, it is anticipated that the Tribunal will progressively draw
down its activities as the judicial work before the various chambers is completed.

6/11

21-05399

S/2021/396

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
31. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and in
resolution 1559 (2004).
32. In an address to members of the Military Council and the commanders of units
of the Lebanese Armed Forces delivered on 8 March, Commander General Joseph
Aoun of the Lebanese Armed Forces referred to the situation in the country as very
dangerous. He noted that people were suffering from the high exchange rate of the
United States dollar, that salaries had lost a great part of their value, and that citizens
were poor and hungry. “We as an army are part of this people”, he said, adding that
the overall budget of the Lebanese Armed Forces had been reduced.
33. Some level of insecurity continued to affect regions of the Biqa‘ Valley, where
the Lebanese Armed Forces enforced security measures with roadblocks and security
patrols. On 22 November 2020, an exchange of fire and shelling took place between
two families north of Hirmil District. The incident, which was related to an earlier
shooting incident, resulted in the wounding of three individuals. In eastern and
northern Lebanon, during the reporting period, several personal disputes escalated
into shootings, resulting in 39 fatalities (including two children) and injuries to 108
persons. At least 16 personal disputes in Baalbek-Hirmil, eastern Lebanon, involved
the use of rocket-propelled grenades. On 14 December, in Hrar, Akkar, a family
dispute escalated into shooting. One person was reported killed and two others were
injured. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to arrest individuals and groups
suspected of smuggling goods, particularly fuel and basic goods subsidized by the
Government, across the border with the Syrian Arab Republic. In January 2021, a
series of armed clashes between border clans, kidnappings and armed robberies,
including the killing of a soldier of the Lebanese Armed Forces, led to large
anti-trafficking operations in the Hirmil area. Increased criminality sparked protests
by citizens against lawlessness in Hirmil and Tripoli.
34. On 2 December, in Qartaba, Jubayl, a retired customs officer, Colonel Mounir
Abou-Rjeili, was found in his house with a deadly head injury; a criminal
investigation was launched. On 21 December, in Kahhalah, Alayh, Mount Lebanon,
unidentified individuals reportedly shot dead a freelance photographer, Joe Bejjani,
in his car.
35. On 1 February, the Lebanese Armed Forces stated that, during the previous two
weeks, its units had arrested 18 Lebanese and Syrian individuals in Arsal, Baalbek,
over their alleged terrorist affiliation to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
confiscated various weapons and ammunition.
36. While there were no instances of violent and sustained armed clashes within
Palestinian refugee camps during the reporting period, protests did take place in
which attention was called to socioeconomic distress, and humanitarian and
protection needs. The protests led to temporary closures of facilities of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and disruptions of its services.
37. The expected funding shortfall for 2021 of the Agency’s programme budget is
over $200 million. In November and December 2020, its financial crisis prompted the
Agency to defer staff salaries, putting at risk the delivery of critical services. In
response, staff unions called for an Agency-wide strike from 3 January 2021 that was
averted through negotiations between unions and management.

21-05399

7/11

S/2021/396

38. On 3 February, in Ein El Hilweh camp, Sidon, South Lebanon, Palestinian
refugees escalated their protests against UNRWA, leading to the closure of the office
and claims of neglect owing to the spread of COVID-19 inside the camp. The number
of sit-ins and protests in the camp grew and spread to other camps in late February
and March, including Burj Shemali camp, Tyre, South Lebano n; Burj Barajneh camp,
Beirut, central Lebanon; and Nahr el-Bared camp, North Lebanon. The
Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Philippe Lazzarini, visited Ein El Hilweh and
Nahr el-Bared camps on 29 and 30 March, respectively, meeting with refugee
representatives.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
39. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
40. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country.
41. There has been no tangible progress made towards the disbanding and disarming
of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and
resolution 1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have
been taken to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military
arsenal outside a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued to be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those
issues to be destabilizing factors in the country and ones th at undermine democracy.
Many Lebanese people view the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat
that those weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons. During the
reporting period, there were calls from protestors denouncing the maintenance of
weapons by militias combined with the lack of accountability of the political class
towards citizens as the main paradigm of Lebanese governance.
42. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In an interview
with a Lebanese television channel on 27 December 2020, Mr. Nasrallah stated that
“as we approach the end of 2020, the capabilities of the axis of resistance are
multiplied many times compared to past years. This applies to Lebanon, Palestine,
Yemen, Syria, Iraq and Iran. … The resistance now has double the number of
precision missiles it had last year … We can hit precisely all-important targets inside
the Israeli entity that we need to throughout the area of occupied Palestine”. He also
stated, again, that “the killers of Hajj Qasem [Soleimani] and Hajj Abou -Mahdi
[Mohandes] [would] be punished”, a point he reiterated in his 3 January 2021 speech.
43. In an interview on the occasion of the anniversary of the death of General Qasem
Soleimani, on 2 January, the commander of the Aerospace Force of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, Brigadier General Amir Ali Hajizadeh, said that “what
we see today in Gaza and Lebanon in terms of the ability to produce missile forces
was all with the support and backing of the Islamic Republic under the leadership and
management of [General] Soleimani”. In a speech on 3 January, the Secretary General
of Hizbullah accused the Lebanese media of having distorted Mr. Hajizadeh’s
statements. He said that “in the headline, the media wrote: the Iranian Revolutionary

8/11

21-05399

S/2021/396

Guard says the missiles in Gaza and Lebanon are due to our support and represent our
front line to confront Israel … He did not say ‘our front line’ for confronting Israel.
He did not say the front line for defending Iran to confront Israel. When Iran gave
missiles to Gaza and to Lebanon, it was for the people of Gaza to defend Gaza and
for the Lebanese people to defend Lebanon”.
44. The Permanent Representative of Israel, in a letter addressed to the President of
the Security Council and myself dated 12 January 2021 ( S/2021/33), criticized
Mr. Hajizadeh for what he had said in the interview. He stated: “Iran’s proxy in
Lebanon, Hezbollah, a designated terrorist organization, acquire[d] more than
150,000 missiles and rockets with the capability to reach the entire Stat e of Israel.
The vast majority of these rockets were transferred from Iran in violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions related to the Iranian nuclear programme, as
well as resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004)”, while Iran contributed to “the
development of Hizbullah’s “self-production capabilities”. “Iran provides Hezbollah
with advanced technologies and the expertise and know-how to develop upgraded
missiles and deadlier rockets of increased range, accuracy and sophistication”. He
had raised similar concerns in his identical letters dated 16 November ( S/2020/1120).
45. In response, the Permanent Representative of Iran, in a letter to the President of
the Security Council and me dated 22 January (S/2021/72), denounced what he said
was “the continuation of its unlawful occupation of Palest ine and parts of Syria and
Lebanon” by Israel and its “violation of hundreds of resolutions of the United Nations,
including a large number of binding resolutions of the Security Council”, including
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). He recalled “the continued threats by the
Israeli regime” against his country and denied the “unfounded accusations” against
his country contained in the letter of the Permanent Representative of Israel dated
12 January.
46. On 26 January, the Chief of Staff of the Israel Defense Forces, Aviv Kochavi,
said that “every fifth house in Lebanon is either a missile warehouse or rocket
warehouse”, adding that, “we are going to attack military targets, but if a rocket is
linked to a house, it’s categorized as a military target”. On 16 February, Mr. Nasrallah
gave a speech in which he stated: “I say if you attack our cities, we will attack your
cities, if you attack our villages, we will attack your settlements”.
47. With reference to paragraph 42 of my report dated 20 October 2020
(S/2020/1032), the Permanent Representative of Iran, in a letter addressed to me dated
5 July 2020 (S/2020/651), stated that Israel’s “continued occupation of territories of
Palestine and the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as parts of Lebanon, has been the
main source of insecurity and instability in the Middle East”, and mentioned “blatant
violations of numerous resolutions of the Security Council”, including resolution
1559 (2004). He “categorically reject[ed] all unfounded claims raised” in the letter
contained in document S/2020/608.
48. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.

III. Observations
49. It is high time that Lebanese leaders live up to their responsibilities and form a
Government able to undertake the necessary reforms to address the needs and

21-05399

9/11

S/2021/396

aspirations of the Lebanese people as a matter of urgency. Whether it is with regard
to health, education, access to electricity or procuring food supplies, the population
of Lebanon struggles daily. The frustration at the political paralysis and economic
crisis is already visible in protests and could lead to further violence, jeopardizing the
country’s stability. In the face of such desperation, I urge Lebanese leaders to act in
the interest of the Lebanese people and address the dire situation that the c ountry
faces effectively and without further delay.
50. The call for support to the Lebanese Armed Forces by its Commander, General
Joseph Aoun, and his warning that the current situation is very dangerous are
noteworthy. The role of the Lebanese Armed Forces and that of other security forces
in preserving the country’s security remains essential. I am concerned that Lebanon’s
current economic and financial crisis, the ever-increasing suffering of the population
and the operational and budgetary pressures on the army may adversely impact its
ability to maintain order and preserve stability. I encourage donors to continue to
support the Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces and to find creative
ways to address the operational challenges they face and to preserve their readiness
and capabilities.
51. I condemn the killing of Lokman Slim. It is essential that a thorough, swift and
transparent investigation is carried out to bring the perpetrators to justice.
52. An impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into the explosion in the
port of Beirut in line with the demands of the Lebanese people for accountability is
of the utmost importance.
53. While the Special Tribunal for Lebanon must continue its important work and
must be supported by the international community in the fulfilment of its mandate, I
reiterate that it is in the interest of Lebanon and in line with its obligations under
international law to ensure that those who are behind terrorist acts are held
accountable and that violence is not committed with impunity.
54. I remain concerned about the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
The continued, self-acknowledged involvement of Hizbullah in the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic is not only in breach of the disassociation policy and the
principles of the Baabda Declaration of 2012, but carries the risk of entangling
Lebanon in regional conflicts and undermining the stability of Lebanon and of the
region. Furthermore, it demonstrates the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal
to be accountable to the very State institutions that the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) was intended to strengthen. The reported involvement of Hizbullah and
that of other Lebanese elements in fighting elsewhere in the region remains of
concern.
55. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, combined
with the existence of armed militias, continues to undermine security and stability in
Lebanon. The self-acknowledged maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and
sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon
remains a matter of grave concern.
56. Calls from sectors of the Lebanese population for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) and for rejecting the possession of arms outside State
institutions indicate that the maintenance of weapons by Hizbullah remains a divisive
issue within Lebanese society.
57. I again call upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to engage in any
military activity inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the
Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004). It is critical that the Accords be preserved
and implemented by all in order to avoid the spectre of renewed confrontation among
Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the institutions of the State. All parties concerned
10/11

21-05399

S/2021/396

must contribute to efforts to reinforce the institutions of the Lebanese State. The
Lebanese State should increase its efforts to achieve a monopoly over the possession
of weapons and the use of force throughout its territor y. I continue to urge the
Government and the armed forces of Lebanon to take all measures necessary to
prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring weapons and building
paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in violation of r esolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
58. Countries in the region that maintain close ties with Hizbullah should encourage
the disarmament of that armed group and its transformation into a solely civilian
political party in accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004), and in the best interests of Lebanon and of regional peace and security.
59. I strongly condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, as they undermine the credibility of Lebanese security and State institutions
and give rise to anxiety among the civilian population. I renew my calls for Israel to
adhere to its obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions and to
withdraw its forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and the adjacent
area north of the Blue Line, and to immediately cease its overflights above Lebanese
airspace. The alleged use of Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces to strike
targets in the Syrian Arab Republic is deeply concerning, owing to the risk it poses
for regional stability.
60. It is essential that donors continue to provide funding to UNRWA, including in
support of its request for cash assistance to address the deteriorating economic
situation in Palestinian refugee camps, exacerbated by the COVID -19 crisis, so that
it can continue to perform its essential role and deliver services. The Agency’s role in
maintaining stability in Palestinian refugee camps is more critical now than ever and
vital to the dignity and security of Palestinian refugees. Such efforts are without
prejudice to the need for a just resolution of the Palestinian refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive settlement in the region.
61. The continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to its international
obligations is essential. All parties and actors must fully abide by re solutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will continue its efforts in
support of the full implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to
Lebanon.

21-05399

11/11
