S/2018/614

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixth quarterly report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016). It provides a review and an assessment of the
implementation of the resolution since my previous report on the subject, which was
delivered orally on 26 March 2018, and covers developments until 12 June 2018.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, had no legal validity and constituted a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. The Council reiterated its
demands that Israel immediately and completely cease all sett lement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that it fully respect all
of its legal obligations in this regard. No such steps were taken during the reporting
period.
3.
During the reporting period, some 3,500 housing units in settlements in Area C
of the occupied West Bank were advanced, approved or tendered. One third of those
units are in settlements in outlying locations deep in the West Bank. Plans for 2,300
units were advanced in the approval process, plans for 300 units reached the final
approval stage, and tenders were announced for about 900 units. During the previous
reporting period, 1,500 units were advanced, 160 approved and 900 tenders issued.
As in the previous period, no advancements, approvals or tenders were made in
occupied East Jerusalem. Among the largest plans advanced for settlements deep in
the West Bank are those for 135 units in Tene, 156 in Qiryat Arba‘, 189 in Talmon
and 102 in Negohot. One of the plans approved for construction is for 55 units in the
settlement of Peza’el, situated in the Jordan Valley, in a sensitive location where
settlement expansion risks severing the north-south connection in the northern West
Bank.
4.
On 26 March, 20 settler families occupied two houses located a few metres from
the Ibrahimi Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron’s H2 area, claiming that they

18-09913 (E)

210618

*1809913*

S/2018/614

had purchased the houses from their Palestinian owners. Ownership is currently being
adjudicated by Israeli military authorities.
5.
On 13 May, the Government of Israel approved five plans for government
investment in Jerusalem, the largest amounting to $550 million and aimed at closing
gaps in infrastructure, service delivery and employment opportunities for the
Palestinian neighbourhoods of occupied East Jerusalem.
6.
The plans also include allocating $115 million for the development of economic,
commercial and recreational activities, as well as archaeological sites in and around
the Old City. Approximately $55 million was allocated to advance the controversial
plan to build a cable car from West Jerusalem to the Old City. Concerns have been
raised among Palestinians in East Jerusalem that those planned steps could deepen
control by Israel over Jerusalem.
7.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned structures continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, albeit at the relatively low rate that
characterized the past year. Demolitions increased overall across Area C by 94 per
cent and decreased in East Jerusalem by 64 per cent, compared wi th the previous
reporting period. Citing the absence of permits, which, as noted in the Middle East
Quartet report of 2016, are extremely difficult for Palestinians to obtain in Area C and
East Jerusalem, Israeli authorities demolished or seized 84 Palesti nian-owned
structures. This resulted in the forced displacement of 67 people and potentially
affected the livelihoods of 4,500 others.
8.
A new order by the Israel Defense Forces stipulates, as of 16 June, the
demolition of unlicensed structures that are deemed “new” (i.e. established within
6 months or inhabited for less than 30 days) within 96 hours of the issuance of a
removal order. That procedure will significantly impede the ability of Palestinians to
challenge demolition orders in Israeli courts.
9.
On 24 May, the High Court of Justice of Israel ruled that the demolition of Khan
al-Ahmar — Abu al-Helu, home to 181 Palestinians, more than half of whom are
children, could proceed. It renders nearly all community structures at risk of
immediate demolition, including a school serving 170 students from five
communities. Focusing on the legality of the demolition orders according to Israeli
law, the High Court rejected the petitions requesting that the implementation of the
demolition order by the State be prevented.
10. On 23 April, residents of the Bedouin community of Jabal al -Baba were forced
to dismantle a caravan used as a kindergarten, a women ’s centre and a clinic,
following a seizure warning from the Israeli authorities. Jabal al -Baba is one of 18
Bedouin communities, comprising more than 3,500 persons located within or near the
E1 settlement plan area, which envisages a continuous built -up area between Ma‘ale
Adummim and East Jerusalem that threatens the north-south contiguity of a future
Palestinian State.
11. On 9 April, the Israeli authorities dismantled a donor-funded school in Khirbat
Zanuta, in Hebron Governorate, subsequently seizing replacement structures. Also in
Hebron, on 2 May several donor-funded structures in Masafer Yatta were demolished,
displacing 35 people. This included six residential structures, electricity -generating
equipment, animal pens and water systems. Four solar panels were also confiscated.
12. In the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, on 8 April, Palestinian families
in three houses were evicted by court order. Although the families obtained an
injunction to suspend the eviction orders, they were not allowed to return to their
homes.

2/12

18-09913

S/2018/614

13. On 12 June, the Israeli authorities evacuated and demolished 15 houses of Israeli
citizens living in the illegal outpost of Netiv Ha’avot in the West Bank. The
evacuation was carried out following a ruling by the High Court of Justice in
September 2016 that the houses were illegally built, either fully or partially, on private
Palestinian land.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
14. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, and called for accountability in this regard.
However, the reporting period was characterized by high levels of violence and rocket
attacks from Gaza.
15. During the reporting period, 135 Palestinians, including 16 children, were shot
and killed by the Israel Defense Forces in Gaza, 118 of them during the “Great Return
March” protests, 68 on 14 May alone, the peak of the protests. Hamas and Islamic
Jihad have publicly acknowledged that a number of their members were among those
killed in the protests and other incidents. Based on local estimates, during the protests,
3,778 Palestinians were wounded by live ammunition, resulting in scores of life altering injuries. Two Israeli soldiers were injured during the protests.
16. Since the beginning of the protests, 54 health workers were injured and
45 ambulances affected. On 1 June, Razan al-Najjar, a 21-year-old Palestinian woman
volunteering as a first responder, was shot and killed. She was one of two medical
workers killed during the protests. According to eyewitness reports, Al -Najjar was
dressed in clothing clearly distinguishing her as a health-care worker and was
attempting to reach injured protesters when she was shot. The Israel Defense Forces
opened an internal investigation and, on 5 June, released initial findings indicating
that “no shots were deliberately or directly” aimed at Al-Najjar.
17. Public statements and messages by Hamas leaders indicated the intention t o use
mass protests to infiltrate Israel and seek martyrdom. Among the thousands of
peaceful demonstrators, hundreds approached and attempted to breach the fence,
burned tyres, threw rocks and firebombs at Israeli forces, launched incendiary kites
and laid improvised explosive devices, at least two of which exploded at or near the
perimeter fence. According to the Israeli authorities, incendiary kites have caused
large fires that burned thousands of acres of agricultural fields and nature reserves,
resulting in damage estimated at more than $2 million. On three occasions, Palestinian
protesters attacked the Kerem Shalom crossing and severely damaged infrastructure
on the Palestinian side (see sect. V).
18. After discovering an improvised explosive device ad jacent to the fence on
27 May and reportedly coming under fire while arresting two Palestinians who
crossed into Israel on 28 May, the Israel Defense Forces killed three Palestinian
Islamic Jihad militants and a Hamas militant. During the night of 28 May, machine
gun fire from Gaza hit the Israeli city of Sderot, causing damage to several buildings
and a vehicle.
19. On 29 May, reportedly in response to the deaths in Gaza, nearly 200 rockets and
mortar rounds were fired from the Gaza Strip towards Israel, t he largest wave of
projectiles fired from Gaza since the conclusion of the previous round of fighting in
Gaza in 2014. The majority of the projectiles were intercepted by Iron Dome, while
one mortar reportedly landed in the grounds of a kindergarten in a k ibbutz in the
Eshkol Regional Council, causing no injuries. Three Israeli soldiers and two civilians
were reportedly injured in other incidents in Israeli communities bordering Gaza. In

18-09913

3/12

S/2018/614

response, the Israel Defense Forces retaliated by striking 65 targets throughout the
Gaza Strip that it attributed to Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas. No casualties
were reported from those retaliatory strikes.
20. Hamas and the Islamic Jihad claimed joint responsibility for the rockets and
mortars fired at Israel. The escalation ended on 30 May, although on 2 June militants
in Gaza fired at least four additional projectiles towards Israel. In response, the Israel
Defense Forces said that they had retaliated by firing on 15 militant sites throughout
the Gaza Strip. No casualties were reported.
21. Overall, since 26 March more than 250 rockets and mortar shells were fired
from Gaza towards Israel, a tenfold increase compared with the previous reporting
period. The Israeli Air Force targeted facilities that it attributed to Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad on 120 occasions, causing extensive damage, killing two
Palestinian militants and injuring another militant and one civilian. On 27 May, the
Israel Defense Forces indicated that they had located an unmanned aerial vehicl e
armed with explosives, sent from Gaza towards the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council.
22. During the reporting period, Israel announced the destruction of three tunnels
from Gaza, including a 2 km tunnel leading from Gaza and entering Israel and Egypt.
23. In the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, regular clashes between
Palestinians and the Israel Defense Forces continued throughout the reporting period.
On 23 May 2018, a Palestinian teenager died of gunshot wounds sustained from
Israeli security forces during protests. On 26 May, an Israeli soldier died after being
critically wounded on 24 May by a Palestinian during an arrest operation in the
Am’ari refugee camp in Ramallah. On 6 June, a Palestinian youth was shot dead by
the Israel Defense Forces during protest-related clashes in the village of Nabi Salih,
north-west of Ramallah.
24. Since 10 June, thousands of Palestinians have demonstrated in Ramallah in
solidarity with Gaza against the restrictive measures imposed by the Government of
the State of Palestine on the Strip. Demonstrators also demanded an end to the
political division and the closures in Gaza.
25. On 11 June, an 18-year-old Israeli woman was seriously injured in a stabbing
attack in the city of Afula, in northern Israel. The Israeli authorities arrested a
Palestinian from Janin on suspicion of carrying out the attack.
26. During the reporting period, 48 incidents of Israeli settler-related violence were
documented and resulted in 14 Palestinian injured casualties and damage to prop erty.
There were 29 Palestinian attacks against Israeli civilians in the West Bank, also
resulting in casualties or damage. Both represent a decline compared with the
previous period, during which there were 61 and 45 attacks, respectively.
27. The highest number of incidents of violence perpetrated by settlers occurred in
the Yitzhar settlement and its adjacent outposts and affected at least 20,000
Palestinians in five communities in the Nablus Governorate. The Israel Defense
Forces have reportedly deployed additional forces in the area to prevent further
incidents.
28. On 19 April, an Israeli civilian was lightly wounded in occupied East Jerusalem
by a molotov cocktail, while on 22 May a vehicle driven by an Israeli was hit by gun
shots near the Talmon settlement, causing no injuries. Two Palestinians were
reportedly arrested in connection with the attack.
29. On 28 March, findings were published of the Israeli military police investigation
into the killing of a Palestinian 29-year-old double amputee, Ibrahim Abu Thurayah,
during demonstrations close to the Gaza fence on 15 December 2017. The
investigation concluded that he had not been killed by Israeli sniper fire.
4/12

18-09913

S/2018/614

30. On 25 April, the Jerusalem District Court sentenced an Israeli border police
officer, Ben Deri, to nine months’ imprisonment after he pleaded guilty for causing
death by negligence. According to the Court, Deri shot and killed a 17 -year-old
Palestinian, Nadeem Nuwara, on 15 May 2014, during the Nakbah demonstrations in
Ramallah.
31. On 8 May, an Israeli soldier, Sergeant Elor Azaria, was released after serving
two thirds of his sentence (9 months in prison). He had been convicted in February
2017 of manslaughter for shooting and killing an incapacitated Palestinian after the
latter had reportedly stabbed an Israeli soldier in Hebron in March 2016. Sergeant
Azaria’s initial sentence of 18 months had been reduced to 14 months in September
2017.
32. On 29 March, for the first time, an Israeli court convicted an Israeli national of
membership in a terrorist organization for participating in a “price tag” attack against
Palestinians. In the first four months of 2018, 23 Israelis suspected of involvement in
“price tag” attacks, many of them minors, were reportedly indicted and 13 were issued
administrative orders, limiting their access to the West Bank.
33. On 1 May, indictments were filed with the Jerusalem District Court against three
Palestinians from East Jerusalem for allegedly conspiring to carry out shooting
attacks in the West Bank under the guidance and sponsorship of Hamas. On 27 May,
additional indictments were filed by the Israeli prosecution authorities against
suspected members of a cell for allegedly planning attacks against high -level targets,
including the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, and diplomatic missions
in Jerusalem.

IV. Incitement, provocation and inflammatory rhetoric
34. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to
act on the basis of international law, including international humanitarian law, and
their previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain
from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric and called for
compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of ongoing
efforts to combat terrorism and to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism. Provocation,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric continued during the reporting period.
35. On 30 April, during his opening speech at the Palestinian National Council, the
President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, made statements that included
the unacceptable suggestion that the social behavio ur of Jews was the cause of the
Holocaust and said that Israel was “an imperialist project”. Those statements were
widely condemned by the international community, and Mr. Abbas subsequently
apologized, emphasizing that the Holocaust was “the most heinous crime in history”.
A senior Palestinian religious leader and adviser to the President also made statements
calling any Jewish connection to Jerusalem an “imperialist myth”.
36. At the height of the Gaza protests, a senior Hamas official called upon protest ers
to “take down the border and tear out their [i.e. Israelis’] hearts”, one of several public
calls by Hamas leaders inciting protesters to violence, including on social media. As
in previous reporting periods, Fatah’s official social media pages continued to glorify
the perpetrators of past terrorist attacks. According to media reports, during one of
the protests, another Hamas official delivered a speech calling upon protesters to
welcome “martyrdom” before thousands of them streamed towards the perimeter
fence.
37. Israeli officials also made provocative and inflammatory statements. In a radio
interview, a senior Israeli minister asserted that, in Gaza, “everyone is affiliated with
18-09913

5/12

S/2018/614

Hamas”, justifying the use of live fire against demonstrators. Separatel y, an Israeli
Member of the Knesset tweeted that a Palestinian teenager, Ahed Tamimi, currently
sentenced for slapping Israeli soldiers, should have “gotten a bullet, at least in the
kneecap”. Senior Israeli politicians also continued to call for the annex ation of the
settlements, denying that the Palestinian territories were occupied, and for open
rejection of the Palestinian right to statehood.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
38. Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the calls by the Middle East Quartet for
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. The period witnessed both positive and
negative actions by the parties in this regard.
39. Significant progress was made towards finalizing a power purchase agreement,
which would enable the Palestinian Authority to exercise operational and commercial
responsibility over electricity connection points in the West Bank. Outstanding issues
to be resolved include bank guarantees and Israeli access to clearance revenues in the
event of a default on payments.
40. On 7 June, Israel reinstated the 24-hour operations of the King Hussein
(Allenby) Bridge crossing between Jordan and the West Bank during weekdays. That
arrangement will be in place until 13 September.
41. Progress continued on the reconstruction in Gaza of houses completely
destroyed during the conflict in 2014, with work on more than 400 houses comple ted
during the reporting period. Nearly 13,500 of the 17,800 houses completely destroyed
have been rebuilt. The temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism continues to play
an important role in the reconstruction, as well as in new construction work in Gaza.
However, despite a significant improvement since the beginning of the year in Israeli
approvals for materials to enter Gaza, there has not been a significant increase in
imports, and the number of new submissions under the Mechanism has also declined.
This is due largely to the drop in purchasing power and international assistance for
reconstruction.
42. The Rafah crossing with Egypt was open for six days, from 12 to 17 May, for
the crossing of humanitarian cases and pre-registered Palestinians in Gaza, including
students and those with dual nationalities and residences. On 17 May, Egypt
announced that the opening would be extended throughout the holy month of
Ramadan and that entry would also be possible for people injured during the Great
Return March. This was the longest uninterrupted opening of the Rafah crossing since
October 2014. Since 26 March, more than 14,000 Palestinians have crossed into
Egypt, while more than 3,300 have crossed into Gaza. The adjacent Hamas -controlled
Salah al-Din Gate was open for 26 days during the reporting period, with more than
1,100 trucks entering Gaza, loaded mainly with food commodities, construction
materials and fuel.
43. On 30 April, the Palestinian National Council convened in Ramallah for the first
time in 22 years, re-electing Mr. Abbas as Chair. The Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine and Hamas boycotted the meeting. The final statement of the Palestinian
National Council reiterated the commitment to a peaceful solution based on long standing parameters and United Nations resolutions. The same statement stressed the
need to implement the decision of the Central Council, made at its past two sessions,
to stop all forms of security coordination and to be free from the economic
dependency ties established by the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations, including
the economic boycott of occupation products, in support of the independence of the

6/12

18-09913

S/2018/614

national economy and its growth. It also mandated the Executive Committee to
suspend the recognition of Israel until Israel recognizes the State of Palestine on the
basis of the borders of 4 June 1967 and repeals the decision to annex East Jerusalem
and stop the settlements. It also endorsed a set of political moves to join various
international treaties and to seek international protection for the Palestinian people.
44. The process of returning the Gaza Strip to Palestinian government control came
to a halt after the convoy of the Prime Minister, Rami Hamdallah, was targeted in
Gaza by a roadside bomb on 13 March, as no senior Palestinian government official
has since travelled to Gaza. Egypt continued its efforts to revive the process, holding
talks with senior Hamas and Fatah officials.
45. The Government of the State of Palestine has maintained its restrictive measures
against Gaza since April 2017, including cuts of up to 50 per cent in the salaries of
tens of thousands of public sector employees in Gaza. Most recently, the Government
failed to pay these reduced salaries for the month of March and applied salary cuts of
approximately 50 per cent when it paid April salaries on 3 May and May salaries on
4 June.
46. The health sector of Gaza has struggled to deal with the mass influx of casualties
and injuries related to the recent protests, with essential health services al ready on the
edge of collapse after 10 years of Israeli closures, Hamas control and Palestinian
Authority measures to reduce electricity payments for Gaza. Medical supplies are
significantly depleted, and access to health care for non-trauma patients is being
compromised. Foreign medical teams have been urgently requested to provide
specialized vascular, orthopaedic and reconstructive care. Some 49 per cent of
essential medicines, including 74 per cent of cancer drugs, and 29 per cent of medical
disposables are at zero stock level as a result of funding shortages.
47. Power cuts in Gaza continued to reach up to 22 hours per day, severely
undermining the provision of essential services. At current consumption rates, donor
funds are available for the United Nations to distribute emergency fuel to power
critical water, sanitation and health facilities only until early August. On 12 April, the
Gaza power plant ceased production, owing reportedly to a lack of funds to purchase
fuel, with a brief resumption from 30 May to 5 June. Following the closure of the
power plant, the only reliable source of electricity in Gaza came from Israel, as the
supply from Egypt continued to be inoperable. Such limited supply meets less than
one quarter of the demand and has resulted in an average of four hours of electricity
per day. Water is piped to households for a few hours only every four to five days.
48. On 4, 11 and 14 May, Palestinian protesters burned and looted equipment and
installations on the Palestinian side of the Kerem Shalom crossing. Nevertheless,
coordination between Israel and the Palestinian Authority enabled a speedy
resumption of essential imports, including medical supplies, fuel and other food and
non-food items, as well as agricultural exports. Despite substantial damage caused on
11 May, the volume of truck traffic through the crossing had reached almost normal
levels within five days. However, the specialized transfer equipment, including
pumps and conveyor belts, was rendered unusable. The United Nations c ontinues to
work with the parties to ensure urgent, safe and reliable solutions for all critical
supplies, particularly cooking gas and fuel for the private sector.
49. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) is facing an unprecedented $250 million shortfall. The Agency and
its stakeholders are making every effort to ensure that 526,000 Palestine refugee
students will be able to attend the following school year without interruption. On
15 March, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Jordan and Sweden co -chaired
an extraordinary ministerial conference, attended by some 90 Member States, to
provide sufficient, predictable and sustained funding to UNRWA by building new
18-09913

7/12

S/2018/614

funding alliances, reaffirming support for the UNRWA mandate and overcoming the
Agency’s unprecedented shortfall of $446 million. Some $100 million was pledged
at the conference. In April, over $100 million was pledged by other partners, notably
the Gulf States. Despite these crucial contributions, the shortfall remains at
$250 million.

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process and other relevant developments
50. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967. During the reporting period, there were no
developments related to States’ doing so.
51. In the same resolution, the Council called upon all parties to continue to exert
collective efforts to launch credible negotiations, including through the acceleration
of international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at ach ieving,
without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. No
progress was achieved during the reporting period.
52. On 15 May, the State of Palestine submitted a request for membership in the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. On 17 May, it deposited
instruments of accession to the Constitution of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, which entered into force for the State on the same day,
and to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, which was to enter into force
for the State on 16 June. On 6 June, Palestine deposited instruments of accession to
seven international conventions and treaties, including the Second Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty.
53. Following its recognition on 6 December 2017 of Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, the United States of America opened its embassy to Israel in Jerusalem on
14 May. That move, which was followed on 16 and 21 May by similar actions by
Guatemala and Paraguay, respectively, was objected to by several other States.
54. On 17 May, the Council of the League of Arab States held an extraordinary
ministerial meeting in Cairo on confronting the United States decision to move its
embassy to the occupied city of Jerusalem, the development of the situation and
condemnation of the crimes committed by the Israeli occupation in Palestine. Its
member States adopted a resolution in which, inter alia, they condemned and rejected
the recognition of Jerusalem by the United States as the capital of Israel and the
relocation of its embassy.
55. At its seventh Extraordinary Islamic Summit Conferen ce, held on 18 May, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) called for the provision of international
protection for the Palestinian people, including through the dispatch of an
international protection force, as well as for the establishment by the OIC General
Secretariat of an international independent mechanism for alleged crimes committed
by the Israel Defense Forces against the Palestinian people. The OIC Summit also
underscored its rejection of the United States proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel and the relocation of the Embassy of the United States.
56.

A number of other States expressed their condemnation of the deaths in Gaza.

57. On 1 June, the Security Council voted on but did not adopt two draft resolutions
related to the high number of casualties during the protests on 14 May and to the
8/12

18-09913

S/2018/614

rockets and mortar rounds launched from Gaza towards Israel on 29 and 30 May. On
13 June, the resolution that had been proposed to the Council by Kuwait, on the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population, was presented to the General
Assembly for a vote and adopted.
58. On 15 May, during the meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Gaza,
several Member States requested the Secretariat to bring forward proposals to address
the situation in Gaza, in line with the commitment to advancing urgent infrastructure
and economic development projects, improving access and movement in Gaza and
supporting the Egyptian-led reconciliation process. In this regard, my Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process outlined, in his briefing to the Council
on 23 May, a proposal prioritizing projects identified and agreed over the past two
years by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, focusing primarily on improving water, energy and health
infrastructure, as well as income-generating activities; enhancing United Nations
project management capacity in Gaza to accelerate the implementation of the
prioritized projects; and strengthening coordination with the Governments of Egypt,
Israel and the State of Palestine. In the weeks since, he has continued to engage with
all sides to advance those proposals.
59. On 18 May, the Human Rights Council adopted resolution S -28/1, in which it
decided to urgently dispatch an independent, international commission of inquiry, to
be appointed by the President of the Human Rights Council, to investigate all alleged
violations and abuses of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly in the occupied Gaza Strip, in the context of the military assaults on the
large-scale civilian protests that began on 30 March.
60. On 22 May, pursuant to articles 13 (a) and 14 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, the State of Palestine requested the Prosecutor to
investigate, in accordance with the temporal jurisdiction of the Court, past, ongoing
and future crimes within the Court’s jurisdiction, committed in all parts of the
territory of the State of Palestine. Following the referral, also on 22 May, the
Prosecutor issued a statement in which she noted that, since 16 January 2 015, the
situation in Palestine had been subject to a preliminary examination in order to
ascertain whether the criteria for opening an investigation had been met. That
preliminary examination has seen important progress and will continue to follow its
normal course, strictly guided by the requirements of the Rome Statute.

VII. Observations
61. The settlement activities of Israel continue unabated and undermine the hopes
and the practical prospects for establishing a viable Palestinian State. The deci sion on
30 May by Israel to advance, approve and tender some 3,500 housing units in the
occupied West Bank, the largest single batch of advancements since June 2017,
creates yet more obstacles to advancing a negotiated two -State solution. I reiterate
that all settlement activity in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, constitutes a flagrant violation under international law, as stated in
resolution 2334 (2016), and must cease immediately and completely.
62. The ruling of 24 May of the High Court of Justice to enable the demolition of
almost all structures in Khan al-Ahmar — Abu al-Helu puts the community at
imminent risk. I am also concerned that the decision represents a significant precedent
and threat for other Bedouin herder communities across Area C of the occupied West
Bank. I call upon the Government of Israel to cancel its plans to carry out the mass
demolition and the transfer of the residents of Khan al -Ahmar — Abu al-Helu, and
18-09913

9/12

S/2018/614

remind all parties that such actions within an occupied territory may constitute a grave
breach of international humanitarian law.
63. In Gaza, the reporting period witnessed the immense suffering of the people and
the most serious escalation since the conflict between Hamas and Israel in 2014. It is
and should be a warning to all as to how close to the brink of war the situation is.
Only by changing the reality on the ground — by recognizing and addressing the
plight of Palestinians in Gaza, by ensuring that all sides recommit to the 2014
ceasefire understandings and by supporting Egyptian-led efforts to restore control by
the legitimate Government of the State of Palestine in Gaza — can the possibility of
a viable, independent and fully representative Palestinian State be preserved and
another disastrous, lethal conflict averted. I unequivocally condemn the steps by all
parties that have led to this dangerous and fragile place.
64. I am shocked by the number of deaths and injuries of Palestinians resulting from
the use of live fire by the Israel Defense Forces since protests began along the Gaza
perimeter fence on 30 March. Israel has a responsibility to exercise maximum
restraint in the use of live fire and to not use lethal force, except as a last resort against
imminent threat of death or serious injury. It must protect its citizens, but it must do
so with due respect of international humanitarian law. The killing of children, as well
as of clearly identified journalists and medical staff, by security forces during a
demonstration is particularly unacceptable. Journalists and medical staff must be
allowed to perform their duties without fear of death or injury. Attacks on medical
teams in Gaza not only risk the life and health of staff and patients but also undermine
the overall capacity of the health system of Gaza. Noting that the Israel Defense
Forces have established a team to examine recent events, I reiterate my calls for an
independent and transparent investigation into these incidents.
65. The actions of Hamas and other militant groups put at risk not only the lives of
Israelis and Palestinians but also the efforts to restore dignity an d the prospects of a
liveable future for Palestinians in Gaza. In the context of the Great March of Return,
some have attempted to breach or place explosives at or near the fence, exploiting
and undermining the legitimate right of individuals to protest no n-violently. Rockets
launched towards Israel on 29 and 30 May have brought us closer to all -out conflict
than we have seen since 2014. All these actions are unacceptable and, in the case of
the indiscriminate firing of rockets at civilian populations, may constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law. Hamas and others must prevent the launch of
rockets and breach of the fence, as escalation only costs more precious lives.
66. The incitement by the Hamas leadership of protesters in Gaza inflamed and
encouraged a highly volatile situation that contributed to violent actions at the fence
and risked serious escalation. On several occasions, Hamas leaders directly called
upon protesters to breach the fence and seek martyrdom. Statements from senior
Israeli government officials falsely asserting that all Palestinians there were affiliated
with Hamas, and thus legitimate targets, signalled a permissive Israeli policy towards
the use of live fire against protesters and contributed to the tragedy that the
international community has witnessed over the past 11 weeks.
67. Provocative rhetoric by Palestinian and Israeli officials during the reporting
period also continue to undermine trust between the parties and do not serve the
interests of peace in the Middle East. Leaders have a responsibility to reduce, not
augment, tensions, to build bridges, not create obstacles, and to confront conspiracy
theories, not perpetuate them.
68. I note the decision by the Government of Israel to increase investment in
occupied East Jerusalem. While gaps in infrastructure and service delivery in
Palestinian neighbourhoods have long been a concern, some elements, as well as the
accompanying political rhetoric, raise concerns, particularly among Palestinians in
10/12

18-09913

S/2018/614

East Jerusalem, that the planned steps could undermine their political, cultural and
economic connections with the rest of the West Bank, threaten their properties and
deepen control by Israel over Jerusalem. I reiterate that unilateral steps by any party
seeking to alter the character or prejudge the final status of Jerusalem, which must be
determined by the parties through negotiations on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, taking into account the legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian and
the Israeli sides, are inconsistent with United Nations resolutions and are an obstacle
to peace.
69. The convening of the Palestinian National Council for the first time in 22 years
was a welcome development. However, I express concern at some aspects of its final
statement, particularly the provision to stop all forms of security coordination and to
be free from the economic dependency ties established by the Paris Protocol,
including the economic boycott of occupation products, in support of the
independence of the national economy and its growth, and to suspend the recognition
of Israel until it recognizes the State of Palestine on the basis of the borders of 4 June
1967 and repeals the decision to annex East Jerusalem and stop the settlements. If
taken, such steps could reverse progress attained through years of negotiations and
efforts spent building Palestinian national institutions, while making a return to
meaningful negotiations even more difficult.
70. I am deeply concerned by the economic collapse in Gaza. In addition to the
impact of the restrictive closure regime, the non-payment of salaries by the
Government of the State of Palestine to Palestinian employees in Gaza further
compounds the situation, already marked by a severe liquidity crisis and an acute
shortage of cash. This and other dangerous measures must be rolled back and no new
ones imposed. Efforts to preserve the links and unite Gaza with the West Bank must
continue, starting with the return of Gaza to the full control of the legitimate
Government of the State of Palestine. The success of any initiative in Gaza is linked
to a credible political horizon that unites all Palestinians.
71. I have continuously warned of the risks of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Today, the desperate situation is compounded by the potential
suspension of key United Nations programmes, a lifeline for Palestinians in Gaza.
The precarious financial situation of UNRWA is of particular concern, not only for
approximately 1 million Palestine refugees in Gaza who receive food and other
humanitarian assistance, but also for recipients of UNRWA services throughout the
West Bank, Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The substantial shortfall
of $250 million, if not urgently met, runs the serious risk of d isrupting the Agency’s
services. The additional instability caused by such a development in a region already
wracked by conflict can, and must, be prevented, if all act now to address the gap. I
call upon all Member States to further support UNRWA, includi ng on the occasion of
the pledging conference to be held in New York on 25 June.
72. I welcome the cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to
ensure that the Kerem Shalom crossing, critical to humanitarian delivery, continues
to function with minimal interruptions despite three rounds of damage caused by
Palestinian protesters. Looking ahead, and taking into consideration its legitimate
security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the movement of goods and people to and from
Gaza. Only by a full lifting of the debilitating closures, in line with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis
and begin the important task of development. I also welcome the decision by Egypt
to open the Rafah border crossing during the holy month of Ramadan, and hope for
more regular movement through the crossing.
73. I remain greatly concerned by the state of our collective efforts to advance
peace, and I urge key regional and international partners to re-engage and remain
18-09913

11/12

S/2018/614

steadfast in pursuit of a two-State solution. I reaffirm my commitment to the Middle
East Quartet, which remains the pre-eminent forum in which to discuss perspectives
for resolving the conflict.
74. Given the interconnected nature of conflicts throughout the region and the
iconic nature of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that can feed extremist narratives,
creating the conditions for the parties to return to meaningful bilateral negotiat ions
remains critical.
75. I welcome discussions in the Security Council of ideas to confront the untenable
situation in Gaza by advancing infrastructure and development projects, improving
access and movement and supporting the vital Egyptian-led reconciliation process.
My Special Coordinator will continue to engage constructively with the Government
of the State of Palestine and with Egypt, Israel and key international partners to move
forward with a quick implementation of a set of relatively modest, ach ievable
interventions that will have an immediate impact on the lives of Palestinians in Gaza
and support longer-term development initiatives. Ultimately, these efforts are meant
to strengthen, not replace, overarching political objectives. Economic develo pment,
critical as it is, is no substitute for sovereignty and statehood.
76. I strongly condemn, as I have consistently done, unilateral measures, which
jeopardize the prospect of peace for Israelis and Palestinians. In its resolution 2334
(2016), the Security Council explicitly underlined that it would not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties through negotiations.
77. Gaza cannot be ignored or dealt with out of context; it is an integral part of the
Palestinian story. The plight of Palestinians in Gaza brings into sharp relief the fact
that the current trajectory, not only in Gaza but also throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory and in Israel, is not sustainable. The multifaceted crisis in Gaza
can ultimately be resolved only if the wider Israeli-Palestinian conflict is addressed,
by ending the occupation; resolving all final status issues, including the status of
Jerusalem, the Palestine refugees, borders and security arrangements; and
establishing a viable, independent Palestinian State that will achieve the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, prior
agreements and international law. I reiterate that there is no viable alternative to the
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.

12/12

18-09913
