SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

244r
NEW

-

YEAR

MEETING:

’

24 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional .agenda (S/Agenda/2441)

... ... ... .... .. .... ... ... ... .... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .
;

1

WPV.2441

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2441st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 24 May 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma, President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2441)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 5760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the previous meetings [2#39th and 2440th meetings] on this item, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Australia, Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Canada, Cuba,
Egypt, Ethiopia, the Gambia, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya,
Kuwait, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Panama,
Romania,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was caBed to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. Jorge (Angola), Mr.
Joseph (Australia), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. A&bade (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Pelletier
(Canada), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr.
lbrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. van WeB
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr.
Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Shearer
(Jamaica), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr..’ Abulhassan (Kuwait),
Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Lobo
(Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Ozores Typaidos (Panama), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Saliu (Sierra Leone),
Mr. van Schirnding (South Aftica), Mr. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Slim
(Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (LJganaIr), Mr.
Rupia (United Repubhc of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper
Volta), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius) took a place at the Councii tabie.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Democratic
1’

Yemen, Japan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Somalia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite them to participate in the d&ussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 ofthe provisional rules of procedure.

Security Council in order to impose comprehensive and
mandatory economic sanctions against the South African regime so as to oblige it to put an end to its illegal
occupation of Namibia. A veto was cast by three permanent members of the Council-who
were also members
of the contact group of five Western countries-and
this
prevented- the adoption of the required resolutions and
demonstrated their connivance with the Pretoria regime
and, consequently, paralysed this body of the United
Nations and seriously jeopardized its credibility.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. But-win (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) and Mr. Adan (Somalia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

12. Two months ago, the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries
held at New Delhi:

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is Mr. Paul0 T. Jorge, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, whom I cordially welcome. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and make his
statement.
..

“expressed their deep concern that Namibia’s independence continued to be obstructed by the intransigence
and persistent refusal of the racist regime of South
Africa to comply with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and decisions on Namibia”

7. Mr. JORGE (Angola) (interpretation from French): I
should like to congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, which meets
at a particularly serious moment in the history of the
African continent.

and
“called upon the United Nations Security Council to
meet, as soon as possible, in order to consider further
action on the implementation of its plan for Namibia’s
independence thereby assuming’its primary responsibility for implementation
of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).” [See S/15675 and Corr.1’ and 2,
annex, sect. I, paras. 48 and 49.1

8. We feel it is significant that these deliberations of the
Council on an African problem should be presided over
by an African, and we are happy that the task falls to the
representative of Zaire. Your qualities and your personality assure us of the success of our discussions here.
9. It is 17 years since the General Assembly adopted the
historic resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, whereby it decided to terminate South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia and to assume direct responsibility for the Tenitory until its accession to independence and to set up an
Ad Hoc Committee composed of 14 Member States to
recommend practical means for the administration of the
Territory, so as to enable its people to exercise the right of
self-determination and to achieve independence.

13. This explains .the presence at the United Nations of
many Ministers for Foreign Affairs, appointed by the
’ Conference to participate in these meetings of the Council. It should be emphasized that, once again, these initiatives were taken neither by the contact group nor by.the
Council.
14. To appreciate the true scope of the responsibilities
of the Council and also of the contact group, responsibilities which have never been fully shouldered, one need
only recall a number of.commitments
entered into with
respect to the situation in Namibia resulting from the
illegal occupation of that Territory by South Africa.

10. It is 16 years since the General Assembly adopted
resolution 2248 (S-V), of 19 May 1967, which established
the United Nations Council for Namibia, with the necessary powers to administer the Territory until independence, to promulgate. laws, decrees and administrative
regulations, to take as an immediate task all the.necessary
measures, in consultation with the people of the Territory,
for the establishment of a constituent assembly to draw
up a constitution on the basis of which elections would be
held for the establishment of a legislative assembly and a
responsible government, and also to ensure the transfer of
all powers to the people of the Territory upon the declara;
tion of independence.

15. On several occasions, the General Assembly and the
Council have strongly condemned the persistent refusal
by South Africa to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations, its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people and its persistent violation of their human rights;
reaffirmed the inalienable right of the Namibian people
to self-determination,
to freedom and national independence in a United Namibia, as well as the legitimacy of
their struggle by all means at their disposal; reafftrmed
that the illegal occupation of Namibia and the acts of
aggression against independent African States launched
from bases in Namibia are a serious threat to interna- tional peace and security; reaffirmed that the illegal occupation of Namibia is an act of aggression against the
Namibian people and against the United Nations as the
authority responsible for administering
the Territory

11. Two years ago, faced with the break-down of the
preliminary talks in Geneva, full responsibility for which
always lay with the racist and Fascist regime in Pretoria
and with the United States, the Organisation of African
Unity (OAU) and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries took the decision to call for an urgent meeting of the
2

until independence; recognized SWAP0 and reaflirmed
that it is the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people; ‘deeply deplored the policy of States that
continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular and
other relations with South Africa, as well as military or
strategic collaboration, ail of which has the effect of sup
porting or encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the
United Nations; requested all Member States to cooperate fully with the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the legal Administering Authority of the Territory until independence; demanded the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of all South African military
and paramilitary forces; and so forth.

group and of the Security Council, the United States, persists in trying to establish a linkage or a parallelism
between the process of decolonization or independence
for Namibia and the withdrawal of the Cuban intemationalist forces from Angola.
.
19. We feel it is-essential, therefore, that the Security
Council take duly into consideration the following positions of principle.
20. First, the process of the decolonization or independence of Namibia is not a matter within the competence
of the Government of Angola. It is a matter within the
competence of the United Nations and it involves all
Member States because Namibia is a Territory under the
direct responsibility of the United Nations, which therefore implies that every State should shoulder its own
responsibilities. Hence it is unjust that, owing to the selfish interests of some and the unjustified passivity or indifference of others, the Angolan people should be left
almost alone to pay an extremely high price for its solidarity, which is reflected in the loss of more than 10,000
human lives, thousands of handicapped and maimed,
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, and $10
billion in material damage caused by the criminal acts of
aggression perpetrated by the racist regime of Pretoria
since 1975.

16. Despite the legality and legitimacy of all these
United Nations resolutions, it is deeply regrettable to note
that almost all of those provisions have remained a dead
letter in that certain Powers have undertaken to hinder
deliberately the implementation
of those decisions. Each
of us knows full well who have been and who still are
responsible for such setbacks, suffering and frustration. In
no case can the delaying or blocking of the solution to the
question of Namibia be imputed to Angola.
17. In his excellent further report on the implementation
of resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), the SecretaryGeneral has given us, most lucidly and frankly, a very
clear picture of the evolution of negotiations concerning
the process of independence for Namibia. He has stated in
his report that:

21. Secondly, the joint Angolan-Cuban statement of 4
February 1982 states formally and without any ambiguity the situation regarding the gradual withdrawal of
the Cuban internationalist forces stationed on Angolan
territory, as follows:

“Unfortunately,
moreover, the positive side of the
balance sheet has been set back by the emergence of
other issues which were neither raised nor envisaged at
the time when resolution 435 (1978) was adopted or in
the subsequent negotiations under United Nations auspices. These issues now apparently constitute the main
reason for the delay in the implementation
of the
United Nations plan.” (S/15776, paw. 19.1

“When the Angolan and Cuban Governments so
agree, the withdrawal of the Cuban forces stationed in
Angolan territory will be carried out by sovereign
decision of the Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola, once there is no further possibility of
aggression or armed invasion and, to this end, the
Cuban Government reiterates that it will immediately
respect any decision taken by the sovereign Government of the People’s Republic of Angola concerning
the withdrawal of these forces.‘*

The report also emphasizes that:
“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
on Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the region as a whole. The
delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense
of frustration and mistrust, with all that that implies
for peace and security in the region.” [Ibid, para. l6.J

22. Thirdly, resolution 435 (1978) remains the sole valid
basis for a negotiated solution to the question of
Namibia. Thus, to claim a linkage or parallelism between
the process of decolonization
or independence for
Namibia and the withdrawal of the Cuban internationalist forces from Angola is completely incompatible with
the letter and spirit of resolution 435 (1978) and constitutes unacceptable interference in the internal affairs of
Angola.

18. While it is true that, in the context of the implementation of the United Nations plan according to resolution
435 (1978), decisions remain to be taken as to whether the
electoral system is to be based on proportional representation or single-member voting, and on the composition
and deployment of the military component of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and on
the date of the cease-fire between SWAP0 and the Pretoria regime, it is equally true that the major obstacle would
seem to lie in the fact that a single member of the contact

23. Fourthly, the legitimacy of the position of Angola
and of the front-line States as a whole in rejecting most
categorically this so-called linkage is endorsed by a similar position taken by the entire international community. The General Assembly, in its resolution 371233 B of
20 December 1982, and the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
New Delhi have conflrrned this quite clearly and firmly.
3

24. Five years have passed since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978). It is thus quite legitimate for the Council
to be seized once again or to remain seized of the question
of Namibia so as to find effective ways and means of
ensuring the implementation of its resolutions 385 (1976),
435 (1978) and 439 (1978); this means that the Council
would henceforth shoulder once again all the responsibilities incumbent upon it in seeking a negotiated solution to
the question of Namibia.
..)
‘.
25. In this context, it is essential that the powers of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Council for
Namibia be duly strengthened so as to enable them to
‘address themselves to ensuring the implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions. But it is also essential that all
the parties concerned or interested contribute, individually and collectively, to the commendable efforts that will
continue to be made by the Secretary-General so that
Namibia can swiftly accede to independence. Angola, for
its part, undertakes to continue along this path.

deliberate acts of violation or armed aggression must take
place, how many more human lives must be lost, what
further material damage-already
reaching enormous
and tragic proportions-must
be done for the competent
international
bodies finally to shoulder their responsibilities?
30. Statements by the speakers who have preceded me
convince us that, at last, a genuine common political will
to reach a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia
is emerging and that the disturbing powerlessness of the
international community is giving way to a new determination on the part of the Council to take the measures
needed to ensure the restoration of peace in southern
Africa, in accordance with the mandate entrusted to the
Council by the Charter.
31, It is incumbent on the Council to find ways ‘iind
means of ensuring respect not only for the provisions of
the Charter but also, with the same objective, for the
decisions taken by all the organs of the United Nations.
which, as a whoie and through the unanimous votes of
their members, have-for 2O’yearsbeen calling uponSouth
Africa to withdraw from Namibia and to cease to be a
eonstant threat to international peace and security and to
ignore arrogantly the principles upon which the Organization is founded and which we all wish to uphold and
maintain.

26. Directly faced with threats, acts of aggression and
armed invasion by the racist r&me of Pretoria since
1975, Angola expects from the Council a decisive commit.ment to meet the requirements of the moment so as to
ensure that the question of Namibia is finally settled.
27. We must recall, however, Council resolutions 428
(1978), 447 (1979), 454 (1979) and 475 (1980) concerning
the many premeditated, persistent and continuing acts of
armed invasion carried out by South Africa in flagrant
violation of the airspace, national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. In those resolutions, the Council,
inter alia, strongly condemned South Africa’s aggression
against Angola; demanded that South Africa scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola; also demanded that South Africa
cease immediately its provocative armed invasions against
Angola; requested member States ,urgently to extend all
necessary assistance to Angola and other front-line States;
called for the payment by South Africa ‘of full and adequate compensation to Angola for the damage to lie and
property, resulting from these acts of aggression and
decided to meet again in the event of further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola
by the South African racist r&ime, in order to consider
the adoption of more effective measures in accordance
with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof.

32. South Africa’s despicable aggression against Mozambique, carried out by racist troops at the very moment the
Council was convening its 2439th meeting to try to settle the
question of Namibian independence, seems unfortunately
to be proof that the Pretoria r&ime is not in any way
prepared to abide by the wishes of the international community and to respect the sovereignty of States in the southern
part of the continent of Africa but, on the contrary, has
decided to persist in its bloodthirsty and inhuman policy of
terror.
33. We wish to express our absolute outrage at this challenge to the international community by South Africa. We
trust that the Council will join its voice to that of Angola in
strongly condemning South Africa for this new act of
aggression and reafliiing
the Council’s solidarity with
Mozambique in its time of trial.
..
34. This is no time for futile resolutions or ambiguous
condemnations that leave South Africa free to pursue its
efforts to destabilize the countries of southern Africa and to
plunder and subjugate Namibia, thereby undermining faith
in and respect for the United Nations.

28. Nevertheless, further acts in violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola continue to take
place, to such an extent that a considerable part of the
province of Cunene is and has been occupied by South
African troops since August 1981.

,35. It is imperative that, together, we make every effort to
ensure that an independent and sovereign Namibia rejoins
the community of nations.

29. What are the international community or the States
members of the Council, in particular, waiting for before
they adopt “more effective measures, in accordance with
the appropriate provisions of the Charter, including
Chapter VII thereof “7 Are they waiting for an act of genocide like the one that occurred in Lebanon? What further

36. The struggle continues; victory is certain!
37. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is Mr. Hugh L. Shearer, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
4

.38. Mr. SHEARER (Jamaica): Allow me, on behalf of
my delegation, to join other representatives in extending
to you, Sir, our congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I have every
confidence in your able leadership as you preside over
these very important meetings.

factual summary of developments
concerning the
attempts of the Secretary-General to implement resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) but also an ominous
reminder of the perils that will confront southern Africa
and the international community if the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people are further delayed.

39. The question of Namibia, first brought before the
United Nations in 1946, continues to be a burriing issue
on the agenda of this world body. It is a colonial situation
that persists in South Africa to this day, despite the fact
that some 17 years have elapsed since the General Assembly, in its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. By that
action the United Nations assumed responsibility .for
Namibia, and since then it has sought to ,exercise its
authority through the United Nations Council for
Namibia, which was established by resolution 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967.

45. By General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966, the United Nations assumed responsibility
for the welfare of Namibia and its people. This responsibility cannot be considered fully discharged until the
Namibian people are free from colonial rule and are provided with an opportunity for the free and unfettered
exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence.

40. Over the past 17 years, South Africa has been
allowed to continue to frustrate the legitimate aspirations
of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence, in defiance of the wili of the international community and with contemptuous disregard of all the
resolutions of the United Nations and of the 1971 opinion
by the International Court of Justice that South Africa
had no legal right to Namibia.’
41. It is against the background of South Africa’s continued refusal to comply with the United Nations resolutions on Namibia, especially Security Council resolution
435 {1978), and of the brutal oppression of the Namibian
people that the current series of meetings was convened.
Innumerable conferences, debates and consultations have
been held in the past in an effort to free the Namibians
from the dehumanizing and degrading policy of apartheid
and to allow them to achieve the full exercise of their
inalienable rights. These have not produced satisfactory
results.
42. The Council, at this series of meetings in particular,
must address itself to the task of effectively bringing pressure to bear on the intransigent Pretoria regime to comply
with resolution 435 (1978).
43. It was by resolution 435 (1978) that the Security
Council approved, a proposal [S/12634 designed to
achieve a peaceful, negotiated, political settlement that
could lead Namibia to self-determination and independence. The fact that, in the intervening years, this proposal has gained universal acceptance is testimony to its
continuing relevance and viability. The cardinal elements
of the proposal were the signing of a cease-fire agreement,
the establishment of a demilitarized zone, the deployment
of UNTAG, the holding of free and fair elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations and the
rejection of any internal settlement that would foist South
Africa’s hand-picked puppets on the Namibian people.
This proposal has not yet been implemented.
44. The Secretary-General’s repgrt [S/l577aJ is before
the Council. It provides not only a timely, objective and

46. There have been tiines when it was felt that
Namibia was on the verge of achieving its independence.
The elation and hope of these moments have always been
dissipated by one or other of South Africa’s delaying
tactics.
47. The contact group had, until recently, made some
progress towards a solution of the Namibian issue. They
had put forward proposals which had been accepted by
SWAP0 and the front-line States. One member of the
group has, however, introduced the concept of linkage
into the debate on Namibia’s independence. The Govemment of Jamaica joins the front-line States, SWAP0 an<
the rest of the international community in outright rejection of the linking of Namibia’s independence with the
withdrawal of troops from Angola. As I stated in my
address to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, the two are separate issues and must be dealt with
separately.2
48. The Non-Aligned Movement has constantly rejected
linkage, most recently at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 11 March 1983. The
final document states:
“The Conference expressed its deep concern that
the Western contact group was unable to detach and
dissociate itself from the extraneous issue of linkage
between Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal
of Cuban foices from Angola insisted upon by one of
its members. The Conference stressed that the linkage,
which was totally incompatible with the letter ‘and
spirit of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), constituted an impediment to the implementation
of the
United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia.*’ [See S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2, annex,
sect. Z ‘para. 47.1
49. Since the introduction of the concept of linkage and
the philosophy of constructive engagement with South
Africa, the prospect of a solution .to the Namibian issue
has receded. There is also growing concern within the
international community that the contact group has not
succeeded in securing South Africa’s compliance with
resolution 435 (1978) and has therefore outlived its
usefulness.

50. My Government is not at all convinced that the contact group has in fact been able to achieve the substantial
progress which it claims has been made since the last
Council debate on Namibia, in 1981 [2267th to 2277th
meetings3. It is also our firm belief that the persistent failure of some of its members to observe scrupulously the
ban imposed by the United Nations on military sales to
South Africa has only served to strengthen the hand of
the racist Pretoria regime in its stubborn policies of
defiance and intransigence.
-.
51. The need for urgent settlement of the Namibian
issue is further reinforced by recent troubling events in
Namibia. in January of this year, South Africa, again in
defiance of the United Nations and while in discussion
with the contact group, took direct control of Namibia
after the resignation of the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers. We are deeply concerned that this move will
only serve to further entrench South Africa in Namibia,
resulting in the annexation of Namibia to South African
territory.

to co-operate fully in the implementation
of the United
Nations plan for the settlement of the Namibian question?
56. I must here emphasize the fundamental role and
responsibility of the permanent members of the Council
to bring the requisite pressure to bear in order to compel
South Africa to live up to its international obligations.
57. We must not forget that the Council, in addition to
its responsibility to Namibia, also has a duty to maintain
peace and security in southern Africa, where the,frontline States have been victims of South Africa’s unprovoked acts of aggression.
58. Therefore I wish to propose that, arising out of this
current debate: first, the Security Council must reassert
its responsibility for the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978); secondly, the Council must fix a time-frame
for implementation
of the various stages implicit in resolution 435 (1978); thirdly, the Council must take steps to
ensure that South Africa does not introduce institutional
measures in Namibia which would constitute a hindrance
to the Security Council’s mandate; and, fourthly, the
Council, in fulfilling its task, must give emphasis to the
role of the Secretary-General as envisaged in resolution
435 (1978).

52. Meanwhile the resources of Namibia are being ruthlessly exploited by South Africa, not for the benefit of the
Namibian people but for the benefit of South Africa and
some Western countries. One mine alone, the R&sing
mine, from which South Africa draws some $500 million
per year, produces 10 per cent of the total amount of
uranium consumed by the Western industrialized countries. South Africa is able to control the major part of the
world’s uranium resources and of production available
for export. Nearly all of Namibia’s diamond, zinc, tin,
lead, vanadium and tungsten production is sent to South
Africa for processing, use and sale, from which it makes
millions of dollars in profit. In this exploitation by the
mining companies in Namibia, African workers receive
only about 5 or 6 per cent of the wages paid to the whites.
The ratio of per capita income of a Namibian African
worker to that of a’ white worker in Namibia is 1 to 24.

59. The issue before the Council today involves the
question of the credibility ‘of the United Nations.
Namibia is the only case in which the United Nations has
assumed responsibility for a territory in order to bring
about the independence of its people. Yet the United
Nations has allowed its authority to be flouted by a
regime, based on the vicious principles of apartheid,
which has usurped the Territory and its people.
60. The Council must be aware that the alternative to
its taking action now is more bloody and destructive
activity in all of southern Africa. Can the Council resign
itself to that? On few other occasions have the issues been
so clear and the moral rights so unassailable. There can
be no excuse for inaction .now.

53. In parallel with this ruthless exploitation, the racist
Pretoria regime continues to perpetrate the most outrageous aggression against the neighbouring front-line
States. The continued occupation of Angolan territory,
the arrogant and brutal attack on the capital of Lesotho
last December and the bombing of Mozambique cities by
the South African Air Force in the last few days are but
examples of a massive and deliberate campaign of terror
being waged by South Africa against its neighbours. The
death, destruction and distress that have resulted and the
escalation in political tension that is being produced can
no longer be ignored by the international community.

61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
62.

Mr. BURWIN

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpreMy delegation previously expressed
its congratulations to Mr. Umba di Lutete on his assumption of the presidency for this month. Today I wish to
convey my delegation’s congratulations to you personally, Mr. President. I am happy to see another true son of
Africa presiding over the Council today, especially at a
time like this when the Council is dealing with one of the
major problems confronting our African continent.
tation from Arabic):

54. In view of this situation, it now becomes incumbent
on the Council to find other means of bringing South
Africa to heel, particularly in view of the fact that
Namibia remains the direct responsibility of the United
Nations until self-determination
and national independence are achieved in the Territory.

63. Once again the Council is resuming consideration
of the question of Namibia, a question that has been
considered by the Council at scores of meetings and has
been debated by the General Assembly at all its regular
i/

55. The unavoidable question to which the Council
must find a credible response is: What more must now be
done, and how can it be achieved, to compel South Africa
6

sessions since 1946 and at two special sessions and one
emergency special session. Hundreds of resolutions on it
have been adopted in the two forums. The question is well
known in all its details. I shall not, therefore, go into
details now and shall conline’ myself to certain observations on the present situation in Namibia and to the reasons why the attainment of its independence has so far
been obstructed.

serious in their commitment to help the United Nations
find a solution to the Namibian question. So far, they
have exerted no pressure worth mentioning on South
Africa, and that leads us to believe that their main concern is their own interests and the enormous profits they
reap through their corporations from operations in
Namibia and South Africa. It is unfortunate that those
countries continue to encourage their corporations to
invest in Namibia and South Africa in spite of the numerous United Nations resolutions calling upon States not to
deal with the apartheid rCgime.

64. More than 16 years have elapsed since the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), which terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. The Security Council endorsed that in its resolution 264 (1969), in
which it recognized the termination of the Mandate and
called upon the Pretoria r&me to withdraw immediately,
its administration from the Territory. However, the racist
rkgime disregarded the Assembly resolution, did not
respond to that of the Council and persisted in flouting
the will of the international community.

68. The report of the United Nations Council for
Namibia3 notes the presence of 236 companies of Western States and Israel with subsidiaries operating in
Namibia. Among them, 190 are based in the States of the
Western contact group. These companies directly support the racist r&me in South Africa, and this has
enabled it to strengthen its domination of Namibia and
to persist in its policy of racial segregation in southern
Africa. Their activities are in direct contravention of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia:
and are seriously depleting the resources of
Namibia.

65. More than four years ago, the Security Council
adopted its resolution 435 (1978), which endorses the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. At
the time, the majority of the world’s countries believed
that this augured well for the early accession to independence of Namibia, because the United Nations plan was
the work of the Western contact group, made up of five
major Powers with strong and close relations with the
69. The racist regime receives financial support from
racist regime in South Africa, and it was felt that the
Western financial institutions and banks. Loans to the
group could therefore bring pressure to bear on South
apartheid rigime between I979 and mid-1982 amounted
Africa to comply with the will of the international comto $2.7 billion. That sum covers South Africa’s military
munity. My country was not among those optimists,
expenses in Namibia.
because it real&d that those States-or some of themwere the allies of the racist regime, seeing it as the protec70. In the military field, despite the long time that has
tor of their economic and strategic interests in southern
passed since the adoption of Council resolution 418
Africa. Over the past four years it has become crystal- \ (1977) imposing the arms embargo against South Africa,
clear that those optimists were very much mistaken, and
the embargo is not being strictly observed, and the racist
the validity of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya’s doubts has
regime has been able to receive huge quantities of arms
been proved. We see the Namibian people still suffering
through the collusion of the Zionist entity and certain
under the yoke of colonialism and the policy of apartheid,
Western Powers. With the help of certain of those States
and denied its right of self-determination.
in the field of military technology, the racist rkgime has
been able to develop its military industry and has
66. The majority of the countries of the world have
achieved near self-sufliciency in most kinds of military
understood for many years the racist r&me’s aims in
equipment. It is thus able to increase its military power,
southern Africa and the purpose of the prevarication and
maintain its occupation of Namibia and intensify its bardelaying tactics it employs in order to prolong its occupabaric acts of aggression against neighbouring States, viotion of Namibia and impose a puppet regime on the Nalating their sovereignty and destabilizing them. The latest
mibian people. But some Western States, foremost among
example of this is the act of aggression against Mozamthem the United States of America, do not care to recogbique on 23 May-an act which the Libyan Arab Jamanize these facts. They have turned a ‘deaf ear to the voice
hiriya condemns.
of reason and have opposed the adoption by the Council
of any measures .in accordance with the provisions of
71. Well-founded reports indicate that South -Africa
Chapter VII of the Charter to compel the racist regime to
maintains
over 100,000 soldiers in Namibia. The report
comply with United Nations resolutions and to withdraw
of the United Nations Council for Namibia states that
from Namibia. All members of the Council will doubtless
recall the result of the last series of meetings held on the
question of Namibia, in April 1981 [ibid.], when three
“an estimated 2,000 to 3,000 mercenaries, mainly
States Members belonging to the Western contact group
from the United States, the Federal Republic of Gerhad recourse to the veto against the draft resolutions
many, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
before the Council.
‘. Northern Ireland, France, Australia, Chile and Israel,
are reported to be fighting alongside the South Africa
67. It would seem that certain major Western counforces in the campaign to crush the Namibian liberatries, first among them the. United States, are not really
tion struggle’*.S
7

b.

72. The racist regime of South Africa has consolidated
its occupation of Namibia thanks to the absolute support
it receives from certain Western countries that see it as
guarding their interests in southern Africa and thanks to
the support it receives from another racist regime: the
Zionist entity in occupied Palestine. The similarities
between the two regimes and their aggressive nature .are
obvious to all. The racist regime of South Africa denies
the black majority its fundamental rights and denies the
Namibian .people their right to self-determination and
independence while the racist Zionist regime denies the
Palestinian people their right to self-determination and to
establish an independent State of their own. The racist
regime occupies Namibia and a portion of Angolan territory, while the racist Zionist entity occupies part of the
Arab countries. The racist regime in South Africa has
linked its withdrawal from Namibia to the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola: these are legitimate forces
whose presence is the sole concern of the Governments of
Cuba and Angola. The racist Zionist entity has linked its
withdrawal from Lebanon to the withdrawal of the Arab
forces which are now legitimately present there: their presence is the sole concern of the Government of Lebanon
and the other Arab parties concerned. Both regimes have
committed repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring countries on the pretext of pursuing members of liberation ‘movements, whom they wrongly call “terrorists’*.

implementation
of the United Nations plan; secondly,
reaffirmation of the fact that the two parties to the conflict are SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the
Namibian people struggling for the independence of the
Territory, and the racist Pretoria regime, which is OcCUpying the Territory illegally; thirdly, support for the armed
struggle of SWAP0 in order to step up pressure on the
racist regime and make it comply with the will of the
international community and withdraw from Namibia;
fourthly, the formulation of a specific time-table for the
strict and immediate implementation
of resolution 435
(1978), without any modification and in such a way as to
guarantee the complete independence of Namibia and
the sovereignty of the Namibian people, under SWAPO,
over all its Territory, including Walvis Bay and all the
offshore islands; and tifthly, the imposition of mandatory sanctions, in accordance -with Chapter VII of the
Charter, thus compelling the racist regime to withdraw
its administration
from Namibia.
76. My delegation sincerely hopes that the efforts of the
Council will be crowned with success-‘and that the Namibian people will be able to exercise fheir right to selfdetermination and independence. My delegation wishes
to utter a warning against the manoeuvres to which
South Africa and its allies have recourse while claiming
to seek a peaceful solution. The purpose of those
manoeuvres is to bypass the true liberation movement,
SWAPO, and impose a suspect solution whose ultimate
result would be a puppet regime that would support the
interests of the imperialist States and do their bidding.

73. The attempt to link the independence of Namibia to
the ,withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola is nothing
but a’delaying tactic worked.out by South Africa in collaboration with the United States Administration. Its purpose is to delay the implementation of the United Nations
-plan for the independence of Namibia, deplete the
region’s resources to the greatest extent possible, and give
the racist regime more time to create puppets to which it
can hand over the government of the country. That
manoeuvre has been condemned in many international
forums, most recently at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
at New Delhi.

77. In conclusion, 1 should like to confirm the unlimited support of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the Namibian people, led by SWAPO, in their
just struggle for self-determination
and independence.
We shall continue to give all possible material and moral
assistance to those heroic people and to the people of
South Africa until they achieve independence and the
complete elimination of racism in southern Africa. We
also confirm our solidarity with the front-line States in
the face of the numerous acts of aggression against them
committed by the racist regime. We condemn those acts
as well as South Africa’s continued occupation of
Namibia and part of the territory of Angola.

74. The crisis in Namibia ‘.worsens daily. The acts of
oppression, suppression, detention and assassination have
become daily practices of the racist regime against the
black citizens of Namibia. That regime is also stepping up
its evilmanoeuvres within Namibia in a desperate attempt
to oust SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the
Namibian people. It pursues the members of SWAP0
with increasing determination in its desperate efforts to
establish a puppet government in the Territory.

78. Finally, I should like to express my delegation’s
great appreciation and gratitude for the efforts of the
United Nations. Council for Namibia, led by Mr. Paul
Lusaka of Zambia, and of the Secretary-General, to
ensure the early accession to independence of Namibia.

75. The situation in southern Africa constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security through
the deteriorating situation in Namibia. The international
community must redouble its efforts to bring Namibia to
independence, in accordance .with the resolutions of the
United Nations, especially, Security Council resolution
435 (1978). My country believes that independence for
Namibia can be achieved only by the following means:
first, complete and unlimited support by all States for the
praiseworthy efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure

79. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him
to take a place, at the Council table and to make his
statement.
80. Mr. HADJ AZZOUT (Algeria) (interpretationfrom
French): I should like first of all to convey to you, Sir,.the
congratulations
of the Algerian delegation on .your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. Your knowledge of international affairs and your
8

.

experience ensure that. the Council will have wise guidance in its consideration of the serious issue before it
today. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, on having guided the deliberations of the Council last month.

85. The presence here of many Ministers of Foreign
Affairs attests to the resolve of the non-aligned countries
to find a genuine political solution, in the hope that the
Council will take the measures dictated by the extreme
gravity of the situation.

8 1. It is almost five years now since the Council adopted
resolution 435 (1978), whereby it- warned the Pretoria
regime that, if it did not co-operate in the implementation
of resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and 435 (1978), the
Council would be compelled

86. In a similar spirit, the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris from 25-29 April 1983, with the
participation of all Member States of the United,Nations,
endorsed that approach in its turn.6

“to meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions
under the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapter VII thereof, so as to ensure South Africa’s
compliance with the aforementioned resolutions’*.

87. We venture to believe that these appeals, which
reflect not only deep anxiety and concern over the many
consequences of the deadlock but also the desire to
ensure international peace and security, will finally be
heeded by the Council.

82. That commitment
having been formally entered
into, Africa and the non-aligned countries, faced with the
continued illegal occupation of Namibia and the steppingup of the aggressive policy ,of South Africa, decided, as
early as April 1981, to request a meeting of the Council
[S/14434) to enable it to fulfil jts primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and to ensure respect for its own decisions. However, that
opportunity could not be seized owing to the veto of three
permanent members of the Council, those very countries
which had given an undertaking to the international community that they would help to bring about the speedy
implementation
of the process of decolonization in
Namibia.

88. These appeals are all the more imperative in that
only yesterday Mozambique,
a sovereign country, a
member of the OAU and of the United Nations, was the
object of aggression by the racist regime of South Africa.
That was not, unfortunately, the first time-and
it certainly will not be the last-that that racist regime, thanks
to the multilateral support it constantly receives from
certain Western countries, has committed such acts, thus
outrageously violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of African States in the region.
89. The question of Namibia is too well known to the
Council to need a long exposition. It is, incontestably, one
of decolonization, for the facts of the matter are crystal
clear.

83. By preventing the United Nations from adopting the
only measures that could put an end to South Africa’s
defiance, those vetoes in the Council helped delay the
implementation
of the settlement plan and prolong the
suffering of the Namibian people. Today, two years later,
the situation has not changed. The process of implementing the decolonization of Namibia remains in the impasse
into which South Africa and some of its allies wished to
lead the efforts of the United Nations. Namibia is still
illegally occupied, its people ruthlessly oppressed, persecuted and tortured and its natural resources plundered.
Its territory is now being used for the launching of largescale aggression against neighbouring countries.

90. Need I recall that, in 1966, the United Nations
entered into a commitment to shoulder direct responsibility for the Territory of Namibia and to bring to completion the process of liberation for that country? Since
then, an international consensus has emerged, confirming the illegality of South Africa’s occupation of the Territory, the absolute right of the Namibian people to
independence, the legitimacy of their national liberation
struggle, strict respect for the territorial integrity of their
country, and the position of SWAP0 as their sole legitimate representative.

84. Drawing the political lessons from this deadlock and
its dangers not only for stability and security throughout
the southern part of Africa but also for world peace, the
non-aligned countries decided to renew their appeal to the
Council to avoid the irrevocable. The Heads of State and
Government of the non-aligned countries, at their conference at New Delhi from 7 to 11 March 1983, while reiterating their firm support For the struggle waged by the
Namibian people under their sole legitimate representative, SWAPO, decided to call upon the Council to meet to

91. Everything seemed to indicate, therefore, that this
problem of a- people deprived of its right to selfdetermination and independence, a people subjected to
occupation of its territory, was, thanks to the United
Nations, going to be solved in favour of genuine independence for the Territory. But despite that consensus of the
international
community,
backed up by the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971,’ which declared South Africa’s presence in
Namibia illegal, the Pretoria regime has continued to
mobilize its political and military machinery in order to
apply a neo-colonial solution to Namibia.

“consider further action on the implementation
of its
plan for Namibia’s independence thereby assuming its
primary responsibility for implementation
of Security
Council resolution 435 (1938)“. [see S/I5675 and

92. Need I recall the exclusive responsibility of South
Africa in the failure of all the initiatives to secure implementation of the United Nations plan in accordance with

Cbr. I and 2, annex, sect. 1 para. 49.1

9

Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)?
Those resolutions, reflecting the international consensus
and expressing the common will to bring about the swift
decolonization of Namibia, set forth the terms and conditions necessary to establish and strengthen the process
that would lead to that decolonization.

phase of the decolonization of Namibia, further hinders a’
process which has already taken far too long and also
diverts it from its normal course. To try to link a sovereign decision by a State to a genuine problem of decolonization on which there is
international unanimity is
-_~-_-seriously to jeopardize the efforts thatthemunity
of
nations has made, with so much patience and perseverance, to achieve a just and peaceful settlement of the
problem of Namibia. That is why Africa, first of all, then
the General Assembly, in its resolution 37/233B,
adopted at the thirty-seventh session and, recently, the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned
Countries and the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People
for Independence firmly rejected any such linkage.

93. By the same token, need I recall that South Africa’s
responsibility for the failure of those initiatives, like its
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, its successive
attempts to pervert the process of decolonization of the
Territory and its repeated acts of aggression against the
sovereign States in the region should have led the Council
to take stronger action to fulfil its primary mission-that
of guarantor for international peace and security7 Indeed,
we expected such action all the more, since, as early as
1963, the Council had described South Africa’s actions as
seriously disturbing international peace and security.

IdO. In this decisive phase of the settIement of the Namibian question we must strongly reaffirm the full and
entire responsibility of the United Nations for the process
of Namibia’s
accession to independence, with strict
respect for the provisions of resolution 435 (1978).

94. One could go on endlessly about other decisions
taken but never implemented, deadlines set but never
respected, promises made but always broken, sanctions
called for but never applied.

101. Because it has the responsibility for the decolonization of Namibia, because it is the guarantor for the
maintenance of international
peace and security, the
Council must respond fully to the obligations incumbent
upon it and take the necessary measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

95. The impasse in which this question of Namibia is now
and the attempts to divert the decolonization process
from the normal course as prescribed by the United
Nations, are matters of serious concern to the countries of
Africa, whose energies are directed towards completing
the liberation of the continent.

102 Faced with the prevarications of South Africa and
the intensification of its policy of oppression and aggression, the Council must translate into action its will to
ensure respect for its own decisions, for the Pretoria
regime will never accord justice to the Namibian people
or submit to international legality unless forced to do so.
Experience has abundantly demonstrated this truth,
whose consideration we have postponed for too long.

96. The situation is all the more serious in that South
Africa is sustained in its defiance by the support of certain
Powers with which it has secure and privileged relationships.
97. While this attitude on the uart of South Africa was
foreseeable, it being part of the logic of the apartheid system, we nevertheless expected those who had initiated the
proposal for a settlement of the Namibian question to
exert the necessary pressure on the Pretoria regime to
ensure implementation
of the plan. The contact group,
which carried out the pre-implementation
talks and took
action to ensure that SWAP0 and the front-line States
would be present at the talks, should have shown a little
more determination to ensure that right would prevail.
This lack of political will reflected a traditional position
taken by some countries whose primary concern is to preserve their strategic and economic interests.

103. The application of comprehensive and mandatory
sanctions against the South African regime is now essential. The Council must take an unequivocal position on
the complete implementation
of its resolution 435 (1978)
so as to enable the Secretary-General to play his full part
as the person primarily responsible for the implementation of the settlement plan decided upon- by the
Organization.
104. In this connection, the Algerian delegation would
like to emphasize that it endorses the conclusions of the
Secretary-General as contained in his report [S/15776J.

98. The Council, which endorsed the initiative of the
five Western Powers, hoping to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia, can see today, five years
later, just how unwilling some of those Powers were to
live up to the commitment
they had entered into.
Moreover, the unjustified linkage of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola and independence for
Namibia strengthens the temptation for the Pretoria
regime
_x to apply its own internal solution in Namibia.

105. Lastly, certain members of the contact group must
stop looking at the question of Namibia in an East-West
context and from the viewpoint of geostrategic power. If
they abandoned this approach, which only diverts the
decolonization
process in Namibia from its natural
course, the contact group would be moving with the tide
of history, that is, of decolonization.

99. This linkage, which is contrary to the spirit and the
letter of the settlement plan, formulated in this crucial

106. The question of Namibia has been clearly established by the international community as one of decolonization, and Namibia
must achieve. independence
10

.

,’

through the implementation
in good faith of the settlement plan drawn up in detail by the Organization.
107. We should like to believe that, at these meetings, the
Security Council will prove equal to its primary task and
respond to the desire of the international community for
international peace and security.

I

.

108. -The PRESIDENT
(interprerafionfrom French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Gambia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
109. Mr. BLAIN (Gambia): My delegation is grateful
for this opportunity to participate in the work of the
Council. Permit me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May. It is a source of immense satisfaction for my delegation to see the affairs of this body entrusted to a diplomat
of your proven qualities, representing as you do a sister
African republic which has established a reputation as a
staunch supporter of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and with which my Government enjoys
the most cordial relations.
110. After 100 uninterrupted years of colonial domination and foreign occupation, the Namibian people continue to be denied their inalienable right to selfdetermination. At this nadir in the history of Namibia, even the
most optimistic can discern few, if any, signs which presage an end to this long tragedy.
111. Yet, it is not for want of effort on the part of the
international community that this situation persists. The
successive resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
since 1966 and by the Security Council since 1969 bear
testimony to the patient efforts which have been made to
terminate, by peaceful negotiation, South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia. Regrettably, these diplomatic
initiatives have hitherto failed to achieve a settlement. At
the same time, the situation in and around Namibia has
continued to register a.steady deterioration and has now
assumed critical proportions, with dire implications for
international peace and security.

Council in order to permit the free exercise by the Namibian people of their right to self-determination. These
efforts, however, were frustrated at every turn by the
duplicity of an intransigent Pretoria, which proceeded for
its own part to consolidate its illegal occupation of the
Territory. These actions were unequivocally condemned
by the Council in resolution 385 (1976). I
114. In 1978, the expectations of the world community
were raised by the endorsement of the United Nations
plan for Namibia in resolution 435 (1978). It should be
recalled, however, that, from the African point of view,
the plan was far from perfect, failing as it did to accommodate a number of major concerns, including, infer
alia, the principle that Walvis Bay and its offshore
islands constituted an integral part of Namibia’s territory. Yet SWAPO, prompted by its genuine desire for a
peaceful settlement, accepted the plan in a historic
compromise.
115. My delegation wishes at this juncture to pay a
tribute to the statesmanship shown by SWAPO, the sole
and authentic representative of the Namibian people.
116. For the overwhelming majority of the international community, the distinguished parentage of the
United Nations plan and its formal acceptance by the
occupying Power, South Africa, portended an early and
peaceful transition to independence in Namibia. However, these legitimate expectations were immediately
demolished by the treachery of the racist regime, which
proceeded to organize sham elections aimed at a socalled internal settlement. Any vestige of credibility
which Pretoria may have continued to enjoy in certain
quarters disappeared in January 1981, when, to the disappointment of the contact group, it deliberately sabotaged the pre-implementation
meeting convened in
Geneva to establish practical modalities for implementing resolution 435 (1978).
117. In April 1981, the Security Council met at the
request of the Group of African States [S/Z4434 to
consider the implication of South Africa’s continued disregard of both the resolutions of this prestigious body
and the precepts of international law. At that time, the
Council was prevented from applying the appropriate
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations because it was felt that the policy of constructive
engagement offered meaningful prospects of a settlement.

112. It was in response to this crisis that the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries decided at New Delhi last March to
request the present series of meetings of the Council with
a view to generating fresh momentum for the stalled negotiations on the implementation of the plan for Namibia’s
independence.

118. Hitherto this approach has produced results of
doubtful value. Far from prompting South Africa to
respect its obligations under the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the policy of constructive engagement has
resulted in the totally unacceptable linkage of Namibia’s
independence with the extraneous issue of the Cuban
presence in Angola. Disavowed by the overwhelming
majority of the international community and rejected by
the recent International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, this
element has no place under resolution 435 (1978), which

113. Following the revocation of Pretoria’s Mandate by
the General Assembly in 1966 and the creation in the
following year of the United Nations Council for Namibia
as the sole legal Administering Authority of that Territory, the illegality of South Africa’s continued occupation
was definitely established by the International Court of
Justice in 1971 in a ruling endorsed by the Council in
resolution 301 (1971). Over the next few years a series of
diplomatic initiatives was launched under the aegis of the
11

forms the sole basis for the transition to independence of
Namibia.

siders that the framework for such a settlement already
exists in resolution 435 (1978) and that what is needed at
this juncture is the political will to implement fully the
provisions of that resolution.

119. South Africa meanwhile has embarked on further
serious breaches of international peace and security. It is
perhaps unnecessary to recall that the Council is already
seized of two major acts of aggression perpetrated by the
racist regime: the mercenary invasion of Seychelles in
December 1981 and the attack on Maseru in February
1983.

i

126. On 27 July 1978-as
adopted-the
representative
State said the following:

resolution 432 (1978) was
of a permanent Member

“By approving this proposal for Namibian independence, at one and the same time we vote for an independent Namibia and we take a step to strengthen the
prestige of the United Nations and its ability to
respond to critical problems wherever they arise.”
[2082nd meeting, para. 25.1

120. At the same time, South Africa continues illegally
to occupy areas of Angola, a sovereign State, while maintaining an intense campaign of destabilization against
Mozambique, Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Less
than 48 hours ago, as if to underscore Pretoria’s utter
disregard of the rules of international law, the racist
r&gime launched a massive and unprovoked air strike
against the capital of Mozambique.

Since that time, however, the plan has remained a dead
letter, and the authority and prestige of the Organization
have been significantly eroded. Over the last year alone,
the Council, as the competent United Nations body, has
been seized of a succession of crises, often involving
grave breaches of international peace and security, on
which, sadly, it has been unable to act decisively.

121. The Gambia unequivocally condemns these repeated criminal acts of aggression. It seems appropriate to
recall at this juncture that the Charter prescribes specific
measures to be applied in such circumstances.

127. In the report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the Grganization that he submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirtyseventh
session,7 the SecretaryGeneral attributed that state of affairs to the increasing
disregard by Member States of the resolutions and decisions adopted ‘by the competent organs of the United
Nations. If this disturbing trend is to be reversed, the
Security Council, as the supreme organ of the United
Nations, must be prepared to enforce its resolutions, particularly those which concern Namibia, a Territory for
which the United Nations is the sole legal Administering
Authority. I take this opportunity to commend the energetic and relentless efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at an early and peaceful resolution of the problem.

122. As Namibia enters its hundredth year of subjection
to foreign occupation, it is perhaps timely to review
briefly the long ordeal endured by the people of that country. The fate of Namibia can be said to have been sealed at
the Berlin Conference of 1884. For the next 30 years, that
is, until the outbreak of the First World War, the Territory was subjected to a systematic campaign of genocide
in which one third of the indigenous population was decimated. History records that it was during that sombre
period that the world’s first extermination camps were
established and operated-in
Namibia.
123. In 19 19, following the cessation of hostilities, South
Africa assumed responsibility for the Territory under a
Mandate conferred by the newly established League of
Nations. Despite the principle in article 22 (1) of the Covenant of the League of Nations “that the well-being and
development of [the peoples of Mandated Territories]
form a sacred trust”, South Africa immediately imposed
its heinous system of discriminatory laws and practices
upon the Territory.

128. There can be no retreat from the historic compromise achieved in resolution 435 (1978): To demand
further concessions from SWAP0 would be to heap
insult upon the manifold injuries which the Namibian
people have already endured for too long.
129. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the acting Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Ratil
Roa Kouri. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

124. Even after the establishment of the United Nations,
in the aftermath of the Second World War, the Namibian
ordeal continued-for
the Pretoria regime, refusing to
yield the Territory to the Organization’s trusteeship system, maintained and indeed intensified its ruthless exploitation of Namibia’s human and material resources. Pass
laws, the Masters and Servants Proclamation and the fragmentation of their homeland into bantustans have continued to define the inhuman existence imposed upon the
Namibian people.

130. Mr. ROA KOURI (interpretation from S’anfsh):
On behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to ColonialCountries
and
Peoples, I thank the Council for giving me the opportunity to address it on the item now under consideration,
the question of Namibia. However, we deeply regret the
fact that this is necessary.

125. In addition to the weighty legal arguments already
adduced, there are thus pressing moral and humanitarian
imperatives for the adoption of effective measures to put
an end to the long ordeal of Namibia. The Gambia con12

131. I should-also- like to express my satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the Council on this important occasion. I am sure that, once again, you will honour’the
commitment of the people and Government of Zaire to
the right of colonial peoples to self-determination and
independence.
‘*
132. In September 1978, when the Council met to adopt
its resolution 435 (1978), the majority of the members of
the international community harboured the justifiable
hope that, within a year, the suffering people of Namibia
would already be beginning to enjoy the fruits of their
hard-won independence. In just four months, however,
five years will have passed since that meeting without
much real progress having been made. Instead of proceeding to hold free and fair elections under the supervision
and control of the United Nations, in accordance with
resolution 435 (1978), South Africa has made a mockery
of the, hopes of the international community, taking
advantage of the situation to strengthen its military occupation of Namibia, stepping up its oppression of the Namibian people and increasing its acts of aggression
against the front-line States and other neighbouring African countries. It can be no surprise to us, then, that the
international
community has lost what little faith it
might once have had in South Africa’s good intentions
and now feels it necessary to reassess, promptly and thoroughly, the usefulness of the measures so far adopted to
arrive at a solution.
133. I shall not take time todav to mention where
responsibilities lie, because everyone knows; neither does *
this seem the proper time for recriminations. Those
responsible for the failure to achieve the results that we
were told were imminent five years ago will be judged by
history once the urgent task of obtaining South Africa’s
withdrawal from Namibia has been concluded.
134. The Special Committee has been considering the.
question of Namibia since its establishment in 1962. Since
that time, the Committee has clearly understood that, in
order to ensure the independence of the Territory as
quickly as possible, urgent and positive action was
required from the United Nations, specifically, the imposition of sanctions against South Africa. The Special Committee is still convinced that there will be no progress in
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) unless, at the
same time, the coercive action provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations is taken.
135. The Special Committee long ago rejected the reasoning of those who in the past have thwarted the action
of the Council, alleging that South Africa would respond
to. reason rather than to force. In fact, it is now abundantly clear that South Africa has viewed the inaction of
the Council as a blank cheque for delaying negotiations
for obviously spurious reasons, reducing what was conceived as a serious, honest effort to achieve a balanced
solution to a contemptible farce. It is also clear that only
by bringing strong economic pressure to bear on South
Africa can that country be forced to reconsider its current

policy of’ defiance and scorn towards the international
community.
136. The Special Committee
has also categorically
rejected all efforts to link the question of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) to the withdrawal of foreign
forces from Angola. Such efforts will not only delay the
decolonization process but also’represent brazen interference in the affairs of sovereign States. This point of view
of the Special Committee has been broadly endorsed by
the international community, as is clear not only from
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in
March of this year, but also from the recent International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence, held in Paris in April.
137. By contrast with South Africa, in the five. years
since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), SWAPO, the
sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people,
has demonstrated a praiseworthy willingness to facilitate
the negotiating process and clear the way for the holding
of free elections on the basis of universal suffrage. On
more than one occasion, SWAP0 has accepted suggestions from the contact group, even when it was not to its
advantage. Only the fact that South Africa is not equally
committed to reaching an agreement has prevented the
aforementioned position of SWAP0 from being properly rewarded.
138. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay ,a tribute, on behalf of the Special Committee, to the
front-line States, which have given outstanding and
unswerving support to the efforts of the Namibian
people to achieve their independence. The sufferings that
they have borne and are continuing to bear for this just
cause clearly reflect their commitment to peace, justice
and the freedom of peoples. As has been repeatedly
pointed out by the Special Committee,
the Security
Council must, in its discussions, bear in mind that time is
running out. If resolution 435 (1978) is not implemented
soon, South Africa will continue to consolidate its illegal
occupation through internal elections or other procedures. With a view to preventing any procrastinatoj
manoeuvres and putting an end once and for all to the
sacrifice and suffering of the Namibian people, the Council must take resolute action, including, in particular, the
implementation
of comprehensive sanctions.
139. As a corollary to that action, the international
community must continue to give every possible assistance to the people of Namibia so that, under the leadership of SWAPO, they can continue to accelerate the
decolonization process. In the considered opinion of the,
Special Committee, concerted action by all these forces
could, even at this stage; prevent the situation in southern Africa from degenerating into a general state of war
with unforeseeable consequences not only for Africa but
for the entire world community.
140. In conclusion, wisdom suggests that the solution
to the problem should rest with the Council and that the

role of the Secretary-General
should be strengthened in
order to carry out the provisions of resolution 435 (1978)
as quickly as possible.
*

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

2 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, 22nd meeting,para 135.
j AiCONF.

s AKONF.1200
NOTES
.
’ Lega! Consequencesfor States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia(South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion. I. C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.

120/K

4 OficiaI Records of the General Assimbly, Thirtyfifth Session, SuppIement No. 24, vol. I, annexII.
and Corr.1

and 2, para. 30.

6 See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibign People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 ApriI 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),

part three.

’ Officiai Records of the General Assembly, Ddrty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. I.

90-60205-February

1991~2,050
