S/2020/1032

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 October 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Thirty-second semi-annual report of the Secretary-General

I. Background
1.
The present report is the thirty-second semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It
provides a review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the
issuance of my previous report on the subject, on 24 April 2020 ( S/2020/329) and
covers developments up to 2 October 2020.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation. A number
of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to
which all the political parties in Lebanon had committed thems elves. That objective
has remained the priority of my efforts.
4.
During the reporting period, Lebanon continued to face a deep economic and
financial crisis. On 30 April 2020, following consultations with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the Cabinet of the Prime Minister, Hassan Diab, adopted a
financial recovery plan. Discussions with IMF subsequently stalled, amid
disagreements between political and financial stakeholders over the scope of and
responsibility for the country’s financial crisis. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants, Nassif Hitti, submitted his resignation on 3 August, stating, “I had pinned
high hopes on change and reform; but the reality aborted every hope”.

20-13873 (E)

261020

*2013873*

S/2020/1032

5.
Intermittent protests occurred throughout the country, some of which turned
violent. The protestors denounced the dire socioeconomic conditions, the frequent
power outages, the price hikes, the fluctuating exchange rate and the lockdown
measures. On 27 April 2020, clashes in Tripoli between demonstrators and the
Lebanese Armed Forces led to the death of a demonstrator. On 28 April, the Lebanese
Armed Forces issued a press release in which it expressed regret for the death and
stated that it had “opened an investigation into the incident”. Later that night,
demonstrators vandalized banks, attacked police vehicles and hurled stones at
soldiers. From 27 to 29 April, 77 civilians and 159 soldiers were reportedly injured.
In reaction to a further devaluation of the currency, violent demonstrations occurred
in Beirut and Tripoli on 12 and 13 June. Some 123 persons, including 26 Lebanese
Armed Forces personnel, were injured. The Higher Defence Council met on 15 June,
following which the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested 36 people for acts of vandalism,
damage to public and private property and attacks on security forces.
6.
On 4 August 2020, a massive explosion at the port of Beirut caused mass
casualties, widespread displacement and large-scale infrastructural damage to areas
close to the blast site. Material and property damage e xtended for several kilometres
from the blast zone. According to initial statements from authorities, a large stockpile,
estimated at 2,750 tons, of highly explosive ammonium nitrate stored in the port
exploded after a fire broke out in an adjacent storage facility. Overall, 192 people
were killed, 7 remain missing, more than 6,500 were injured, including 1,000
children, and hundreds of thousands were left in need of shelter. The World Bank
estimated the value of physical damage between $3.8 billion and $4. 6 billion, losses
in economic flows between $2.9 billion and $3.5 billion and priority recovery and
reconstruction needs for the calendar years 2020 and 2021 between $1.8 billion and
$2.2 billion.
7.
Following the explosion, Beirut was declared a “disaster city” by the authorities
and placed under a state of emergency, initially until 18 August, granting the army
exceptional powers over civilian and security matters. On 5 August, the Cabinet
mandated a commission to conduct a five-day “administrative inquiry” into the Beirut
port explosion. The case was subsequently referred to the Judicial Council. The
judicial investigator has since detained 25 individuals. The Lebanese investigation is
ongoing. Four former Prime Ministers, the Patriarch of the Maronite Ch urch, Béchara
Boutros Rai, and several political parties and Lebanese civil society groups have
called for an international investigation into the explosion.
8.
In the aftermath of the explosion, protestors accused the Government of having
allowed the explosion to occur as a result of criminal negligence, corruption and
incompetence and called for the resignation of the political class. From 8 to
11 August, large-scale, anti-Government protests took place in Beirut, resulting in
violent clashes between protestors and security forces. The protest of 8 August was
especially violent, resulting in the death of 1 soldier of the Internal Security Forces
and 281 protestors, 108 soldiers from the Lebanese Armed Forces and 136 soldiers
from the Internal Security Forces injured.
9.
Following those incidents, several ministers and members of Parliament
resigned on 9 and 10 August, and, on 10 August, Mr. Diab announced the resignation
of his Government. He stated that the disaster, which had hit the Lebanese people “at
the core”, had occurred “as a result of chronic corruption in politics, administration
and the State”. He added that “the corrupt system [was] bigger than the State, and the
latter [was] constrained by this system and [could not] confront it or get rid of i t”.
10. In order to shore up international support to Lebanon in the aftermath of the port
explosion, on 9 August, the United Nations and France jointly convened an
international conference on support for Beirut and the Lebanese people. The United
2/11

20-13873

S/2020/1032

Nations pledged that it was “committed to helping the people of Lebanon in every
way we can”, called on everyone to “rally together, and provide all the financial,
material and political support [possible]” and emphasized the need to “focus our
support on four priority sectors: health, food, the rehabilitation of buildings and the
rehabilitation of schools”. The Deputy Secretary-General reaffirmed the commitment
of the country’s partners to the well-being of its people. After the conference, France
announced that €250 million had been raised. On 10 August, at a briefing for Member
States on the humanitarian situation in Lebanon, I called for robust international
support for all people in need in Lebanon, especially women and girls, and reiterated
the importance of implementing reforms to address the needs of the Lebanese people
for the longer term.
11. On 27 August, 44 women’s rights organizations and feminist activists in
Lebanon released a charter of demands for a gender-sensitive disaster response plan.
The signatories demanded “that aid be channelled to civil society organizations and
delivered in an equitable and just manner for all. Aid must also be distributed in a
manner that takes into account the disproportionate effect and impact, both short and
long term, of the most vulnerable and historically excluded groups.”
12. On 31 August, the then-Ambassador of Lebanon to Germany, Mustafa Adib, was
appointed Prime Minister-designate. On 1 September, during a visit to Lebanon, the
President of France, Emmanuel Macron, called for the formation of a Government
within two weeks and proposed a roadmap for reforms, which secured commitment
from political forces across the spectrum. On 26 September, after the parties were
unable to agree on the composition of a Government, Mr. Adib, informed the
President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, that he was unable to form a Government and
stepped down.
13. On 23 September, the Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, Jean Yves Le Drian, and I co-chaired a ministerial meeting of the International Support
Group for Lebanon. Members of the Group urged the leaders of Lebanon “to unite in
support of the timely formation of a Government able to meet the legitimate
aspirations expressed by the Lebanese people and committed to addressing [t he
country’s] multiple and acute challenges, notably its humanitarian, socioeconomic
and financial crises, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the
reconstruction of Beirut and the restoration of [the city’s] heritage and historical
buildings”. The Group “strongly urged Lebanese political leaders to undertake critical
reforms”.
14. Regrettably, the economic crisis in Lebanon has been further deepened by the
COVID-19 pandemic and the associated lockdowns, as well as by the explosion of
4 August, leading to a spike in unemployment and poverty. Over 150,000 workers are
estimated to have lost their jobs, either permanently or temporarily, as a result of the
explosion, further compounding the 30 per cent unemployment rate already registered
in June 2020. In the Beirut Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment of August 2020,
prepared by the World Bank in collaboration with the European Union and the United
Nations, it was noted that “[p]re-disaster estimates of general and extreme poverty
rates were 45 and 22 per cent, respectively”. According to the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), those combined
challenges are estimated to have reduced women’s participation in the economy by
14 to 19 per cent.
15. Findings from assessments and research conducted by the National Commission
for Lebanese Women, UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund and the World
Health Organization in April and May 2020 indicate that the COVID -19 lockdown
has contributed to an increase in different forms of gender-based violence, in
particular as experienced by women and girls. Prolonged periods of isolation, income
20-13873

3/11

S/2020/1032

insecurity and restricted access to medical and social services have created the
opportunity for violence against women and girls to continue.
16. As at 31 August 2020, 896,182 refugees and asylum seekers were registered
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Lebanon, including 879,598 Syrian refugees and 16,584 refugees and asylum seekers
of other nationalities. Surveys of more than 20,000 refugee households conducted by
UNHCR since the beginning of 2020 revealed that refugees are increasingly unable
to cover their basic needs.
17. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. Such delineation
remains critical in order to enable proper border control and management, including
with regard to the movement of people and the potential movement of arms.
18. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain essential
to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While border delineation
is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation for Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680 (2006). On 16 July,
marking the first incident of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon since 2018, clashes took place in Qasr, in Biqʻa Governorate, between
smugglers, who reportedly fled to Lebanon, and Syrian security officers at the border.
The Lebanese Armed Forces sent patrols to the area in support of Syrian security
personnel. One Syrian officer was reportedly killed and another injured in the clashes.
19. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and a n
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
20. There was no progress on the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area. Furthermore,
neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel responded to the provisional definition of
the area contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) of 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
21. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make near daily overflights above Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters dated 30 April 2020 addressed to the President
of the Security Council and to me (A/74/836-S/2020/349), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, on behalf of her Government, stated
that, on 27 April, “four Israeli warplanes had violated Lebanese airspace” and “fired
missiles towards Syrian territory”. She added that Israel had “escalated the nature of
its violations by using Lebanese airspace to carry out missile attacks against a third
State”. In identical letters dated 1 July addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (A/74/938-S/2020/642), the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, also on behalf of her Government, stated that, on 4 June 2020, “four Israeli
enemy warplanes flying at low altitude and a speed of 550 knots violated Lebanese
airspace, entering over the sea off Sidon”. She added that “Israel i enemy interference
caused other targets to appear on the radar screens of Rafic Hariri International
Airport in Beirut as missiles were being fired towards Syrian territory”. She noted
that “Israel not only violated Lebanese airspace” but “could have end angered civilians
and Lebanese territory had fire been opened on the source of the missiles”.
22. On 27 July 2020, the Israel Defense Forces fired mortar smoke grenades and
some tank shells across the Blue Line in the Kfar Shuba and Bastrah area. In a publ ic
statement issued that evening, the Israel Defense Forces stated that it had “thwarted
an infiltration attempt by a Hezbollah terror squad in northern Israel” an hour earlier.
4/11

20-13873

S/2020/1032

Soon afterwards, Hizbullah issued a statement denying any involvement in the
incident and asserting that retaliation for the killing of a Hizbullah member in the
Syrian Arab Republic on 20 July, which it attributed to Israel, was yet to come. In
speeches made on 14 and 30 August, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan
Nasrallah, reiterated that pledge. In identical letters dated 17 August addressed to the
President of the Security Council and to me (S/2020/806), the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations stated th at, on 27 July, Israel Defense
Forces surveillance had “identified a squad of armed Hezbollah militants travelling
in a tactical manner towards the Blue Line in the Har Dov area. Three armed militants
then crossed the Blue Line and infiltrated Israeli terr itory in an attempt to carry out
an attack.” In identical letters dated 29 July and 19 August addressed to the President
of the Security Council and to me (A/74/979-S/2020/762 and A/74/996-S/2020/819),
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon, on behalf of her Government, indicated
that, on 27 July, the Israeli army fired artillery shells from inside the occupied Shab‘a
Farms at Kurum, Wadi al-Jawz, eastern Kfar Shuba, eastern Halta, Jabal Shamis and
Jabal al-Sidanah, which are in Lebanese territory.
23. On 18 August 2020, the Trial Chamber of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon
pronounced its judgment in Prosecutor v. Ayyash et al. The Trial Chamber
“unanimously found the accused, Salim Jamil Ayyash, guilty beyond reasonable
doubt of all counts against him in the indictment.” However, according to the Trial
Chamber, the prosecution did not prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt in relation
to Hassan Habib Merhi, Hussein Hassan Oneissi and Assad Hassan Sabra. The Trial
Chamber found those individuals not guilty in relation to all counts charged against
them. The Trial Chamber was satisfied with the evidence that the Syrian Arab
Republic and Hezbollah “may have had motives to eliminate” the former Prime
Minister of Lebanon, Rafik Hariri and “some of his political allies” but that there was
“no evidence that the Hezbollah leadership had any involvement in Mr. Hariri’s
murder”, “no direct evidence of Syrian involvement in it” and “no evidence that either
Mr. Ayyash or [Mustafa Amine] Badreddine were directed by the Hezbollah
leadership to arrange logistical support for Mr. Hariri’s assassination”. Following the
announcement of the ruling on 18 August, Mr. Hariri’s son, Saad Hariri, stated to the
press that, “for the first time in the history of the many political assassinations that
Lebanon has witnessed, the Lebanese [people] know the truth, and, for the first time,
true justice has prevailed”. He added that “Hezbollah must cooperate on” handing
over Mr. Ayyash. The Trial Chamber is continuing with sentencing proceedings
against Mr. Ayyash.
24. On 10 September 2020, Trial Chamber II of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon
confirmed the jurisdiction of the Special Tribunal to try Mr. Ayyash in relation to the
attacks on Marwan Hamadeh, Georges Hawi and Elias El-Murr, carried out on
1 October 2004, 21 June 2005 and 12 July 2005, respectively.
25. Several States objected to the reservation and statement made by Lebanon upon
its accession to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. They noted, however, that those objections would not preclude the entry
into force of the Convention between each of them and Lebanon.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
26. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all the Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and in
resolution 1559 (2004).

20-13873

5/11

S/2020/1032

27. On 20 August 2020, 1 individual was reportedly killed and 10 others wounded
in armed clashes between members of the Amal Movement and Hizbullah in the
southern village of Lubyah, over a banner commemorating the Ashura’ festival. On
26 August, the Internal Security Forces arrested a suspected member of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) who was allegedly planning to target the Lebanese
Armed Forces. On 27 August, two people were reportedly killed and three injured
after armed clashes in Khaldah, south of Beirut, between the Sunni residents of
Khaldah and local supporters of Hizbullah and the Amal Movement. Calm was
restored after the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened. On 7 September, one person
was killed and two injured in clashes among armed youth in Tariq al-Jadidah, in
Beirut, involving machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. The Lebanese Armed
Forces contained the situation and arrested those behind the clashes.
28. On 21 August, four unidentified assailants opened fire in the village of Kaftun,
in northern Lebanon, resulting in the death of three individuals. The following day,
security forces in the Beddawi camp for Palestinian refugees detained an individual
in connection with the fatal shooting. A second suspect in the incident, a Syrian
national, reportedly detonated himself on 24 August, as the Internal Security Forces
raided his apartment in Akkar to arrest him. On 5 September, the Lebanese Armed
Forces reportedly arrested individuals linked to ISIL in relation to the incident in
Kaftun. Those individuals were allegedly planning to conduct several terrorist attacks
in the country. On 13 September, the Lebanese Armed Forces conducted raids in Jabal
al-Biddawi, reportedly in search of suspects related to the Kaftun incident, during
which four members of the Lebanese Armed Forces and one militant were reportedly
killed, and one member of the Lebanese Armed Forces seriously injured. On
26 September, the Internal Security Forces stated that they had raided the house of
alleged members of ISIL, killing nine of its memb ers. On 27 September, unknown
assailants reportedly opened fire from a vehicle at a post of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in Minniyah, in northern Lebanon. Two soldiers of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and one assailant were reportedly killed.
29. On 13 May, the Higher Defence Council reviewed existing measures to combat
smuggling along the border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Council requested that steps be taken to intensify monitoring, prosecute violators,
smugglers and their partners and shut down illegal crossings. The Council decided to
establish new security points for customs and devise a comprehensive plan to
establish military, security and customs control services. Subsequent efforts by
security forces to close illegal border crossings yielded results, with several small
crossing points and bridges closed or dismantled in the Hirmil area along the border.
On 29 May, Mr. Diab, who was then still Prime Minister, pledged to “pursue efforts
to stop the smuggling business” by closing those crossings, as it caused “great damage
to the State” and benefited only “a handful of smugglers”. During the reporting
period, security forces arrested several individuals on charges of smuggling,
including of diesel, liquified petroleum gas and food product s.
30. In a speech made on 13 May, Mr. Nasrallah stated that, “when facing
smuggling”, the two countries concerned, namely, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Lebanon, “have to cooperate to solve the issue”. He added that “all factions have
called for addressing the issue of smuggling. I am not talking about the movement of
resistance combatants and weapons, which is another matter.” He also called again
for Lebanon to normalize its relations with the Syrian Arab Republic, calling the delay
in doing so “harmful” to Lebanon in the context of the economic crisis. He stated that,
“even if troops are deployed along the entire Lebanese-Syrian border, they cannot
prevent smuggling because [the Lebanese] towns and families are interlinked” with
those in the Syrian Arab Republic.

6/11

20-13873

S/2020/1032

31. The situation in Palestinian refugee camps remained calm overall during the
reporting period. However, personal disputes in the Rashidieh camp near Tyre, in
southern Lebanon, escalated into heavy shooting on 8 and 25 May, resulting in two
fatalities. On 28 July, in Ein El Hilweh camp, near Sidon, a personal dispute at a
security checkpoint inside the camp escalated into a shooting, resulting in one fatality.
The next day, demonstrations took place in the camp to protest the shooting.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
32. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
33. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to oper ate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country.
34. There has been no tangible progress made towards the disbanding and disarming
of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and
resolution 1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have
been taken to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a militar y
arsenal outside a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued to be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those
issues to be destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy.
Many Lebanese people view the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat
that those weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
35. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory.
36. On 29 May 2020, protesters staged a sit-in outside the Justice Palace in Beirut,
demanding the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) and
the disarmament of militias. Another group expressed support for the demands of the
protests of 17 October but rejected calls to disarm Hizbullah. Members of Parliament
from both the Lebanese Forces and the Kata’ib Party reiterated their call for holding
a dialogue with Hizbullah to address the issue.
37. On 5 June, two opposing demonstrations reportedly took place in Tripoli, one
to call for the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and reject the possession
of weapons outside State institutions, and the other to reject those demands, saying
that the focus should rather be on socioeconomic issues. The Lebanese Armed Forces
and security forces separated the two groups.
38. On 6 June, protestors reportedly travelled from different parts of the country to
join an anti-Government demonstration in Beirut. Disagreements over the main
demands, including calls for the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), prompted
some groups to boycott the protests. Amal Movement and Hizbullah loyalists staged
a counter-protest. Demonstrations reportedly deteriorated rapidly into clashes along
sectarian lines. Tensions between protestors on opposite sides mounted as the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Internal Security Forces tried to separate the two
groups. The security forces used tear gas to disperse the protestors. A total of
25 soldiers and 48 civilians were reportedly injured during the protests. On 7 June,

20-13873

7/11

S/2020/1032

Mr. Aoun reportedly stated: “Let what happened last night be a wake-up call for
everyone”.
39. Mr. Nasrallah, commenting on the above incidents in a speech made on 16 June,
said that “demanding a solution” to socioeconomic issues was “normal and
acceptable”, but that adding calls for the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) to
those demands was “negative because it leads to divisions”. He added that it was
“wrong and unfair to the revolution of 17 October, because many who joined the
17 October protests, including parties and people from diff erent areas, do not believe
[in] this aggressive position towards the resistance”. He called for the “legitimate
socioeconomic demands” of 17 October not to be conflated with demands for the
implementation of the resolution.
40. In other sporadic gatherings during the reporting period, protestors also called
for the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).
41. In his aforementioned speech of 13 May, Mr. Nasrallah stated that “Hizbullah
and other resistance factions” had been decreasing their presence in the Syrian Arab
Republic “for more than two years” and had been “reducing the number of troops”
because that country had “won the war and started recovering”. He added, however,
that Hizbullah still had “one or two bases” in Qalamun and Zabadani.
42. In a speech made on 26 May, Mr. Nasrallah responded to a question on whether
Hizbullah would “transform all the missiles to precision missiles” by stating that “the
resistance should have such an objective”. In identical letters dated 28 June addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to me ( S/2020/608), the Permanent
Representative of Israel stated the following: “[W]e have witnessed in Lebanon the
acquisition by Hizbullah, a terrorist group and Iranian proxy, of more than 150,000
missiles and rockets that have the ability to attack the entire State of Israel. The vast
majority of these rockets have been transferred from Iran, in violation of no t only
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), but also resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559
[(2004)].”
43. In a speech made on 16 June, in which he referenced the dire socioeconomic
situation, Mr. Nasrallah said that, in a situation in which “to be able to buy bread,
Hizbullah has to hand over its weapons: arms for bread, arms for food”, but “in our
equation, we do not agree to hand over the arms”. He added the following: “[To
anyone] who gives us two choices: either we kill you with weapons or [you die of]
hunger, I tell them the arms will remain in our hands and we will not go hungry. We
will kill you, we will kill you, we will kill you.”
44. On 22 September, an explosion took place in the village of Ayn Qana, near
Nabatiyah in southern Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces stated that it had
launched an investigation. On 26 September, Hizbullah stated that one of its fighters
had died. According to unconfirmed media reports, the death was linked to the
explosion.
45. On 29 September, Mr. Nasrallah stated: “It is important for the Lebanese
[people] to know clearly that we do not place missiles at the Beirut port or next to a
gas station. We know very well where we should place our missiles.” Earlier that day,
at the General Assembly, the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, had
stated that Hizbullah kept “a secret arms depot [adjacent] to a gas station” in a civilian
area in a residential neighbourhood of Beirut. The Permanent Representative of Israel
reiterated those points in a letter dated 2 October addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2020/968).
46. On 17 August 2020, the Maronite Church released an official memorandum
urging the adoption of “active neutrality” for Lebanon. In the memorandum, the
Church noted that positive neutrality was rooted in the Constitution of Lebanon, in
8/11

20-13873

S/2020/1032

the Baabda Declaration of 2012, which contained a reference to the country’s policy
of disassociation, and in successive ministerial statements. The Church also noted that
Lebanon had pursued neutrality from its founding until the signing of the Cairo
agreement in 1969, which was followed by the emergence of armed Lebanese and
non-Lebanese groups outside the control of the State. It contended that “the lack of
political clarity” in the relationship between the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon
with regard to territory, authority and international borders and “the political, military,
economic, social and border implications of the creation of the State of Israel on
Lebanon” and the subsequent refugee influx were “historical causes of conflicts” and
called for the neutrality of Lebanon to be enshrined in the next ministerial statement.
47. On 8 September, the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States
Department of Treasury sanctioned two former Lebanese government ministers,
Yusuf Finyanus, from the Marada Movement, and Ali Hassan Khalil, from the Amal
Movement, for allegedly providing material support to Hizbullah and engaging in
corruption. The United States Department of the Treasury stated that, as from
mid-2019, Hizbullah “used its relationship with officials in the Lebanese
government”, including Mr. Finyanus, as Minister of Transportation and Public
Works, “to siphon funds from government budgets to ensure that Hizballah -owned
companies won bids for Lebanese government contracts worth millions of dollars”.
The statement added that, as Minister of Finance, Mr. Khalil “was one of the officials
Hizballah leveraged a relationship with for financial gain”.
48. On 3 September, for the first time in nearly a decade, the Executive Committee
of the Palestine Liberation Organization held its first meeting together with the heads
of all Palestinian factions. Speakers focused on the need to restore unity and reform
the Organization. Leaders of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad joined the meeting
by video link from Beirut. The leader of Hamas, Ismail Haniyeh, met with several
Lebanese officials, Hizbullah and Palestinian faction leaders. Some politicians from
the Lebanese Forces and the Kata’ib Party, as well as some Sunni representatives,
criticized Lebanese authorities for allowing Mr. Haniyeh into the country and
emphasized the need for disassociation.
49. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continued.
Notwithstanding the decision, taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.
50. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) continued to deliver essential services for health, education, the
improvement of the camps, relief and social services to Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon in the face of a serious Agency-wide funding shortfall, currently at
$200 million, for the programme budget. As at 4 October 2020, 1,343 Palestine
refugees had been infected with COVID-19, with 154 people requiring hospitalization
and 30 fatalities; approximately half of those who had contracted the disease were
from the refugee camps.

III. Observations
51. The loss of life, the impact on the lives of survivors and the material damage
resulting from the tragic explosion of 4 August are considerable. I am heartened by
the immediate solidarity of the international community with the Lebanese people in
these difficult times and call on donors to ensure the prompt disbursement of their
pledges. Conducting a credible and transparent investigation to determine the cause
20-13873

9/11

S/2020/1032

of the explosion and bring about the accountability demanded by the Lebanese people
continues to be paramount.
52. The deterioration of the socioeconomic and financial situation, compounded by
the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the port explosion of 4 August, remains
of grave concern. A call for reforms has been echoed in the past few months by
prominent members of the international community, including during several highlevel visits and meetings focused on Lebanon since the explosion. The onus is now
on the Lebanese authorities to urgently enact reforms that respond to the demands of
the Lebanese people, including calls for accountability, transparency and an end to
corruption. I especially welcome the role of civil society organizations and women
and youth activists in addressing the needs and aspirations of the population.
53. I urge Lebanese leaders to rise above partisan considerations and personal
interests and to form a Government as a matter of urgency. This is necessary to turn
around the Lebanese economy and reduce the negative impact of the current
socioeconomic situation on the Lebanese population.
54. I remain concerned about the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
The continued and self-acknowledged involvement of Hizbullah in the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic, which is not only in breach of th e disassociation policy and the
principles of the Baabda Declaration of 2012, but also carries the risk of entangling
Lebanon in regional conflicts and undermining the stability of the country and the
region. Furthermore, it demonstrates the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal
to be accountable to the very State institutions that the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) was intended to strengthen. It is also concerning that Hizbullah read ily
acknowledges the movement of resistance combatants and weapons between Lebanon
and the Syrian Arab Republic and places them outside the scope of efforts to combat
smuggling. I call upon the countries in the region that maintain close ties with
Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of that armed group into a solely civilian
political party, as well as its disarmament, in accordance with the requirements of the
Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interests of Lebanon and of
regional peace and security.
55. I again call upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to engage in any
military activity inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the
Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004). It is critical that the Accords be preserved
and implemented by all, in order to avoid the spectre of renewed confrontation among
Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the institutions of the State. All parties concerned
must contribute to efforts to reinforce those institutions. The State should increase its
efforts to achieve a monopoly over the possession of weapons and the use of force
throughout its territory. I continue to urge the Government and the armed forces of
Lebanon to take all measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups
from acquiring weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of
the State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
56. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, combined
with the existence of armed militias, continues to undermine security and stability in
Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military
capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of
grave concern.
57. Calls from sectors of the Lebanese population for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) and rejecting the possession of arms outside State institutions
indicate that the maintenance of weapons by Hizbullah remains a divisive issue within
Lebanese society.

10/11

20-13873

S/2020/1032

58. I strongly condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, as they undermine the credibility of Lebanese security and State institutions
and generate anxiety among the civilian population. I renew my calls for Israel to
adhere to its obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions and to
withdraw its forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and the adjacent
area north of the Blue Line, as well as to immediately cease its overflights above
Lebanese airspace. The alleged use of Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces
to strike targets in the Syrian Arab Republic is deeply concerning, owing to the risk
it poses for regional stability.
59. The judgment rendered by the Trial Chamber of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon in Prosecutor v. Ayyash et al. reflected the international community’s
commitment to justice for the terrible crimes committed on 14 February 2005.
60. I continue to encourage donors to provide funding to UNRWA, including in
support of its request for cash assistance to address the deteriorating economic
situation in Palestinian refugee camps, exacerbated by the COVID -19 crisis, so that
it can continue to perform its essential role and deliver services, which are vital to the
dignity and security of Palestinian refugees. Such efforts are without prejudice to the
need for a just resolution of the Palestinian refugee question in the context of a
comprehensive settlement in the region.
61. In other concerning developments, there has been an apparent increase in
security incidents related to ISIL. I welcome the sustained support provided by
Member States to the Lebanese Armed Forces and renew my calls to donors to support
the State institutions of Lebanon, including the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Internal Security Forces.
62. I am counting on the continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to
its international obligations, and I call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will
continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.

20-13873

11/11
