United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8909th meeting

Monday, 22 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Jianjian
Mr. Lōhmus
Mr. Le Floc’h
Mr. Saurabh
Ms. Burns
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Djibo Bartie
Mr. Richardsen
Mr. Shevchenko
Ms. Andrews
Mr. Laouani
Ms. Dix
Ms. Garellek
Mr. Phan

Agenda
Small arms
The impact of the diversion and trafficking of arms on peace and security
Letter dated 22 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/892)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/966) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-35063 (E)
*2135063*

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on the list for this
meeting. I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
congratulating Mexico on keeping the issue of small
arms and light weapons prominent in the deliberations
of the Security Council. The Arria Formula held meeting
in September and today’s high-level open debate are
proof of Mexico’s commitment to mainstreaming
discussions on that matter.
States have every right to acquire and use small
arms and light weapons to ensure their public security,
self-defence and national sovereignty. However, with
that right comes the inseparable duty to control flows
and stockpiles of those weapons. Uncontrolled flows
of such weapons, as well as their ammunition, have
profoundly destabilizing effects on societies around the
globe and can constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
The diversion of small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition to illicit markets and unauthorized
non-State actors fuels transnational organized crime,
fosters terrorism and exacerbates conflicts, with
devastating impact on the lives of civilians, including
women, children, refugees, internally displaced
persons and other groups in vulnerable situations. It can
also threaten the safety and security of peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers, thereby hindering the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates and the
provision of assistance.
We recognize the efforts made by the Council
to address the threats posed by illicit flows of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition, in
particular in situations of armed conflict, as well as its
endeavours to prevent the acquisition of weapons by
terrorists. Likewise, we acknowledge the importance
of the imposition of arms embargoes in preventing
flows of weapons to conflict situations that pose a
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
welcome initiatives from Member States with a view to
strengthening the role of the Council in that field.
2/17

22/11/2021

In the areas of its competence, the Security Council
can and should encourage the application of the
relevant provisions contained in instruments developed
by the General Assembly, such as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and the International Tracing Instrument
to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons
(ITI), which require States to ensure that weapons are
properly marked and that records pertaining to them
are established and kept.
Brazil is firmly committed to the comprehensive
implementation and strengthening of both the
Programme of Action and the ITI. We welcomed
the successful convening of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, which produced a strong
and substantive outcome document (A/CONF.192/
BMS/2021/1) that reaffirms, inter alia, the importance
of efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit flows
of ammunition. Brazil has been at the forefront of
efforts in that field, including by adopting pioneering
legislation and industry practices on the marking and
tracing of ammunition.
In many situations, illicit flows of ammunition fuel
conflict and crime to a greater extent than the illicit
trafficking in weapons itself. It is no longer acceptable
for that issue to remain inadequately addressed by the
United Nations. Brazil therefore takes this opportunity
to welcome the successful conclusion arrived at in
September by the Group of Governmental Experts on
problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus. The Group of
Governmental Experts adopted by consensus a report
containing comprehensive recommendations to enhance
the safety and security of conventional ammunition,
which was recently endorsed by the First Committee
of the General Assembly with overwhelming support.
The recommendations of the Group of Governmental
Experts should be the starting point of negotiations on a
new global framework to address the safety and security
of ammunition when the First Committee’s open-ended
working group on ammunition management convenes
for that purpose in 2022.
Small arms and light weapons are the most
frequently used weapons in the majority of recent
armed conflicts. The threat posed by the excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled flows of such weapons
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

and their ammunition, especially in conflict and postconflict situations, cannot be overemphasized. As an
incoming member of the Security Council, Brazil is
ready to contribute to the Council’s work in tackling
this issue, as we have been actively doing in other
international forums.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation believes in the critical role
that the United Nations system plays in the matter of
disarmament to fulfil the objectives of its Charter,
foremost of which is to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. We join previous speakers in
stressing the importance of countering the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
At the same time, we stress that the General
Assembly and its First Committee are the most
appropriate forums for dealing with issues related
to small arms and light weapons, as they enable
all Member States to submit proposals and address
relevant concerns. The General Assembly and the
First Committee provide the necessary framework to
engage in a common endeavour to achieve the shared
objectives of Member States. My delegation would like
to take this opportunity of this open debate to make the
following points.
First, over the past 10 years in my country, Syria,
certain Governments have been supplying terrorist
groups, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and the Al-Nusra Front, also known as Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, and individuals and entities associated with
them, with various types of weapons, including small
arms and light weapons. That aggressive approach has
had serious repercussions; it has perpetuated the crisis
and claimed the lives of thousands of Syrians.
Secondly, some Governments, known to all, have
funded the procurement of those weapons and facilitated
their smuggling to other countries to destabilize them.
My delegation considers such acts to be in flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and friendly relations
among States, and the relevant Security Council
resolutions on countering terrorism. Those acts must
be explicitly and clearly condemned and deterrent
measures must be taken in response to them.

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, my delegation stresses that facilitating
the acquisition by terrorist entities of small arms and
light weapons and other types of weapons constitutes
a threat to the security and stability of our countries
and exposes civilians, including women and children,
to significant risks. Consequently, it is imperative that
Member States take joint efforts to adopt regulatory
frameworks and measures to prevent the transfer of
such weapons and end the illicit trade in them.
Fourthly,
my
delegation
emphasizes
the
need to strengthen national efforts and intensify
bilateral and multilateral cooperation to combat this
grave phenomenon.
Fifthly, my delegation calls on all States that
produce those types of weapons to ensure that legal
restrictions are applied to prevent the illicit trade in
them, and to verify their final destination. We note
with concern that some States have not been fulfilling
their obligations with regard to final destination or end
user agreements and are permitting or condoning the
transfer of large quantities of their weapons stockpiles
to terrorist groups in a number of countries, including
in my own.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls for the full
implementation of the relevant international treaties
and for the end of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. We reiterate that Member States have
the right to acquire, manufacture, transfer and retain
such weapons for their defence and security needs and
to protect their citizens.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important open
debate, which provides the opportunity to share the
insights and experiences of different actors on how
to address the role of the destabilizing accumulation,
illicit transfer and misuse of small arms and light
weapons (SALW) in fuelling and exacerbating armed
conflicts. Slovakia associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Allow me now to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The diversion, illicit trade and unauthorized use
of SALW and their ammunition constitute a serious
impediment to peace, growth, development and
security in the world. Illicit small arms are fuelling

21-350633/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

armed violence and organized crime, global terrorism
and conflicts. They destabilize entire regions, States
and their societies and increase the impact of terrorist
attacks. In that regard, Slovakia welcomes the
successful outcomes of the seventh Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the seventh Conference
of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty. We need
to further strengthen international cooperation aimed
at the effective implementation of United Nations arms
embargoes and the prevention of the illicit international
transfer of SALW to unauthorized recipients.
The collection of small arms and light weapons
used in the context of armed conflict, violent crime and
drug trafficking and the establishment of their illicit
origin are also important steps towards promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies, in line with Goal 16 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Slovakia very much appreciates the role of the
United Nations Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation
on Arms Regulation (UNSCAR) in the implementation
of relevant international instruments on arms regulations
and the promotion of increased sustainability through
more predictable sources of funding. I am pleased to
say that Slovakia has made a financial commitment to
UNSCAR for 2021.
We also appreciate the fact that the Security Council
has played an important role in developing initiatives
to address the SALW issue. The Council needs to
continue advancing solutions under a common global
approach in that area. Slovakia welcomes the Council’s
role in mandating some peacekeeping missions to
address the issue of SALW as part of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and supports
host States in addressing the threat posed by the illicit
transfer, accumulation and misuse of SALW.
Slovakia also welcomes the stronger role of the
formal and informal subsidiary bodies of the Council in
the formulation of adequate responses to the evolving
challenges posed by the unrestricted flows of small
arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador thanks Mexico, in its capacity
4/17

22/11/2021

as President of the Security Council, for including in
its programme of work this open debate on the impact
of the diversion and trafficking of small arms on
international peace and security.
Our country attaches particular importance to that
issue, given that El Salvador recognizes that the illicit
use of small arms and light weapons, as well as their
diversion, pose a threat to many countries in various
contexts such as civilian security, violence in urban
centres, transport security and peacekeeping, to name
but a few. That hinders efforts to achieve sustainable
development, disarmament, peace and security.
The Salvadoran authorities also recognize that
the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
is used by criminal organizations to increase their
armament and sophisticate their criminal activities. For
that reason, joint actions are being taken with national,
regional and international actors to strengthen national
control and prevent the illegal entry of weapons through
air, land or sea borders, preventing and counteracting
their illicit traffic; reinforce the exercise of controls
over the seizure and detection of parts that comprise
small arms and light weapons in order to effectively
prevent their illicit manufacture; and to avoid any link
or form of financing that this activity may provide both
to transnational organized crime groups and to terrorist
groups recognized as such and identified in accordance
with national legislation and jurisprudence.
El Salvador supports a preventive approach in
relation to the diversion of small arms and light weapons.
Along those lines, my country recognizes the relevance
of having specialized studies that allow a better
understanding of the type of arms and ammunition
that are the object of illicit trafficking in countries like
ours and of how they are related to violent acts. Such
studies would make it possible to determine the origin
and provenance of such weapons and, above all, would
help decision-makers to formulate and adopt laws and
policies that reduce their flow.
In that vein, El Salvador advocates the strengthening
of the systems for the control and registration of weapons
and ammunition in circulation in the countries of the
region and the training of public forces and competent
national institutions in the use of information and
communication technologies that make it possible
to prevent and regulate the emerging varieties of
trafficking among criminal groups, particularly the
illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

well as the perpetration of crimes. Moreover, it is of
crucial importance to strengthen intelligence systems
and the investigation of cases that concern arms and
ammunition trafficking.
Taking into account the lack of resources and
varying capacities among Member States, El Salvador
encourages greater cooperation from the United
Nations system with developing countries, including
middle-income countries, on the formulation and
implementation of policies, with a view to adequately
addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Such cooperation could include increased
financing, technology transfer and appropriate training
and support programmes. In that respect, we commend
the creation of the Saving Lives Entity and call on
countries that are able to do so to support that funding
facility and also to provide financial assistance to States
bilaterally so that they are able adequately to confront
this scourge.
Given that the trafficking of small arms and light
weapons is a serious problem that the international
community must address, we acknowledge the work
carried out by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council in addressing the
consequences and impact of this question. El Salvador
calls for greater coordination among the various bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa notes
with appreciation the convening of this open debate on
the impact of the diversion and trafficking of arms on
peace and security.
We believe that it is timely to build on the
successful outcomes of both the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as the seventh Conference of
States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, in order to give
greater attention to this matter.
South Africa is also pleased to note the adoption
by the First Committee this year of the annual draft
resolution on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects (A/C/1/76/L.43), of which
South Africa, Colombia and Japan are traditionally the
main sponsors.

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

Six years on from the adoption of resolution 2220
(2015), this open debate presents an opportunity to
take stock of its implementation, as well as to reflect
on certain pertinent related developments. Recently,
however, the Council has recognized the adverse
impacts on international security of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, particularly on the
African continent, through the adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), concerning cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security — Silencing the Guns in Africa.
South Africa wishes to make three points.
First, South Africa would like to call on the
Council to encourage support for initiatives undertaken
at the national and regional levels, consistent with
the Programme of Action, through international
cooperation and assistance, not only in material support
but also in information exchange, technology transfer
and, importantly, in capacity-building, to ensure that
countries are able to take ownership of controlling this
scourge and threat. We should address the challenge at
its root to enable an effective response.
Secondly, South Africa also supports efforts to bring
the work of the Council in line with and complementary
to all other initiatives to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, thereby
further operationalizing the Programme of Action.
Thirdly and finally, South Africa calls for the equal,
full and effective participation of women — including
in leadership roles — in all policy, planning and
implementation processes around efforts to address
the impact of small arms and light weapons. That is
especially important given the disproportionate impact
of the use of those arms on women and children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): I wish to express Italy’s
appreciation to the Mexican presidency for convening
this debate and for dedicating special attention to the
global challenge of the trafficking of arms. I also wish
to thank the briefers for their contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the European Union (EU) and would like to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.

21-350635/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

First, I wish to reiterate Italy’s enduring
commitment to all international efforts, particularly
within multilateral forums, to curb the illicit trade of
small arms and light weapons. We attach the utmost
importance to the universalization of all relevant
multilateral instruments. We will continue to work
towards the effective implementation of the Arms
Trade Treaty; the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects;
the International Tracing Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; and
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
constitutes a very serious threat to peace and security
in every region of the world. There can be no
underestimation of the devastating consequences of the
widespread and illegal availability of these weapons; it
contributes to instability, violence and insecurity and
undermines the effectiveness of development efforts.
The risk posed by illegal arms flows has steadily
evolved to the extent that, today, arms trafficking is
not only associated with transnational organized crime
but also, and increasingly, with terrorist entities. The
use of online marketplaces, including the dark web, to
sell and acquire weapons creates further challenges for
national Governments and law enforcement agencies.
Moreover, in recent years, non-State actors have
improved their capabilities to design and produce
improvised explosive devices with commercially
available dual-use components.
Illegal arms trafficking is a key driver of violence
and contributes to the erosion of institutional stability
and the rule of law. The Security Council has often
addressed that scourge by tasking peacekeeping
operations with assistance to national authorities
in controlling the flow of small arms, developing
appropriate legal frameworks and improving law
enforcement capabilities. In the light of the latest
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light
weapons (S/2021/839), we encourage the Council to
remain fully seized of the challenges posed by the illicit
transfer, excessive accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons.
6/17

22/11/2021

It is also important to recall that illegal weapons
usually start as legally produced and traded weapons.
However, their irresponsible diversion and export
can produce harmful effects and facilitate the spread
of illegal flows. In recent decades, the international
community has become increasingly aware of the
pernicious consequences of illicit, unregulated or
irresponsible transfers of conventional arms in fuelling
conflicts. The Arms Trade Treaty is a crucial instrument
that has the potential to mitigate that risk. We supported
this year’s thematic focus of the presidency of the
seventh Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade
Treaty on eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, and we consider this to be a positive
contribution to addressing human rights violations,
terrorist phenomena and gender-based violence.
Italy stands ready to actively contribute to the
efforts of the international community to curb the
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, including by offering
its cooperation to interested States and partners. In
that regard, we welcome the successful outcome of
the seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and continue to
believe that applying the provisions of the Programme
of Action also to small arms and light weapons
ammunition would be beneficial. Moreover, we express
our full support for the EU 2020–2025 Action Plan on
Firearms Trafficking, which complements the road
map for a sustainable solution to the illegal possession,
misuse and trafficking of small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition in the Western Balkans.
Finally, let me stress the importance of including
gender-based issues and perspectives at all negotiation
tables, including when discussing strategies on
non-proliferation and disarmament, conventional arms
and small arms and light weapons. In that spirit we
welcome the significant progress made in the seventh
Biennial Meeting, and specifically the fact that the
outcome document (A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1) calls
for the equal, full and effective participation of women
in all processes related to the Programme of Action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU).
Latvia agrees with the stark assessment of the
Secretary-General that the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons, as well as their ammunition, remains
a defining factor that undermines peace and security at
the national, regional and global levels. The diversion
and trafficking of small arms and light weapons fuel
conflicts, contribute to organized crime and heighten
the risk of terrorism. This challenge demands the
continued attention and active engagement of the
Security Council. Therefore, we applaud Mexico’s
initiative to organize today’s open debate.
Latvia welcomes the steps taken by the Security
Council to address this challenge, including by
integrating language related to small arms and light
weapons in country-specific resolutions. Furthermore,
Security Council-mandated missions continue to play
an important role in monitoring and disrupting the
illicit flows of arms and ammunition. Those efforts
should be redoubled.
Taking a step forward, we would like to encourage
a gender-sensitive approach by streamlining efforts
to control small arms and light weapons with those
related to women, peace and security, as well as genderbased violence. Furthermore, the Security Council
should pay particular attention to the implications of
new technological developments. The use of polymer
frames and the manufacturing of modular weapons
and 3-D printed weapons are just a few examples of
developments that affect the marking, record-keeping
and tracing of small arms and light weapons.
All of those aspects were at the forefront of
discussions during the seventh Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects in July. Serving as a Vice-Chair of that
meeting, Latvia contributed to the efforts of States
parties to agree on a substantial outcome document
(A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1). Now, it is important to
focus on its implementation and the preparations for
the next meeting, which will take place in 2022. The
eighth biannual meeting should not be a mere repetition
of the discussions we already had this year; it should
constitute a clear step forward, particularly when it
comes to the consideration of new developments in the

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

manufacture, technology and design of small arms and
light weapons.
To effectively address the diversion of small arms
and light weapons, we require consistent efforts to ensure
the responsible international trade in conventional
arms. As one of the current Vice-Presidents of the
Arms Trade Treaty, Latvia is a strong advocate of this
instrument and emphasizes the synergies between
the Treaty and the Programme of Action. It is worth
noting that this year’s Conference of States Parties to
the Arms Trade Treaty had a thematic focus on small
arms and light weapons and stockpile management. It
concluded with a set of concrete proposals for States to
consider implementing.
Using the framework of the Treaty, Latvia actively
provides assistance and shares best practices with
other States and regions. This year, Latvia participated
in development of an Arms Trade Treaty outreach
library. It is a European Union project led by French
expertise that is aimed at supporting the practical
implementation of the train-the-trainer principle.
Furthermore, Latvian cooperation with partners
includes regular participation in EU Arms Trade Treaty
projects led by Germany’s Federal Office for Economic
Affairs and Export Control. They cover various
regions, including South-East Asia, Africa, Central
Asia and the Western Balkans. We believe that such
cooperation provides collective benefits that go beyond
the security dimension, as tackling illicit flows of small
arms and light weapons also contributes to economic
development and prosperity. Latvia is determined to
continue its proactive role in these international efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks Mexico for convening
this open debate. My delegation also wishes to express
its thanks to the briefers.
The trafficking and diversion of arms and
ammunition continue to be a concern and a threat to
peace, security, sustainable development and world
stability, due to their humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences and their connection to violence and other
crimes, including illicit drug trafficking, terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The dimensions
of the problem demonstrate that it is the result of the
conjunction of national realities with regional and
global flows and variables. That is why it is essential

21-350637/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

to strengthen at all levels coordinated actions aimed
at preventing and combating the trafficking and the
diversion of weapons, their ammunition, parts and
components to unauthorized recipients.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his latest
report to the Security Council on small arms and light
weapons (S/2021/839), weapons continue to play a
central role in initiating, exacerbating and sustaining
armed conflict, pervasive violence and acts of crime
and terrorism. In addition to their humanitarian impact,
the flows and availability of weapons and ammunition
have an impact on security risks. That is a problem
of global dimensions that requires us to continue to
strengthen alliances, assistance and coordinated action,
particularly in relation to border control and customs;
stockpile management; marking, records and tracking,
as well as the identification of associated groups or
individuals. Likewise, it is essential to strengthen
international cooperation and assistance, including
capacity-building, knowledge and technology transfer,
and exchange of information and best practices.
We welcome the success of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, and the adoption of the outcome
document (A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1). We also value
efforts within the framework of other instruments at the
global, regional and subregional levels. We also value
and encourage intensified bilateral efforts. However,
the persistent and new challenges are many. The rapid
advance of technology and the adaptability of criminal
organizations require States to act swiftly, both to
guarantee the application and effectiveness of existing
voluntary and binding instruments, and to expand and
update them.
We must address current and emerging challenges,
integrating efforts in the implementation of the
Programme of Action and other instruments with
those aimed at the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, promoting the equal,
full and effective participation of women and the
cooperation and assistance of civil society, especially
by recognizing and empowering the contributions of
young people.
The task of identifying and taking advantage
of the synergies among the various instruments is
important, as are parallel efforts to promote sustainable
8/17

22/11/2021

development. As the Secretary-General also points
out in the aforementioned report, there is enormous
potential to link disarmament goals at the operational
level with many other Sustainable Development
Goals, so that the historical relationship between
disarmament and development can once again receive
international attention.
The trafficking and diversion of arms and
ammunition continue to claim lives, destroy families,
affect communities, prolong conflicts and undermine
peace and development efforts. The objective of
reducing the human suffering caused by this scourge
and of increasing respect for life and human dignity
by promoting a culture of peace allowed us to adopt
the Programme of Action in 2001. That remains our
collective purpose and responsibility, and it must
continue to guide our deliberations and action. No
country is alien or immune to this phenomenon, which
has an impact on the life, integrity and dignity of
individuals, families, communities and entire nations.
We must do everything within our capacity to mitigate
this global tragedy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Let me start by expressing
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate.
Ukraine remains gravely concerned by the fact
that the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW)
continue to be part of domestic and transnational
organized crime and terrorism, posing a serious threat
to international peace and security. As of today, small
arms and light weapons are the main cause of the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts, having a
wide range of negative human rights, humanitarian,
development and socioeconomic consequences, as well
as undermining the rule of law, respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
That is why Ukraine is fully committed to continuing
to implement international instruments in the sphere
of small arms and light weapons. The production,
possession and destruction of small arms and light
weapons in my country are licensed and supervised
in accordance with a number of international and
national regulations.
We attach particular importance to ensuring
effective export control procedures. In that regard,
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

Ukraine strictly adheres to decisions of the Security
Council, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and international export control regimes. In
particular, the Security Council resolutions dealing with
sanctions regimes serve as guidelines for the adoption
of relevant legislation and regulations in Ukraine and
are strictly implemented by the national authorities.
A number of national legal acts adopted by Ukraine’s
Parliament, President and Cabinet of Ministers regulate
all forms of activity related to export control, including
that of SALW.
We recognize the important contribution that
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects brings to the
dialogue and concerted actions of States in their
efforts to realize its objectives. Ukraine emphasizes
the need for the equal, full and effective participation
of women in all decision-making and implementation
processes related to the Programme of Action and its
International Tracing Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. Civil society, for
its part, plays an important role in supporting States’
efforts for the full and effective implementation of the
international instruments on SALW.
Countering the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is a top priority for Ukraine, given the
existential security challenges we are currently facing in
the defence of our sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In particular, Ukraine is countering on a daily basis
large-scale illicit trafficking in SALW via the huge
segment of its uncontrolled border with Russia in the
temporarily occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions, as was also confirmed by the Secretary-General.
We receive regular reports on clandestine night-time
convoys entering and exiting Ukraine through the
uncontrolled points away from the border crossings.
More weapons and military equipment, including
SALW and conventional ammunition, are finding their
way into Ukraine through those border points under the
false pretext of the provision humanitarian assistance.
All of those clandestine convoys and cargos have been
entering and exiting the territory of Ukraine in blatant
violation of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Such actions contradict the letter and the spirit of
the Programme of Action and its International Tracing
Instrument and undermine global and regional efforts
in this field. They also erode the internationally

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

established export control and licencing procedures that
secure effective customs and border controls. The only
viable way to end those violations is to restore the full
control of the Government of Ukraine along the entire
stretch of our country’s internationally recognized
borders. Any progress in that regard would substantially
strengthen the security of the entire European region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
appreciates the efforts by Mexico, led by Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico, to organize this very timely and important
open debate.
There is indeed an urgent need to prevent and
combat the diversion and the illicit international transfer
of small arms and light weapons to unauthorized
recipients, as noted by Member States in the outcome
this year of the seventh Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects.
In the Philippines, addressing the diversion of
small arms and light weapons that may eventually end
up in the hands of terrorists and criminals is of critical
importance. We have seen that arms smuggling is part
of the operations of terrorists. Civilians on the island
of Mindanao paid a high price, with dozens killed and
widespread destruction of homes and property, amid the
battle of Marawi, which pitted the Philippine military
against militants allied to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham. The Security Council should enjoin Member
States to act cooperatively to prevent terrorists and
criminals from acquiring weapons. There are various
issues that need to be addressed collectively, but I would
like to highlight the following recommendations.
First, we should improve data analysis. The
Philippines sees value in the Council deepening its
support for long-term, standardized, systematic and
disaggregated data collection and analysis, including
small arms surveys. The aim is to identify trafficking
routes and patterns, diversion points and other methods
of concealing weapons for the purpose of trafficking.
Those will have to be coupled with effective regulatory
impact analysis and assessment in the country that
employs an efficient methodology for determining the

21-350639/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

viability, effectiveness, cost, benefit and implementation
framework of a given policy.
Secondly, we should build capacity. Building the
capacity of Member States — for instance, to report
the number of seized and collected small arms and light
weapons — will be crucial to monitoring progress on
Indicator 16.4.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Security Council can find ways to contribute to
building capacity, and it can encourage Member States
to develop synergies. For instance, in resolution 2370
(2017), the Council encouraged Member States to
share information, establish partnerships, with both
the public and private sectors, and develop national
strategies and capabilities.
Thirdly, we should strengthen engagement with
industry stakeholders. The goal is to improve controls
of small arms and light weapons. The industry
is the first line of defence in the battle against
weapons proliferation.
Lastly, we should address ammunition. Excluding
ammunition would mean that, once weapons are
successfully smuggled, the supply of the corresponding
ammunition is free and limitless. We need to track the
movement of ammunition to ensure that it also does
not fall into the wrong hands. Multilateral and bilateral
transparency measures are crucial to combating the
black market for weapons and ammunition. The Security
Council could encourage debates and initiatives on
securing a full-life cycle approach on small arms, light
weapons and ammunition.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
importance of allowing the increased involvement
of the greater membership of the Council to make
decisions on this subject. The Council should take on
board the perspectives and contributions of the Member
States and regions most affected by the diversion and
trafficking of arms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The proliferation
of small arms is a key driver of conflict across the world,
including in situations on the Security Council’s agenda.
Nearly half of all violent deaths between 2010 and 2015
involved the use of small arms. The proliferation of
small arms has intensified and prolonged the duration
of armed conflicts and frustrated attempts to prevent
and resolve them. The Council has the power to prevent
10/17

22/11/2021

the flow of small arms and other weaponry into conflict
areas, and it must ensure that measures to that effect are
respected by all Member States.
In the case of Libya, the Security Council in 2011
required all Member States to prevent the sale or
supply to Libya of small arms, among other weaponry
and related material. However, the recent report of
the Panel of Experts refers in stark terms to the total
ineffectiveness of the arms embargo, citing violations
that are “extensive, blatant and with complete disregard
for the sanctions measures.” (S/2021/229, summary) We
regret that the Council has been unable to guarantee
the effective implementation of the measures, including
those in connection with small arms, by all members of
the Organization.
In the case of Yemen, resolution 2140 (2014) decided
on a targeted arms embargo for designated individuals
and entities. However, the flow of small arms continues
to fuel the conflict in Yemen and adds to the significant
number of civilian-held firearms that are already
present in the country. The latest report by the Panel of
Experts on Yemen (see S/2021/79) discusses seizures of
small arms in violation of that more focused embargo.
If effectively implemented, arms embargoes could
constitute a significant step in the right direction for
other situations on the Council’s agenda and potentially
strengthen the Council’s relationship with the other
principal organs of the United Nations. In Myanmar,
military forces have used small arms to attack the
civilian population in a systematic manner, which
has greatly exacerbated the situation and created a
massive crisis with regard to the protection of civilians.
In addition, there has been an alarming escalation in
violence in that conflict between certain ethnic groups,
recently in Chin state in particular.
Liechtenstein continues to call on the Council to
act on the situation in Myanmar in order to ensure
de-escalation and a return to a peaceful transition to
a political arrangement in line with the expressed will
of the people. In doing so, the Council can draw on the
action taken earlier this year by the General Assembly,
which called on all Member States to prevent the flow of
arms into the country. Taking such a step would also set
a clear example of the coordination and collaboration
among the principal organs of the United Nations in
preventing the further proliferation of conflict, as
envisioned during the Council’s open debate this past
week (see S/PV.8906).
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

The violence caused by the proliferation of small
arms has a disproportionate impact on women and
girls. Our analyses of, and actions taken to end, the
widespread suffering caused by small arms must
therefore be gender-sensitive, and efforts to achieve
disarmament in the area of small arms must include the
full, meaningful and effective participation of women
and girls in all its aspects. We welcome the relevant
calls in Council resolutions to that end, most recently
resolution 2220 (2015), and hope to see further progress
in the Council’s consideration of the links between
gender and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
I want to thank Mexico for giving the EU the
opportunity to share its views on this important topic.
The diversion, illicit trade and unauthorized use
of small arms and light weapons (SALW) and their
ammunition still constitutes a serious impediment
to peace, growth, development and security in the
world. Illicit small arms are fuelling armed violence
in organized crime, global terrorism and conflicts,
which thwarts sustainable development and crisis
management efforts. They destabilize entire regions,
States and their societies and increase the impact of
terrorist attacks. The EU considers that, in line with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
Sustainable Development Goal Targets 16.1 and 16.4,
sustainable development cannot be realized without
peace and security, and that peace and security will be
at risk without sustainable development.
The EU remains committed to preventing and
curbing the illicit trade in SALW and their ammunition
and is promoting accountability and responsibility
with regard to their legal trade. Three years ago, the
EU adopted its strategy against illicit SALW and
their ammunition, entitled “Securing arms, protecting
citizens”. The strategy takes into account the evolved
security context and the developments in SALW design

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

and technology affecting the capacity of Governments
to address the threat. To that end, the strategy is guided
by the following principles.
The first principle concerns unity: taking a joinedup and coordinated approach across external policies,
between Member States and the EU, and between
internal and external policies. The second principle
concerns promoting cooperation and partnership
at all levels. The third principle concerns taking
responsibility in relation to priority regions, especially
those likely to pose a threat to the EU’s security and
most likely to benefit from EU action. The fourth
principle concerns promoting a global rules-based
cooperative order with multilateralism as its key
principle and the United Nations at its core, based on
respect for international law, including international
human rights and international humanitarian law, with
a view to creating a peaceful and sustainable world.
The fifth principle concerns incorporating gender and
diversity aspects in SALW-control projects and actions.
The majority of assistance projects supported by
the EU can be considered as classic SALW-control
projects, with a focus on voluntary civilian disarmament
campaigns, the collection and destruction of surplus
SALW and ammunition, physical security and stockpile
management for SALW and ammunition and capacitybuilding for marking, record-keeping and tracing.
In order to increase the efficiency and sustainability
of assistance efforts, the EU calls for improved
coordination with relevant regional organizations,
donors and implementing agencies, with full ownership
of the Governments of recipient States and steered by
national action plans and strategies.
In line with its 2018 strategy on SALW, the EU
systematically mainstreams gender considerations in
the design of new projects relating to the fight against
gun violence and SALW control in general. When gender
dimensions are not adequately dealt with in legislative
and policy frameworks, the success and effectiveness of
interventions are limited. The EU provides funding to
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs for
the implementation of a global, multi-year project, which
seeks to translate gender-related global commitments
on small arms control into regional, national and local
practices. The EU also strengthened its dialogue and
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
Organization of American States (OAS) by aligning
our activities with regional strategies and action plans.
In 2018, the EU adopted a Council decision supporting

21-3506311/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

the OAS efforts to counter the illicit proliferation and
trafficking of SALW and ammunition and their impact
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The EU considers that the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects continues to provide an effective
framework for States to consider, commit to and
implement activities. The EU is a convinced supporter
of the International Tracing Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons as one
of the most important achievements of the Programme
of Action and an essential tool in the fight against the
diversion, unauthorized re-export and the illicit trade
in SALW.
The EU and its member States reaffirm their
strong support for the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as
a key international instrument aimed at establishing
the highest possible common international standards
for regulating the international trade in conventional
arms as well as eradicating the illicit trade in
conventional arms and preventing their diversion. The
universalization and full implementation of the ATT
ranks high among the priorities of the EU. In that light,
we call on all Member States, especially the major
arms importers, exporters and transit States, to ratify
or accede to the ATT without further delay. In order
to reinforce international cooperation and effective
implementation of United Nations arms embargoes and
to promote the necessary synergies across the United
Nations system, we need to build on the momentum
generated by the successful outcome of the seventh
Biennial Meeting of States of the Programme of Action
and the seventh Conference of States Parties to the
Arms Trade Treaty.
In conclusion, we are convinced that military
weapons have an indispensable role in the preservation
of security, freedom and peace, provided that they are
used in accordance with international law, international
including human rights law and international
humanitarian law. At the same time, weapons of war
are, by definition, capable of inflicting death and
destruction. That dilemma means that Governments
that control such weapons must ensure that they are
traded in a responsible and accountable way and should
prevent their diversion to terrorists, criminals and other
unauthorized users.
12/17

22/11/2021

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Courtois.
Ms. Courtois: The International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) is grateful for this opportunity
to address the Security Council and welcomes the
attention to the impact of diversion and trafficking of
small arms and light weapons on peace and security.
Contemporary armed conflicts tend to be
protracted, fuelled by a steady inflow of arms and
ammunition and are rarely fought alone, leading to a
diffusion of responsibilities, fragmented command
chains and unchecked flows of weapons. Every day, the
ICRC witnesses the suffering caused by the widespread
availability, poor regulation and misuse of arms and
ammunition. We see high levels of armed violence
and insecurity. Medical and humanitarian assistance
is hindered or halted. Humanitarian impacts are often
gendered, including when weapons are used to commit
or facilitate sexual and gender-based violence.
Too often, children are victims of violence. In South
Sudan, for example, our surgical teams have cared for a
staggering 9,000 patients wounded by weapons over the
past decade, and a quarter of those treated for gunshot
wounds have been women or children. More than
40,000 wounded Afghans have been treated at ICRCsupported medical facilities over the past month. It is
heartbreaking to see our wards filled with people who
have lost limbs, particularly children.
Despite the advances made in regulating the
international arms trade, including the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty in 2013, weapons and ammunition
continue to be supplied in large numbers to parties to
armed conflicts — States and non-State armed groups
alike — and diverted to unauthorized end users and end
uses. There is a gap between the obligations assumed
by States under international law and the arms-transfer
practices of too many States.
The problem of small arms and light weapons must
be addressed in a manner that mitigates the risks from
small-arms violence and assists victims. Towards that
aim, the ICRC encourages States to, first, adhere to
the abundant number of existing instruments related
to small arms and light weapons as well as other
conventional arms and to faithfully implement them,
including the Arms Trade Treaty. Secondly, States that
support warring parties must leverage their influence
and mitigate adverse humanitarian consequences.
They must take steps to better manage arms stockpiles,
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

ensure recipients have training and the means to
adhere to international humanitarian law and human
right obligations, and safeguard arms transfers so that
no arms are transferred if there is a clear risk that
international humanitarian law or human rights law
would be violated.
Failing to manage the supply chain, without regard
to how weapons will be used, is putting a dirt-cheap
price on the lives of civilians. We urge States to take
an honest look at how actions and inactions perpetuate
violations, insecurity and suffering. The well-being of
millions of people depends on that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Today’s discussion
concerns an issue that is crucial for international peace
and security on several counts — ranging from terrorism
to transnational organized crime, armed conflicts,
gender-based violence and sustainable development.
At the outset, I thank the briefers for sharing their
valuable insights.
Turkey remains highly concerned with the threat
posed by the proliferation of illicit conventional
weapons, particularly small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition. Such diversion of weapons to
unauthorized recipients, especially to terrorist groups,
poses an exceptionally grave threat, as experienced
first-hand in our region. We know all too well that
it is innocent people and our societies that pay the
price when terrorist groups obtain the means to
threaten national security and disrupt socioeconomic
development. Therefore, we must take all the necessary
measures at the national, regional and global levels in
order to prevent and eradicate the accumulation and
illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Turkey is firmly committed to the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Tracing Instrument to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. On
the historic occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the Programme of Action, we need to ensure this
instrument’s continued relevance — and that begins
with renewing and strengthening our commitments.
Indeed, there is an urgent need to effectively address
challenges resulting from recent developments in the

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

marketing, manufacture, technology and design of
these weapons. To that end, we welcome the successful
conclusion of the seventh Biennial Meeting of States
to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action and its substantive outcome document. We look
forward to building on that as we work towards the
eighth meeting, which takes place next year.
Furthermore, we are encouraged by the consensus
agreement on a report (see A/76/324) by the Group of
Governmental Experts on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects regarding problems
arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus. We also believe
that the Security Council can build on its existing
body of work in this field. The recommendations in
the latest report of the Secretary-General on small
arms and light weapons (S/2021/839) provides a good
basis for discussions, most notably the terrorism-armscrime nexus.
Moving forward, we see a need to increase capacitybuilding assistance to better implement the Programme
of Action, as well as effective border and export controls,
risk assessments, sharing best practices, transparency
and reporting. The Security Council also has a key
role to play in post-conflict settings, as small arms
issues can be integrated into peace operation mandates,
country-specific resolutions and sanctions regimes. It
is clear that we need to harness this momentum if we
are to protect the people we serve. Turkey stands ready
to contribute to this collective effort.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Last week we gathered in
this very Chamber (see S/PV.8906) to highlight the
importance of preventive diplomacy. All speakers
agreed that prevention must be placed at the heart of
our collective efforts to build and sustain peace. That is
very important and promising. This debate, for which
we thank the Mexican presidency, reminds us that, in
order to properly invest in conflict prevention, we must
invest in the effective management of small arms and
light weapons, including their ammunition. Needless to
say, there is lot more we can and must do in that regard.
Small arms and light weapons cause the most
casualties worldwide, in conflict and non-conflict
areas. They are easy to use, hold and hide. They are
often the weapon of choice in conflict situations. Illicit
small arms are fuelling armed violence and organized

21-3506313/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

crime, global terrorism and conflicts. In his latest
report on small arms and light weapons (S/2021/839),
the Secretary-General encourages the Security Council
to consider the relevance of weapons dynamics in its
thematic discussions, including on children and armed
conflict, peacekeeping, mine action, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and women and
peace and security.
Let me now highlight a number of key aspects from
our national and regional perspective.
First, we are happy to join our voice in calling
for the universalization of the Arms Trade Treaty,
a crucial instrument with real potential to mitigate
risks. We remain committed to the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Tracing Instrument as the main framework for measures
within the activities of the international community
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. We
are encouraged by the outcome of the seventh Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, held in July, and congratulate
Kenya in leading the process. Aware of the magnitude
of human casualties and suffering, especially among
children, caused by the illicit proliferation and use of
small arms and light weapons — and not only in conflict
areas — the Government of Albania has approved its
national strategy and action plan on small arms and light
weapons and has established a national commission.
Secondly, allow me to highlight the importance
of regional and subregional organizations in tackling
the trafficking and the diversion of small arms and
light weapons. Concerted efforts at the national,
regional and international levels are needed to prevent,
combat and eradicate their illicit manufacture,
transfer and circulation. South-East Europe is lucky
to benefit from European Union assistance regarding
conventional arms transfer at the national and regional
levels. Considerable work is carried out through close
cooperation, coordination and joint actions of all
countries in the region and relevant local agencies. In
the context of the Western Balkans road map, Albania
has set a national target to substantially reduce by 2024
the estimated number of firearms in illicit possession
and to improve its legislation regarding the legalization,
voluntary surrender and destruction of seized small
arms, light weapons and ammunition — always
adhering to environmental standards.
14/17

22/11/2021

Thirdly, I want to recall the importance of arms
embargoes and their implementation by all Member
States, as a peaceful measure authorized by the Charter.
The illicit trade, misuse and diversion of small arms and
light weapons constitute a threat to international peace
and security, and it is the responsibility of the Council
to address that threat and reinforce its efforts. We all
know that illicit flows of small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition undermine the effectiveness of
peace operations. We support initiatives mandating
peacekeeping operations, when relevant, to ensure the
tracing of weapons and ammunition and the collection
of relevant data.
Last, but not least, there is something we must
never forget: although entire communities suffer the
consequences of armed conflict, the most vulnerable,
women and children, are those particularly affected.
Violence against women and children is exacerbated
and facilitated by the presence of guns and other arms.
The consequences of their proliferation include murder,
intimidation, rape, torture, sexual abuse, sexual
harassment, threats and humiliation, forced prostitution
and the trafficking of women and girls. Sexual violence
at gunpoint is a threat for every woman, but it is
especially common in conflict situations, as it is used
as a war strategy. During the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia, for example, more than 20,000 women
were raped as a deliberate policy of warfare.
Let me conclude with the words of the late Secretary
General Kofi Annan:
“The death toll from small arms dwarfs that of all
other weapons systems ... In terms of the carnage
they cause, small arms, indeed, could well be
described as ‘weapons of mass destruction”.
Let us not forget them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Ferreira Silva Aranda (Portugal): Allow
me, first of all, to commend Mexico for maintaining
high on the agenda the impact of the diversion and
trafficking of arms for peace and security. This issue is
as important as it is difficult, as shown by the guiding
questions (S/2021/892) and the latest report by the
Secretary-General (S/2021/839) on this issue. In that
context, let me also commend the work undertaken by
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
with a view to addressing those questions. In addition
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

to the European Union (EU) statement, I would like to
offer three very brief remarks in my national capacity.
First, let me highlight the problem of
non-regulation. Although many countries are affected
by non-regulation, they often deal with different root
causes that trigger the illegal diversion of weapons.
Attention should therefore be given to cases where
arms are illegally owned as a result of historic legacies,
such as recent armed conflicts or a change in national
legislation.
The second issue l would like to address is theft.
Although the impact is larger if theft occurs from
Government stockpiles, commercial actors, production
facilities and destruction sites, private individuals are
also often the victim of targeted thefts of legally held
arms. Regular exchanges of good practices on this topic
as well could be useful.
Finally, I would like to recall the importance of
data collection. We need the standardization of data in
all aspects, supported by well-functioning databases
that are accessible by competent authorized users.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance
of cooperation among States and organizations.
Instruments such as the Arms Trade Treaty and the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects play an essential role. Portugal will
continue to work towards the implementation and
universalization of those important instruments.
Cooperation is also needed, not just among but also
within States and organizations. That means working
across both external borders and internal silos. We
therefore commend regional processes such as the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative and the
Caribbean Community’s Firearms Roadmap. While
focusing on the impact of the diversion and trafficking
of arms on peace and security, we should not lose sight of
the importance of the respective impact on sustainable
development and human rights, in particular those of
women, children and youth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I speak on
behalf of the Group of Arab States.
We would like to sincerely congratulate Mexico on
its presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We would like to thank Mr. Marcelo Ebrard
Casaubón, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico,

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

for presiding over this meeting. And we would like
to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for all her efforts to support
the United Nations system in addressing the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons.
The crisis in the Middle East has threatened peace
and security in the region over the past decade. The
region has also experienced the illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons, which has been used by
illegal armed groups and terrorist groups to undermine
peace and security, leading to the exacerbation of
conflicts. We have also seen the exacerbation of
conflict in other regions of the world due to the spread
of small arms and light weapons. We must therefore
work together to address illicit trafficking and to curb
the phenomenon.
The Arab Group supports the active role played
by the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. We reiterate the importance
of supporting that role by maintaining Member State
consensus on the Programme of Action and its goals.
We are also of the view that it is important to avoid
controversial issues in the context of the Programme of
Action, which is a political declaration and not a binding
agreement on Member States. We wish to underscore
that this year coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Programme of Action. In that
context, the Arab Group would like to reiterate its
support for the Programme of Action as well as for the
International Tracing Instrument, with a view to curbing
the negative impact of the spread of small arms and light
weapons when it comes to the various conflicts raging
around the world and to assisting people in achieving
their sustainable development aspirations.
We welcome the completion of the work of the
seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was
held in July, as well as the outcome document and its
conclusions. Moreover, we eagerly await the eighth
meeting, which will be held in 2022, so that we can
build on the outcomes of the previous meeting.
The Arab Group welcomes all recommendations on
supporting efforts to maintain peace by combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
negative effects on conflicts throughout the world. We
also welcome the completion of the work of the Group
of Governmental Experts on the illicit trade in small

21-3506315/17

S/PV.8909 (Resumption 1)

Small arms

arms and light weapons in all its aspects and the Group’s
report. The Group recommended the establishment of
an ad hoc working group, and that recommendation was
adopted by the First Committee. We are convinced of
the importance of strengthening cooperation to transfer
expertise to developing countries and to provide them
with the necessary equipment to allow them to build
their capacity when it comes to marking, tracing and
border oversight. We would also like to highlight
support to the Programme of Action to assist all efforts
made to combat the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the Mexican presidency for taking the
initiative to organize this open debate in the Security
Council. We are also grateful that the Secretary of
Foreign Affairs of Mexico was present to preside over
this meeting.
The illicit trade in firearms, especially small arms
and light weapons, moves billions of dollars a year
around the world. The global concern to combat this
crime is due to the use of these weapons in armed
conflicts as well as their use by criminal groups, which
creates a serious threat to public safety. Chile has
spoken out in favour of disarmament and the protection
of citizens, for which reason we are part of the main
treaties against the illicit trafficking of firearms, their
components and ammunition.
Small arms and light weapons trafficking impacts
society in various ways. It constitutes one of the main
problems in the context of human security and is the
focus of efforts to maintain order and enforce the
law. Firearms are decidedly responsible for violence,
especially homicides. The trafficking of small arms
and light weapons also plays a fundamental role
in organized crime and amplifies the incidence of
armed and terrorist conflicts. We must understand
the link between the excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons, criminal violence and illegal
drug trafficking.
For that reason, we are confident that multilateral
efforts are key to combating this scourge. Accordingly,
we wish to highlight the results achieved at the
seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
16/17

22/11/2021

and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We call on all
members to agree on common positions among States
in pursuit of cooperation and assistance for capacitybuilding in the areas identified in the Programme of
Action, bearing in mind that the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference must always be respected. We
emphasize that this illicit trade is one of the major
impediments to peace and security, as well as to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
especially Goal 16 and specifically indicator 16.4.2.
In conclusion, I would like to indicate the special
importance that Chile attaches to the following four
themes: first, the promotion of complementarities
between the Programme of Action and other international
instruments, including the Arms Trade Treaty; secondly,
the promotion of the meaningful participation and
representation of women in policymaking, planning
and implementation of the Programme of Action and
its connection with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000); thirdly, highlighting the relevant role of
civil society and the private sector in our common
effort to fully implement the Programme of Action; and
fourthly, continuing the debate on new technologies for
the manufacture, design, stockpiling and trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the delegation of Mexico
for convening today’s important open debate, and His
Excellency Mr. Marcelo Ebrard Casaubón, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico, for his briefing.
At a time of deepening regional tensions, the
expansion of terrorist and criminal networks and the
intensification of inter-State conflicts that wreak havoc
on our peoples, it is important that Council members are
meeting to discuss one of the key issues in this crisis:
the problem of the diversion and illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
While the Council has dealt with small arms as
part of its thematic and country-specific agendas, its
decision to address this issue as a single agenda item
for the first time in 1999 has allowed for an inclusive
and comprehensive approach to small arms. This
inclusive approach is vital, given the relevance of small
arms to a variety of contexts, from arms embargoes,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, child
soldiers, and counter-terrorism, to the protection
21-35063

22/11/2021

Small arms

of civilians in armed conflict and transnational
organized crime.
The multidimensional and cross-cutting nature of
small arms is indisputable. Argentina attaches great
importance to this problem, the consequences of which,
as we have noted, are devastating for our societies and
directly threaten their sustainable development. In that
regard, the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, together with the
International Tracing Instrument, the Firearms Protocol
and the Arms Trade Treaty, form a legal framework for
control, with many complementarities and points in
common that should be examined in depth for better
implementation at the national, subregional, regional
and global levels.
Argentina chaired the sixth Conference of States
Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, proposing as an
issue the transparency and exchange of information
and its role in the prevention of diversion. To this
end, Argentina drafted a working paper that was later
adopted by consensus, whose main recommendations
regarding this debate were the following: first, use
all available information exchange tools; secondly,
designate, communicate and update national points
of contact; thirdly, consult and exchange information
to verify the authenticity of import, export and transit
or trans-shipment documents in cases of international
transactions, corroborate the legality of end-users
and end-uses as well as entities and actors involved
in international transit and trans-shipment, and carry
out post-shipment operations in relation to exports and
imports to exchange information on authorizations
issued; and fourthly, exchange information at bilateral,
subregional and regional levels.
A forum for the exchange of information on
diversion has also been established under the Arms
Trade Treaty and is expected to hold its first face-toface meeting in 2022. Further, at the regional level, the
meetings within the framework of the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
Other Related Materials are noteworthy. In this forum,
work is currently under way to establish a regional
cross-border communication mechanism on illicit
transfers of firearms, ammunition, explosives and
other related materials, a process in which Argentina
is actively participating. This mechanism, once ready,
will make it possible to improve the information
available for considering cases of diversion.

S/PV. 8909 (Resumption 1)

My country also participates actively in the
meetings of the Southern Common Market States parties
and associated States working group on firearms and
ammunition, which it chaired at its most recent meeting.
This forum makes it possible to strengthen the exchange
of information, including the possibility of addressing
cases of diversion. It should be noted that the importance
that Argentina attaches to strengthening these
mechanisms is part of a broader commitment that the
country has made to the development, implementation
and strengthening of confidence-building measures. It
is important to note that in examining the problem of
the diversion and illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons, consideration should also be given to the
issue of ammunition.
The human, economic and social costs of the use
of illicit small arms and light weapons are immense.
Preventing, combating and eradicating this destructive
trade is urgent and essential if we are to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development as the agenda for
sustaining peace. We will continue to do everything in
our power to achieve this objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Devoto to make a closing statement.
Ms. Devoto (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having each of the countries that
took the floor address the issue of highlighting the
Arms Trade Treaty and the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We know that Mexico and all countries,
especially in those regions affected by small arms and
light weapons, will make strenuous efforts to combat,
prevent and eradicate the illicit trafficking and diversion
of weapons. I thank them and wish them every success
in this task.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Devoto for her closing remarks and for her
participation throughout the day.
As there are no more speakers on the list, I would
like to once again thank all the speakers who have joined
us today. I would like to thank the Member States and
the regional groups that have so far submitted written
statements on the subject of the debate. Statements
received by the end of the day will be included in the
compilation of statements for this meeting, and we look
forward to receiving further contributions.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

21-3506317/17
