VI.

215

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committel'

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -----------------------tance of research and training for the advancement of
put an end to the system of repressing the activities of
women;
trade union leaders and their organizations;
12. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to respect
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to proand, where necessary, restore economic, social and cultural
vide support to the Institute, particularly in it~ fund-raisrights and, in particular, the rights intended to preserve the
ing activities, by encouraging voluntary contributions to
cultural identity and improve the social situation of indigthe Institute;
enous populations, recognizing especially their right to
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
their land;
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
13. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the Special
activities of the Institute;
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under considera8. Decides to include m the provisional agenda of its
tion the situation of human rights in Chile;
fortieth session a separate item entitled "International
14. Again requests the Chilean authorities to co-operResearch and Training Institute for the Advancement of
ate with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their comWomen".
ments on his report to the Commission on Human Rights
JO I st plenary meeting
at its forty-first session;
15. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth at its forty-first session the report of the Special
Rapporteur and to take the most appropriate steps for the
effective restoration of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile, including the extension of the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur for one more year, and requests
the Commission to report, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/122. International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women 136
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37 /56 of 3 December I 982 and
38/104 of 16 December 1983 on the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,

Taking note of the note by the Secretary-GeneraJl 37 on
recent developments regarding the activities and statute of
the Institute,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision 1984/
124 of 24 May 1984 on the statute of the Institute,
Bearing in mind that the entire operation of the Institute
depends solely on voluntary contributions,
l. Welcomes the statute of the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement ofWomen 138
as approved by the Economic and Social Council in its
decision 1984/ l 24;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the programme of
activities of the Institute, 139 which constitutes a valuable
contribution to an increased role of women in the development process at all levels and is carried out in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system;
3. Stresses the relevance of programmes related to
women and international economic relations;
4. Requests the Institute, in preparing its future activities, to take into consideration the trends in research and
training relevant to women and development;
5. Invites Governments and intergovernmental organizations to contribute to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, in view of the increasing impor136 See also sect. VIII, resolution 39/249.
137 A/C.3/39/6.
138 A/39/511, annex.
139 See A/C.3/39/6, sect. II.
14 0 Report of the World Conference of 1he ln1ernational Women ·s Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July /975 (Umted Nations pubhcation, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. I.

I 4 December I 984

39/123. The role of women in society
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, as well
as the importance of the Declaration of Mexico on the
Equality of Women and their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975, 140 the World Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year 141 and the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 142
Noting that just and lasting peace and social progress as
well as the establishment of a new international economic
order, require the active participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation and in the
process of development,
Bearing in mind that economic inequality, colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, acts of aggression
and interference in the internal affairs of others and violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms constitute an impediment to the achievement of real and genuine equality and to the integration of women in society,
Convinced of the necessity to secure for all women full
realization of the rights embodied in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 143 in the International Covenants on Human
Rights 144 and in other relevant instruments in this field,
Recognizing that the achievement of equal and full participation of women in all spheres of activity constitutes an
inseparable part of the political, economic, social and cultural development of all countries,
Aware that efforts to promote the status of women in all
its aspects and their complete integration in society go
beyond the problem oflegal equality and that deeper structural transformations of society and changes in presentday economic relations, as well as elimination of traditional prejudices through education and dissemination of
information, are required so as to create conditions for
women to develop fully their intellectual and physical
capacities and to participate actively in the decisionmaking process in political, economic, social and cultural
development,
Mindful of the necessity to enlarge the possibilities for
both men and women to combine parental duties and
141 /hid .. chap. II, sect. A.
142 Report of the World Confi-rence of the

l'mted Na1ions Decade Jiir
Women: Equality. Development und Peace. Copenhai:en. 14-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.JV.3 and rnnigendum). chap. I.
sect. A
14.l Resolullon 34/180, annex.
144 Resolut,on 2200 A (XXI). annex
