A /70/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

84th plenary meeting

Friday, 12 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/70/722/Add.1,
A/70/722/Add.2, A/70/722/Add.3, A/70/722/Add.4,
A/70/722/Add.5 and A/70/722/Add.6)
The President: Before proceeding to the other items
on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with established
practice, to draw the attention of the General Assembly
to documents A/70/722/Add.1, A/70/722/Add.2,
A/70/722/Add.3, A/70/722/Add.4, A/70/722/Add.5
and A/70/722/Add.6, in which the Secretary-General
informs the President of the Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communication contained in document
A/70/722, Bahrain, Burundi, the Dominican Republic,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mali, the Marshall
Islands, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Vanuatu
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have made
the necessary payments to reduce their arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/70/L.31/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 9, jointly

with agenda item 15, at its 36th plenary meeting, on
19 October 2015. Members will also recall that, under
agenda item 9, the Assembly adopted resolution 70/78,
at its 70th plenary, on 9 December 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.31/Rev.1.
Ms. Niyomthai (Thailand): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and of the Republic of Angola, I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.31/Rev.1,
entitled “Graduation of Angola from the least developed
country category”.
We would like to stress the need for a smooth
transition strategy for countries graduating from
the list of least developed countries. It is therefore
important to acknowledge the realities on the ground
and the structural weaknesses that Angola faces. We
ask its development partners to be forthcoming in
recognizing those vulnerabilities and to continue to
provide assistance for the country’s smooth transition
and long-term development.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would
like to thank all partners involved in the negotiations
on the draft resolution’s text, and we hope the General
Assembly will adopt it by consensus.
The President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/70/L.31/Rev.1?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/253).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-03666 (E)

*1603666*

A/70/PV.84

The President: I now call on the representative of
Angola, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this plenary
meeting to consider agenda item 9, “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, and to take action on
resolution 70/253, regarding Angola’s graduation from
the leastdeveloped country category. It is indeed a
great honour for me to address the General Assembly
today and to reaffirm my country’s commitment to the
graduation process.
I also wish to express our gratitude for the positive
and constructive comments, support and encouragement
from Member States during the informal consultations,
which enabled us to reach an agreement on the text.
I would especially like to thank Mr. Alain Wilfried
Biya, Second Secretary of the Permanent Mission of
Cameroon, who facilitated the discussion of the text.
In the past decade, Angola and the Angolan
economy have witnessed strong growth. The country
was commended by the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank for both its macroeconomic
stability and its economic growth, which resulted in
recommendations from the United Nations proposing
Angola’s graduation from the group of least developed
countries. Nevertheless, we recognize that Angola, a
commodity-dependent developing country, is currently
experiencing a slightly difficult economic period due to
the drop in international oil prices, which has affected
the entire world economy. Recent external shocks,
including the global economic crisis and the decrease
in commodity prices, have triggered an economic
slowdown and highlighted the fact that diversification is
crucial to the sustained growth of the Angolan economy.

12/02/2016

transformation in the markets. In addition, the Angola
Invests programme is intended to support small
companies focused on agriculture, industry, retail,
fishing and other sectors with a view to diversifying the
economy and increasing business activities. Moreover,
the Medium-term Agriculture Sector Development Plan
seeks to achieve growth and improve the production of
cereals, fruits, vegetables, roots and tubers to make the
country self-sufficient in food.
Given the significant drop of oil prices, the
authorities have adjusted the State budget to take into
account more conservative assumptions. The Council
of Ministers has approved a national strategy to face the
current difficulties by replacing oil as the main source
of revenues, controlling the expansion of the deficit and
promoting debt sustainability, improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of private investments, increasing
domestic production and promotomg the export of
goods and services in the short and medium terms.
As the text of the resolution on graduation reaffirms,
graduating from the category of least developed country
should not result in a disruption to development plans,
programmes and projects. It is therefore our opinion that
the Government of Angola still needs to build a resilient
and sustainable economy as a pathway towards a real
graduation from the list of least developed countries.
The Istanbul Programme of Action envisions a smooth
transition period for graduating countries. Angola sees
such a transition as a precondition for any eventual
graduation, so as to ensure that negative impacts are
addressed through policy interventions aimed at each
respective vulnerability and at capacity development.

As of now — and we have started right at the
beginning of the year — in terms of diversification
purposes, Angola has adopted and is still implementing
various programmes aimed at helping it to adjust to the
changes in its national economy and in the world.

Angola would like to note that in the course of
negotiating the resolution, we were able to witness the
full commitment of the Member States in the Assembly
to that fundamental principle. As we are now facing
challenging times and are engaged in improving our
economic diversification and reducing our social
vulnerabilities, it is encouraging to see that the
international community stands by Angola.

The National Development Strategy, which is the
main vehicle for economic diversification until 2025,
is being implemented. The aim is to guide and improve
the pace and quality of development in the following
ways: improving the quality of life of Angolans,
preserving macroeconomic stability, promoting an
active employment policy and enhancing national
human resources, and increasing productivity and

My delegation understands that our request to
be afforded, on an exceptional basis, an additional
preparatory period of two years before the start of the
three-year period leading to graduation is well received
and appropriate. The additional preparatory period
will enable Angola to craft and implement policies and
strategies focused on, among other things, strengthening
structural reforms to safeguard macroeconomic stability

2/29

16-03666

12/02/2016

and debt sustainability; continuing investments in the
non-oil sector; strengthening the business environment
to generate diversification and job creation, mainly in
agriculture, electricity, manufacturing and services;
improving the quality and skills of human resources;
and, finally, strengthening our educational sector.
Angola is overcoming the consequences of
several decades of sociopolitical crises and is willing
to graduate from the least-developed-country status.
We look forward to working with the United Nations
system and other partners in putting in place balanced
and development-oriented strategies and policies, as
well as the necessary assistance to help address the
development challenges that we face.
The resolution just adopted demonstrates the
support and goodwill of the international community
to see developing countries such as Angola achieve
sustainable development. On behalf of the Government
of Angola, I would once again like to take this
opportunity to sincerely express our gratitude for all
the invaluable support of the international community.
Angola wishes to express special thanks to the members
of the Group of 77 and China, as well as the members
of the least developed countries. I am also very grateful
to our development partners, especially the European
Union, the United States of America and Australia, for
their invaluable support. We look forward to members’
support in that endeavour.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/70/689)
The President: As indicated in the note contained
in document A/70/689, as a result of the expiration of
the term of office, on 31 December 2016, of Mr. Jorge
Flores Callejas of Honduras, the General Assembly is
required, during its current session, to appoint a person
to serve as a member of the Joint Inspection Unit for
a full term of office beginning on 1 January 2017 and
ending on 31 December 2021.

A/70/PV.84

In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and having consulted the regional
group concerned, I have requested Honduras to propose
a candidate to fill the vacancy.
I would like to remind members that, in
accordance with resolution 59/267, of 23 December
2004, the candidate should have experience in at
least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
As also indicated in document A/70/689, as a result
of the consultations held in accordance with paragraph
2, article 3, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, including consultations with the President of
the Economic and Social Council and the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, I
submit to the Assembly the candidature of Mr. Jorge
Flores Callejas of Honduras for re-appointment as a
member of the Joint Inspection Unit for an additional
five-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2017
and expiring on 31 December 2021.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to re-appoint the candidate?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (f)
of agenda item 114.
Agenda items 16 and 117 (continued)
Culture of peace
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/674)
Draft resolution A/70/L.41
The President: I should like to inform members
that the letter dated 22 December 2015 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly introducing the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism has been circulated in document
A/70/675.

16-036663/29

A/70/PV.84

Members will recall that the Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 16, and adopted resolutions 70/19
and 70/20, at its 66th plenary meeting, on 3 December
2015, and adopted resolution 70/109, at its 72nd plenary
meeting, on 10 December 2015.
Members will also recall that the SecretaryGeneral briefed members informally on 15 January
about the Plan. Today, we will take action on the
short, procedural draft resolution A/70/L.41, which
welcomes the Secretary-General’s initiative. In doing
so, we will deliver a clear signal that the General
Assembly is gravely concerned by the issue of violent
extremism. I thank all members for their cooperation
and constructive engagement in the preparation of the
draft resolution.
Today, sadly, violent extremism is on the rise
across the world. All too often, a number of members’
Governments and peoples have been confronted by
waves of terrorist attacks, violence and intimidation. The
pain, fear and destruction caused by those acts present
real and difficult challenges for all Member States.
As a phenomenon, violent extremism is not new.
In our age, the risk is that radicalized individuals may
gain access to, and then proceed to use, tools that can
inflict mass killing and significant destruction. Some
extremists are already skillfully exploiting the Internet
to spread their message of hate and violence as never
before — messages that are contrary to the commitment
to peace that brings us together in this Hall.
Confronting and preventing violent extremism is
fundamental to protecting our societies and our people.
But to be truly effective, our approach to prevention
must remain faithful to our common values and our
common humanity. And it must secure peace and
security in a manner that respects human rights and the
rule of law and advances sustainable development.
I commend the Secretary-General for his timely
initiative and for preparing his Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). Collectively, we
must tackle this issue with the urgency it so obviously
requires. Today’s debate is an opportunity to advance
the global debate on that complex issue and to discuss
how better to use the tools and resources we have to
tackle the drivers of this phenomenon. I look forward to
hearing the contributions of Member States.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.41.
4/29

12/02/2016

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.41?
Draft resolution A/70/L.41 was adopted (resolution 70/254).
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on such an important issue. It offers a new opportunity
for the European Union and its member States to
reiterate their support for the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
We are still analysing the concrete recommendations
from the perspective of coherence and coordination,
including the funding aspects, with ongoing initiatives
conducted by United Nations and non-United Nations
entities. But certainly, the Plan of Action constitutes a
clear and balanced tool to help States in their efforts to
prevent violent extremism.
We welcome the connections the Plan of Action
makes between preventing conflicts and preventing
violent extremism. A conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding approach applied at all levels can indeed
make a significant contribution to preventing violent
extremism. This approach includes, first, promoting
good governance, including through security sector
reform; secondly, tackling political, social and
economic exclusion; and thirdly, last but not least,
promoting human rights and opportunities for all. We
also welcome the links made by the Plan of Action
to the Sustainable Development Goals, including the
gender perspective.
Most of the Plan’s content reflects what the
European Union has been working on now for more than
a decade. Internally, since 2004, we have had in place
our own prevention strategy — reviewed in 2014 — and
a general European Union counter-terrorism strategy
since 2005, which includes prevention as one of its
pillars. Moreover, the strategy and regional action
16-03666

12/02/2016

plans on foreign terrorist fighters from the European
Union, such as those for Syria, Iraq and the Sahel,
include preventing radicalization as a key priority. The
conclusions adopted recently by the Council of the
European Union state the need to establish counterterrorism action plans that include countering violent
extremism, with priority to countries in the Middle
East and North Africa region.
The EU is also actively participating in several
initiatives, such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
the Hedayah Centre in Abu Dhabi and the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund, which
are mobilizing expertise aimed at preventing violent
extremism. As can be seen, EU internal and external
efforts on prevention are in line with the United Nations
Plan of Action.
We welcome today’s resolution 70/254, by which
the international community is sending a united
message of engagement in the prevention of violent
extremism. The matter will remain high on our agenda,
and we look forward to engaging in further discussions
in the context of the upcoming Geneva conference in
April and the tenth anniversary review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in June.
Ms. Vilde (Latvia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Estonia, Lithuania and my own country,
Latvia. We align ourselves with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union. We
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely debate.
The magnitude of the threat emanating from
the spread of violent extremism requires united and
coordinated collective action. There is a growing
need for credible political solutions and a more
comprehensive approach to meeting the increasing
challenges posed by violent extremism. In that regard,
we welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General
and the efforts taken in the preparation of the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We
also welcome the adoption of the procedural resolution
70/254, which is a consistent next step for further
substantive and inclusive dialogue on the matter.
Although more time is needed for thorough analysis of
the recommendations contained in the Plan of Action,
we would like to emphasize a few areas of action that
deserve special attention.
First, we commend the fact that Plan of Action
addresses the root causes of violent extremism and

A/70/PV.84

emphasizes systematic preventive efforts, including
conflict prevention. We appreciate the links with the
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, particularly
those related to promoting peaceful and inclusive
societies, gender equality and women’s empowerment
and accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
Secondly, the cross-border nature of violent
extremism requires action at global, regional and
national levels. Although the primary responsibility for
preventing violent extremism lies with Member States,
national efforts must go hand in hand with enhanced
regional cooperation. Also, regional instruments need
to be strengthened. In that regard, a good example is the
Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention
on the Prevention of Terrorism, which was opened for
signature in Riga last October and has already been
signed by almost half of the Council’s member States.
The Riga Protocol is the first regional legal instrument
to implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters,
and its special focus is on the prevention of terrorist
training and travel abroad for the purpose of terrorism.
Finally, in the age of the Internet and social
media it is impossible to fight violent extremism
without efficient communications strategies based on
international human rights standards. Preventing and
combating terrorism and violent extremism should
not become a pretext for repressive action against free
speech, whether online or offline. We have to make sure
that our actions aimed at preventing violent extremism
are fully in line with existing human rights obligations.
Promoting the freedom of expression, pluralism, and
protecting journalists should be important components
of those efforts.
We once again thank you, Mr. President, for
facilitating this pertinent discussion, and we look
forward to further deliberations.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): In Saudi Arabia’s
capacity as the coordinator on counter-terrorism within
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and
on behalf of the countries of the OIC, I wish to thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s debate, which affords
an opportunity to the member and observer States of
the United Nations to express their views on violent
extremism and the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism.
The OIC believes that violent extremism and
terrorism undermine our shared objectives of a

16-036665/29

A/70/PV.84

peaceful and prosperous world, and that no country in
the world is immune to the effects of violent extremism
and terrorism. The OIC therefore supports efforts at the
national, regional and international levels to prevent
violent extremism and terrorism. In that regard, the
OIC welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to
develop a Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
and takes note of the Plan of Action (A/70/674).
The OIC reaffirms its unequivocal rejection of all
attempts to associate any country, race, religion, culture
or nationality with violent extremism and terrorism.
While the OIC emphasizes that there is no agreed
definition of violent extremism, it fully subscribes
to the need to prevent that phenomenon. The OIC
believes that a comprehensive preventive approach to
violent extremism should address its local and external
drivers in a balanced manner. Cooperative efforts
at the international level must be conducted in full
respect of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The OIC has a principled position
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomsoever and wherever. The OIC
recognizes that terrorism cannot be tackled by security
or military means alone and underlines the need to
attach due attention to, and devising concrete plans for,
addressing the various dimensions and root causes of
terrorism.
We also consider it important to address the root
causes of the global phenomenon of terrorism, violence
and extremism and the means to address them at the
political, economic, social and intellectual levels. In
that vein, the OIC recalls the provisions of resolutions
68/127 and 70/109, on a world against violence and
violent extremism.
On a comprehensive approach to tackle terrorism,
the OIC believes that due attention and concrete
plans of action must address the following aspects
and dimensions of the phenomenon of terrorism:
the political and socioeconomic contexts that bring
forth conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism, such as continued economic
deprivation, exclusion, alienation, separation and
marginalization of people, and the forced dismantling of
political, legal, security and sociocultural institutions;
the deep impact and legacy of historical injustices done
to colonized peoples or those under occupation, their
suffering and the forced destruction of their national
institutions, culture and identity and the denial of their
rights to self-determination; the potential of external
6/29

12/02/2016

actors penetrating terrorist and extremist groups for the
purpose of serving their own political agenda and the
threat of non-Arab and non-Muslim fighters; and the
need to counter all types of radical extremist discourse,
including through the media and new communications
technologies, particularly the Internet, in order
to delegitimize the violent and manipulative acts
committed in the name of religion, ideology or claims
of cultural superiority.
The OIC stresses the importance of integrating
youth and women in the efforts and decision-making
processes regarding violent extremism, while we also
underscore that children and youth represent the future
of society and that failure to protect their rights can
contribute to an environment conducive to crime and
violent extremism. In that regard, the OIC recalls and
welcomes the Security Council open debate on the role
of youth in countering violent extremism and promoting
peace, organized under Jordan’s presidency of the
Security Council in April 2015 (see S/PV.7432), which
brought this important matter to the attention of the
international community and served as a transparent
and vital platform to discuss Member States’ views on
the matter.
The OIC expresses serious concern about the
increase in intolerance and discrimination against
Muslims, resulting in the upsurge of Islamophobia,
a phenomenon that is an affront to the human rights
and dignity of Muslims. The OIC recalls the Human
Rights Council resolution 16/18, entitled “Combating
intolerance, negative stereotyping and stigmatization
of, and discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against, persons based on religion or belief”
as an important tool to counter radicalization,
marginalization and alienation. Furthermore, the OIC
calls for the resolution’s effective implementation by the
international community as a means to deprive terrorist
groups of any justification for violent extremism on
the grounds of ethno-religious stigmatization and
discrimination.
The OIC calls upon all States to prevent any
advocacy of religious discrimination, hostility or
violence and defamation of Islam by incorporating legal
and administrative measures that render defamation
illegal and punishable by law. The OIC also urges
member and observer States to adopt specific and
relevant educational measures at all levels.
16-03666

12/02/2016

The OIC recognizes the importance of interfaith
and intercultural dialogue as an effective mechanism
to combat extremism and incitement to hatred based on
religion. The OIC also recognizes the efforts made by
the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre
for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in that
regard.
The OIC reaffirms the need for the effective and
comprehensive implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288)
and the need for a robust follow-up mechanism to be in
place. The OIC also considers it imperative to respect
the views and positions of Member and Observer States
and to develop consensus by taking them into account
during consideration of the pertinent agenda items of
the General Assembly and other relevant processes.
OIC member States support resolution 70/254,
adopted a short while ago, which welcomes the efforts
of the Secretary-General and takes note of his Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. To that end, the
OIC stands ready to engage positively with all Member
and Observer States in a thorough and constructive
examination of the Secretary-General’s Plan.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): We also would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this formal debate on
such an important issue.
We thank the Secretary-General for his Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
Australia fully supports. Furthermore, we are pleased
that the General Assembly has adopted resolution
70/254, which welcomes the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral. Through the resolution, Member States have
sent a unified message of their commitment to tackle
violent extremism. We have also heard some very
encouraging words from Saudi Arabia in terms of our
broad support.
The Plan recognizes that we cannot afford to wait
until people have already been radicalized and turned
to violence. That is in line with Australia’s approach
to countering violent extremism, which aims to reduce
the risk of violent extremism by intervening early and
tackling the root of the problem. The Plan also provides
a framework to carry forward the work done globally
throughout 2015 through the regional summits on
countering violent extremism, including the one held
in Sydney in June 2015. The Plan’s call for countries
to develop national and regional plans of action to
prevent violent extremism underscores the need for

A/70/PV.84

the international community to deal effectively with
the global terrorist threat. We support the Plan’s
recommendation that national plans to prevent violent
extremism be developed to address national conditions.
Australia is committed to a regional and international
approach to meet the shared challenges of violent
extremism and is active regionally through capacitybuilding programmes on countering violent extremism.
Violent extremism is an increasing threat to world
security and stability that undermines human rights and
sustainable development. On a related point, Australia
strongly supports the modernization of the directives
on peace and security of the Development Assistance
Committee of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development to dispel any ambiguity
over the use of eligible official development assistance
funds in countering violent extremism
Australia also supports the proposal for a
whole-of-United-Nations approach to implement the
Plan and believes that there is significant capacity for
implementation through existing mechanisms, such
as the Global Community Engagement and Resilience
Fund (GCERF). The GCERF has an established
Government/private-partnership framework designed
to deliver grants for community-based projects on
countering violent extremism. The GCERF is uniquely
placed to contribute to the effective implementation
of the Plan, which acknowledges the importance of
engaging communities, empowering youth and women
and promoting education as part of a comprehensive
approach to addressing the drivers of violent extremism.
Australia looks forward to engaging in further
discussions on the Plan at the meeting on countering
violent extremism to be hosted by Switzerland in
Geneva, and in the context of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy Review.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank you,
President Lykketoft, for your leadership and support
for the Secretary-General’s visionary initiative to fight
terrorism through preventing extremism. The General
Assembly’s consensus adoption of resolution 70/254
today sends a strong message that we are united in
confronting terrorism and the poisonous ideologies that
sustain it.
Threats from violent extremism, especially
when leading to terrorism, undermine security and
development around the globe. From Jakarta to San
Bernardino, from Paris to Ouagadougou, terrorists

16-036667/29

A/70/PV.84

seek to expand their reach and resonance. They exploit
ongoing conflicts, join forces with criminal networks,
find safe haven in weak and repressive States and
propagate hate and recruit via social media. Even as we
work to defeat and degrade the most virulent terrorist
group — Da’esh — we know that defeating terrorists
on the battlefield is not enough. This is indeed a new
war of ideas.
The terrorist threats will not be defeated with
bombs or military means alone. Such measures will not
succeed unless we also address the fundamental drivers
of violent extremism. We must find ways to prevent our
people from being radicalized in the first place, which
makes them vulnerable to terrorist recruitment. And we
must do so in ways that do not engender more sympathy
and more support for terrorist causes. If we fail to do
so, we will forever find ourselves in a vicious cycle of
tit-for-tat with terrorists, with countless innocent lives
lost.
That is why it is so very critical to address the
conditions conducive to terrorism and implement
human-rights-based counter-terrorism programs within
the rule of law. Many countries have already begun
this journey, developing concrete national action plans
to counter violent extremists and to better address
the drivers of radicalization. To boost those efforts, a
Leaders Summit was held in New York last September
on countering the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and violent extremism, during which many world
leaders reaffirmed their commitment to preventing and
countering violent extremism. The Secretary-General
now has presented his own vision on how to mobilize
the United Nations in pursuit of those same goals.
The United States strongly welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), and we commend him for his initiative. The
Plan provides actionable recommendations that States
should begin to consider immediately. In addition,
the Plan provides a framework for the United Nations
system, with all of its various agencies, offices,
missions and programmes, to advance these goals
as well. The United States particularly welcomes the
Plan’s core recommendation that each Member State
develop its own comprehensive national action plan to
prevent and counter violent extremism. We also support
the Plan’s call for greater regional and international
planning to prevent and counter violent extremism.
Such cross-border cooperation is critical in today’s
interconnected world.
8/29

12/02/2016

We also underscore the importance of involving
a diverse range of Government and non-Government
stakeholders in developing and implementing such
plans. The Plan of Action’s call for an interdisciplinary,
all-of-society approach is critical. Progress can be
achieved only through an integrated approach that
includes national and local Governments, the private
sector, young people, women, religious and educational
leaders and civil society more broadly. But there is
truly no one-size-fits-all solution to those challenges.
For that reason, we strongly welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that national action plans
be tailored to local conditions. Our Governments
have learned the lesson over many years that local
perspectives and conditions must be taken into account
in any effective approach to the prevention of violent
extremism. We also welcome the emphasis that the
Plan places on strengthening good governance as well
as promoting human rights and the rule of law. They
are essential ingredients in any effort to eliminate the
drivers of violent extremism.
Finally, the United States appreciates the fact that
the Plan of Action provides the basis for the first-ever
approach encompassing the entire United Nations for
implementing key parts of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. To stay ahead of that threat,
the United Nations must improve the coordination
among its many internal offices and agencies. The
United States looks forward to working closely with
partners, both among Member States and United Nations
bodies, to ensure that the Organization is positioned
as well as possible to support implementation of the
Plan’s recommendations. That means making existing
assistance more directly relevant to preventing violent
extremism in specific contexts, as well as designing
new programmes.
Different countries have different perspectives
on this challenge. We may even disagree about the
particular factors that drive radicalization in our
diverse societies. We will have ample time to continue
this dialogue, including at a major United Nations
meeting in Geneva this spring and during the General
Assembly’s review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in the summer. Nevertheless, the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action provides a framework today,
with a set of principles that can help us accomplish
our shared goals of fighting terrorism and confronting
violent ideologies. We encourage the Assembly to unite
behind those goals.
16-03666

12/02/2016

Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would first
like to associate myself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
I would like to emphasize that we believe the Plan
of Action to Prevention Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
presented by the Secretary-General on 15 January to
be of major importance. France therefore welcomes
the fact that the General Assembly has today decided
to show its unanimous support for that initiative by
adopting resolution 70/254, which is brief but goes to
the heart of the issue. The Plan of Action is designed
to unite and better coordinate the efforts that all of
us, both as Member States and in the United Nations,
at the national, regional and international levels, are
making to prevent radicalization — an essential aspect
of the fight against terrorism. It represents the practical
realization of the strategic role that the United Nations
should play today in guiding and coordinating action
in the area.
More specifically, since one of the goals of this
debate is to tackle the substance of the issue, the seven
areas identified by the Secretary-General, particularly
that of engaging young people, are, in our view, very
relevant. The recommendations to Member States are
also particularly welcome and will, we hope, help to
strengthen the effectiveness of the action taken by the
international community.
The prevention of radicalization and violent
extremism is a national priority for France, and we
are very engaged in that area. For us, that threat is
represented not just by the 254 French fighters who have
returned home from Syria and Iraq but also includes
the nearly 1,900 French nationals or residents involved
with jihadi affiliates, including 597 on the ground. In
that regard, I would like to cite some of the measures
that France has taken, many of which are in the areas of
action identified by the Secretary-General.
The essentially preventive dimension of our efforts
has been deployed in our national plan for combating
violent radicalization and terrorist networks, which
was adopted in April 2014. That plan set up a hotline for
families and others worried about their loved ones. So
far, our interministerial committee on crime prevention
and radicalization has received more than 7,000 reports
of persons at risk of being radicalized. We are also
working on the speedy creation of a support centre for
young people returning from conflict zones, who will
not be prosecuted by the courts.

A/70/PV.84

Along with that, a year ago, we established an
Internet site focused on stopping jihadism and aimed
at young people at risk of being radicalized and their
families and friends, now with the addition of a
related Twitter account and Facebook page to help to
disseminate messages on social networks aimed at
countering propaganda. We are also working to prevent
radicalization through the Internet, including by
blocking websites and removing content that glorifies
terrorism. We have already blocked several sites in
France under a law enacted on 13 November 2014, and
we have established a close and constructive dialogue
with major Internet companies. These are just a few
examples, and France will, of course, continue with
its commitment in the area, taking into account the
recommendations of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Cardi (Italy), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The sequence of events that has begun today with
our debate in the General Assembly and will continue
in Geneva in April and in New York in June with the
review of our Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
is particularly timely and gives us an opportunity to
reflect together on how States can take ownership of and
implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
France welcomes the chance to participate in that
process, with the aim of strengthening and making
more effective our collective action to prevent the kind
of violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): At the outset, I would, of
course, like to stress that Austria fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered just now by the observer of the
European Union.
Austria welcomes and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674). We are heartened by the fact that the
General Assembly is in a position to welcome that
important initiative. We appreciate the balanced and
comprehensive nature of the document and welcome
its recommendations for concrete measures to be
operationalized, both within the United Nations and
nationally and regionally by Member States. Austria
commends the Secretary-General for taking a lead in
promoting efforts at the local and national levels to
prevent violent extremism, since it is those kinds of
measures that will produce the most concrete results. We
support the Plan’s areas of focus, particularly regarding
young people, and commend the emphasis on measures
aimed at strengthening good governance, human rights

16-036669/29

A/70/PV.84

and the rule of law, all of which are indispensable to
the effective prevention of violent extremism and the
fight against terrorism, as a couple of speakers before
me have already stressed.
Austria looks forward to the implementation of the
Plan of Action and of national and regional measures.
We recognize that their effective implementation is the
responsibility of each and every individual Member
State, with the participation of local communities and
civil society. We have already put in place a number of
measures aimed at preventing violent extremism, with
a particular focus on integration and social inclusion
and human rights and gender equality, as well as
intercultural and interreligious dialogue.
In the framework of Austria’s national action plan
on integration, those measures were developed after
broad consultations, including with communities and
civil society. Their implementation is being monitored
by an expert body. We encourage other States
Members of the United Nations also to implement the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which we are
endorsing today. Austria looks forward to supporting
the Plan of Action, also in relation to the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank the President
for convening today’s plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for submitting his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).
In recent years violent extremist forces, such as
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), have
been expanding their presence in Iraq and Syria. That
represents an increasing danger and poses a serious
threat to peace and stability in the Middle East, Africa
and Asia.
Recently, terrorist forces have demonstrated new
features. First, their groups are more tightly knit.
They control larger areas and use those areas as bases
for spreading extremist ideologies, for carrying out
terrorist attacks and for sending terrorists to the rest of
the world.
Secondly, the networks of the international
terrorist forces are expanding their activities. Terrorist
organizations such as ISIS and Boko Haram have
10/29

12/02/2016

been coordinating with each other from afar and have
launched attacks from multiple regions and countries,
causing enormous damages and harm.
Thirdly, terrorist groups have been scaling up their
use of new technology, such as the Internet and social
media, in plotting, organizing and financing terrorist
activities and spreading extremist and violent ideologies
to poison youth and encourage young people mired in
difficult situations to join violent extremist groups.
Fourthly, terrorism and regional conflicts are
interconnected. Terrorist groups exploit regional
hotspots to step up their terrorist activities, thereby
making the settlement of regional conflicts even more
difficult and aggravating existing humanitarian crises.
In fighting terrorism and violent extremism, the
international community should stay united, strengthen
its coordination and form synergies. In that connection,
I would like to make the following points.
First, in order to give full play to the coordinating
and leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council, countries should fully implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution
60/288). The international community should, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other accepted
norms of international relations, give full play to the
coordinating and leading role of the United Nations
and form a united front to fight terrorism and scale up
its efforts to do that at the global level. We can defeat
terrorist groups only through effective coordination.
Secondly, we must adhere to unified criteria and
standards and fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Double standards should be avoided.
We should never link terrorism with any specific
ethnicity or religion. The Security Council has adopted
resolutions on fighting terrorist groups, such as
ISIS. Other terrorist groups have been placed on the
sanctions lists. Countries should be resolute in their
fight against violent extremist groups, especially those
on the consolidated Security Council sanctions list.
Thirdly, the international community should
resolutely combat terrorist organizations that engage
in terrorist activities through the Internet and social
media. They issue violent audiovisual products, spread
extremist ideologies, recruit people, raise funds and
plot terrorist activities. Measures should therefore be
16-03666

12/02/2016

taken to fight against such crimes. Countries should
strengthen their cooperation in the regulation of the
Internet. The relevant United Nations agencies should
coordinate in formulating measures to strengthen such
regulation and assist Member States in their fight
against crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups using
the Internet.
Fourthly, the root causes of the problems should
be addressed. We must focus on economic and social
development and promote the stabilization of situations
in turbulent areas. The international community
should pay more attention to the political settlement
of conflicts.
The Chinese Government is resolute in its fight
against terrorism and violent extremism in all its
forms. We will vigorously fight violent terrorism,
which challenges civilization and humankind. We
will actively participate in the review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy this year, which marks the
tenth anniversary of its adoption, and will work with
the international community in fighting terrorism and
violent extremism and maintaining global peace and
security.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wants to thank the President for organizing
this debate and welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 70/254, on the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
The adoption of that resolution will make it possible
for us to respond to the Secretary-General’s appeal and
to send a strong and unified message from the entire
international community to address one of the biggest
challenges of our time.
The Plan of Action (A/70/674) is part of the
broader framework of United Nations preventive
action, the importance of which was underlined in
the recent reviews on peace operations (see A/70/95),
the peacebuilding architecture (see A/69/968) and
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
seek to prevent armed conflicts, atrocities, violence
against women and children, and sexual violence in
conflict. The Plan of Action stresses the need for a
more comprehensive approach, entailing not only
security-based counter-terrorism measures, but also
more systematic measures directly addressing the root
causes of violent extremism that can lead to terrorism.
Switzerland welcomes the increased importance
given to pillars I and IV of the United Nations Global

A/70/PV.84

Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288). That
will enable a full and balanced implementation of
the Strategy and underscores the need to respect
human rights and the rule of law in the prevention of
violent extremism.
It is therefore essential today to implement
systematic preventive measures that directly address the
causes of violent extremism and that recognize political
exclusion and social marginalization among its causes.
The Plan of Action shows that only a multidisciplinary
and preventive approach, together with counterterrorism measures, is suitable for efficient, legitimate
and sustainable action against violent extremism. Not
only do extremist groups contribute to insecurity and
are often parties to armed conflict, but their actions also
impact peace efforts, sustainable development, human
rights, the rule of law and humanitarian aid work. Thus
it is important that the various actors — including
peace workers, security actors, human rights defenders,
educators, civil society and aid workers — all be
involved. In that connection, we acknowledge the
pertinence of the recommendations in the seven areas
of action under the Plan of Action.
The Plan of Action offers considerable opportunities
for the Global Community Engagement and Resilience
Fund (GCERF), based in Geneva. The Plan encourages
the identification of new sources of funding, while also
emphasizing the role of the private sector. The GCERF
has already contributed significantly to shaping the
agenda on those two issues and will be in a position to
play a key role in funding activities aimed at preventing
violent extremism.
Switzerland also recognizes the importance of
working to prevent violent extremism at the bilateral,
regional and multilateral levels, especially with
Governments, international organizations and forums
and non-State actors, including civil society, armed
groups and private-sector organizations.
Switzerland welcomes today’s adoption of
resolution 70/254, which marks the beginning of a
process of discussion among Member States and which
will be conducted in tandem with the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
scheduled for June.
Switzerland hopes to make a concrete contribution
to those discussions through its organization, jointly
with the United Nations, of a conference on the
implementation of the Plan of Action to be held in Geneva

16-0366611/29

A/70/PV.84

on 7 and 8 April. We have circulated a save-the-date
message to all delegations in New York and Geneva in
that regard. The conference will be open to all Member
States and to international and regional organizations,
and representatives of non-governmental organizations
will also be invited. It will be divided into two parts, of
which the first, on 7 April, will be devoted to meetings
with senior experts, and the second, on 8 April, will be
a high-level meeting to be attended by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Didier Burkhalter, Head of Switzerland’s
Federal Department of Foreign Affairs, and other
ministers and high-level political representatives.
We will communicate further information about the
conference in due course.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by expressing my
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly
for organizing this meeting and for the opportunity
to exchange views on the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism presented by the Secretary-General
(A/70/674), which we have studied carefully. We will
continue our analysis with the bodies concerned,
since the issues raised in the Plan have a wide
interdisciplinary impact.
The international community today is dealing with
an extremely dangerous trend — the rapid spread of
ideas of violent extremism leading to terrorism. That
ideology has exacerbated conflicts in various parts of
the world and created a breeding ground for attracting
new recruits to the ranks of terrorists, especially among
young people. This is hardly the first time that we at the
United Nations have examined the problem of violent
extremism. Two months ago, the Assembly adopted by
consensus resolution 70/109, entitled “A world against
violence and violent extremism”. The subject has also
been reflected in the decisions of the Security Council,
since it is so closely linked to the threats of incitement
to terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe firmly that States should play a central
and decisive role in countering violent extremism and
therefore in any international cooperative efforts in the
area. In that regard, we note the reference in the Plan of
Action to the principle of national ownership, which we
believe deserves further reflection. It is vital that such
action be based on a solid foundation of international
law and in particular on the Charter of the United
Nations, including its principles of the sovereignty
and equality of States. The Plan of Action specifically
focuses on the importance of respect for international
12/29

12/02/2016

law and the Charter regarding the use of force. We
share its view of the interconnectedness of the tasks
of countering violent extremism and settling conflicts.
The work of law-enforcement bodies constitutes
an important part of our efforts to prevent and combat
violent extremism and terrorism, and in our opinion, it
would make sense to give it more attention. Of course,
law enforcement is not the only way for States to fight
violent extremism. As the Plan of Action rightly points
out, working with young people, including in educational
institutions — creating conditions conducive to their
socioeconomic engagement, connecting them to local
religious communities and leaders who can explain
how radicalism differs from genuine religion — and
ensuring that the media are disseminating appropriate
information can all help to create an atmosphere that
rejects violence and extremism. Another such task is
preventing terrorists from using the Internet and social
networks to spread extremist content.
Harnessing the potential of civil society is also
an important element of efforts to counter violent
extremism. We believe that the exploitation of that
potential should be firmly linked to States’ specific
characteristics and traditions, without weakening
their leading role in combating terror. We see civil
society’s primary role as being one of cooperation
with the State’s efforts on the ground by working with
vulnerable sections of the population. In general, in the
highly sensitive area of combating violent extremism,
we should never use and certainly never impose any
formulaic approaches, methods and classifications. It is
vital to avoid the perception of international efforts and
initiatives in the area as any kind of intrusive mechanism.
Successful policies against violent extremism
will contribute to a proper understanding of the scope
of the phenomenon and its causes. The concept of
violent extremism must include its clear connection to
terrorism and encompass a mastery of counter-terrorism
terminology in international law and practice. That area
has important links to the Security Council resolutions
on the subject, including resolution 2178 (2014), referred
to in the Plan of Action. The contribution of the United
Nations to global efforts to combat terrorism must be
part of the context of cooperating in the implementation
of the foundational anti-terrorist decisions, particularly
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
16-03666

12/02/2016

Concerning the reasons for the growth of violent
extremism, we feel that the analysis in the Plan of Action
is incomplete. The events in Iraq and Libya are a clear
demonstration of how external intervention can lead to
the collapse of public institutions, leaving total chaos
in its wake. It has created an ideal breeding ground for
the growth of violent extremism and radicalization,
which in turn has led to the spread of terrorism in the
region and the emergence and consolidation of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Those essentially
obvious and not insignificant facts are unfortunately
not reflected in the report.
One of the document’s key elements is its call for
the development of national plans to counter violent
extremism. In that regard, we would like to point out that
the Russian Federation has undertaken sustained efforts
to effectively protect its Government and citizens from
threats of extremism and terrorism. Since November
2014 we have been working on a comprehensive strategy
for countering extremism in the Russian Federation to
the year 2025. Regional plans for implementing the
strategy are being consolidated, and we are ready to
share the experience that we have gained in the area
with interested States and international organizations.
We would like to hope that the forthcoming
discussion of the Plan of Action and its recommendations
in the framework of the review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy will contribute to our efforts to find
the most effective and well-targeted responses to the
threat of violent extremism.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for organizing today’s important meeting
on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) and the SecretaryGeneral for preparing his report.
Violent extremism leading to terrorism is one of
the most dangerous challenges facing our world today.
No one is exempt. Egypt has been aware of that danger
for some time and has taken concrete action, including,
inter alia, the implementation, starting in January
2015, of calls by the President of Egypt to renew
ideas, concepts and religious discourse with a view to
eliminating sectarianism and factional polarization, as
well as dogmatism and extremism. Al-Azhar and Waqf
scholars have taken the lead in that fundamental task.
During the high-level segment of the seventieth session
of the General Assembly, President Al Sisi presented

A/70/PV.84

an initiative entitled “Hope and Action for a New
Direction”, which seeks to prevent youth from falling
into the trap of extremism and to get them to make use
of their potential and energies (see A/70/PV.14, p.10).
The entire world, Muslims and non-Muslims alike,
must be convinced that violent extremism leading to
terrorism is not specific to any culture or people. It
exists in all States. Our action to stave it off should be
universal, rather than confined to the Arab region or
Islamic States. All causes of violent extremism must be
taken into consideration — as must national ownership,
international law and practical law — and the necessary
funding should be provided.
I would therefore like to focus on the following
observations on the Plan of Action of the SecretaryGeneral. The Plan of Action focuses on the national
and regional dimensions more than the international
dimension. It pays more attention to the internal causes
that lead to violent extremism. Although the Plan refers
to as-yet-unsettled protracted conflicts as one of the
reasons of violent extremism, greater focus is placed on
reasons such as the lack of good governance, violations
of human rights and the rule of law, marginalization
and discrimination. The Plan does not, however,
clearly refer to continued foreign occupation as one
of the reasons behind violent extremism, although
there are indirect and weak allusions to that factor in
paragraphs 33 and 35. In addition, the Plan contains
no reference to all of the underlying internal causes
of violent extremism that give rise to terrorism, such
as Islamophobia and other factors. We can see, then,
that the Plan targets a specific group of States, a bias
that we categorically reject, especially since we witness
the arrival of foreign terrorist fighters from European
States in Syria and other States.
Let us be candid: if there is a serious desire to
take action, the international community must realize
that Israel’s continued occupation of Palestine is one
of the main reasons behind the proliferation of violent
extremism, which, in turn, gives rise to terrorism. Other
reasons include interference in the internal affairs
of States, affronts to Islam and the Prophet — peace
be upon him — under the pretext of the freedom of
expression, and the treatment of Muslims as secondclass citizens in some States. Furthermore, the Plan of
Action seems to focus on the future, failing to stress the
need to settle current conflicts and end the occupation.
The Plan contains no reference to the need to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, to respect

16-0366613/29

A/70/PV.84

international law or the findings and decisions of the
International Court of Justice.
With regard to mobilizing the necessary resources
for implementation, as mentioned in paragraph 46, the
Plan refers to the need to use existing funding more
efficiently. Paragraph 58, subparagraph (l), refers to the
development of a proposal for a Secretary-General’s
fund to support innovative projects designed to prevent
violent extremism. It is clear from the contents of the
Plan that the trend is to try to use existing resources
and voluntary contributions. That would mean reducing
part of the funding set aside for combating terrorism
and for financing projects to prevent violent extremism
and part of the funding proposed for the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre over the coming five years.
That will adversely affect efforts to combat terrorism.
It is therefore important to consider the best way to
establish the proposed fund as quickly as possible. It is
also important that States agree on its characteristics
and look into the best ways to finance the fund without
adversely affecting other efforts to combat terrorism
and implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Most of the recommendations
presented by the Secretary-General rely on efforts at
the regional and national levels The main reason for
the failure to implement such measures has been the
shortage or absence of the requisite funding. The Plan
does not mention how to overcome that problem nor
how to provide the necessary funding.
Paragraph 58, sub-paragraph (b), states that the
prevention of violent extremism will be prioritized
among the programmes implemented by United Nations
entities, in cooperation with Member States, including
by integrating the prevention of violent extremism into
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The Plan did not refer to the impact of such a decision
on troop-contributing countries.
In conclusion, I would like to state that the goal
is not to adopt or reject the Plan, but rather to carry
out efforts on the ground to prevent violent extremism.
That requires convincing everyone to abide by the
Plan of Action, which will happen only if the views
and proposals of States are taken into consideration
while developing consensus, and that in turn requires
ensuring the universality of implementation in
accordance with international law and the principle of
national ownership. We are therefore of the view that the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
14/29

12/02/2016

Strategy is the optimal opportunity to take all such
views into consideration without adversely affecting
the measures contained in the Strategy. Otherwise,
the Plan will not be universally accepted, which would
preclude its implementation.
Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to extend my thanks to the
President for holding today’s meeting on the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674).
We welcome and support the adoption today of
resolution 70/254 on the subject. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General in formulating the
Plan of Action. We commend its flexible and practical
approach, which emphasizes the important role played
by the United Nations in combating the terrible
phenomenon of violent extremism, the impacts of which
are not confined to the maintenance of international
peace and security but extend to all aspects of life. We
are of the view that the Plan of Action is practical and
prudent and will help to rally military and security
support in the effort to combat terrorism.
The Plan of Action is an important set of
guidelines that help States draft their own national
plans or amend their already existing national plans
in accordance with the exigencies of States’ national
interests and priorities in addressing local drivers of
violent extremism. Combating extremism necessitates
inclusive interactive approaches on the part of national
institutions, balancing, inter alia, sociopolitical and
educational perspectives. All the drivers and factors
leading to violent extremism must be addressed.
Under the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah
II ibn Al Hussein, Jordan has launched numerous
international initiatives to foster the values of tolerance,
coexistence and dialogue, including the Amman
Message on Islam, the Common Word initiative and the
World Interfaith Harmony Week. Jordan has expressed
its conviction that young people need to be the focus of
the fight against terrorism and extremism. My country
has taken the initiative on that point in the Security
Council by holding, for the first time, an open debate
on the role of youth in countering violent extremism
and promoting peace, in April 2015 (see S/PV.7432).
We also submitted a resolution on youth, peace and
security, which was adopted last year (Security Council
resolution 2250 (2015)).
16-03666

12/02/2016

I would like to make the following points regarding
the Plan of Action. The primary responsibility for
combating violent extremism rests with States, which
will implement the Plan according to their national
priorities, paying due attention to economic factors
and sustainable development. The success of our
efforts depends on taking bold approaches that avoid
sectarian conflicts and close gaps. The continued
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the failure to achieve a
just and permanent solution that fulfils the aspirations
of the Palestinian people will undoubtedly lead to more
violence and hatred. Furthermore, with regard to the
Syrian crisis, terrorism and extremism will be curbed
there when a political solution is reached. Extremism
must not be linked to any specific faction, region or
religion; linking it to Islam will only serve the interests
of maverick terrorists.
With regard to funding the Plan of Action, the
United Nations is a natural partner for assisting States
in implementing their national plans. Mechanisms must
be established to monitor the assistance extended by the
United Nations. Jordan looks forward to discussing the
Plan in detail at other forums in the future, including
in Geneva, as well as during the biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Sudan aligns itself with the statement made earlier by
the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. We would like to make the following
statement in our national capacity.
My country commends the efforts of the
President of the General Assembly and his Office to
hold broad informal consultations with groups and
countries, which led to today’s consensus adoption
of resolution 70/254. The resolution takes note of the
Plan of Action submitted by the Secretary-General
(A/70/674) and welcomes the Secretary-General’s
initiative in submitting it. The resolution also stresses
the importance of giving further consideration to the
Plan of Action during the consultations on the periodic
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy next June and in other relevant forums,
including the international conference to be convened
by the Government of Switzerland in cooperation with
the United Nations in Geneva in April.
The Sudan took a constructive in the informal
consultations that preceded the consensus on resolution

A/70/PV.84

70/254. We were committed to reaching that consensus
on the resolution on the Plan of Action, which addresses
an alarming phenomenon that spares no one, namely,
violent extremism. In order to contribute to the dialogue
on the Plan of Action that will take place over the next
days and months, my delegation would like to make the
following observations with respect to the Plan.
The Plan of Action stresses that the phenomenon of
violent extremism lacks a clear and agreed definition.
It cannot be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group, as stated in the preamble of
the resolution adopted today. That is an essential point,
one that we reiterate in order to avoid any stereotyping
when talking about terrorism and violent extremism. It is
not enough to refer to that point in the introduction of the
Plan of Action. The Plan of Action should be consistent
with that essential point, especially with regard to the
conditions conducive to violent extremism. We should
also avoid any potential contradiction between the
notions of combating terrorism and violent extremism
and avoiding overlapping or misunderstanding.
A comprehensive approach to the phenomenon of
violent extremism is one of the most important tools
for combating it. It is not useful to focus on the effects
of the phenomenon; rather, we should address the root
causes and main incubators through a comprehensive
and balanced approach that does more than focus on
the security and military aspects. Indeed, it should
also take into account all cultural and social aspects
of the phenomenon. In that regard, my country stresses
that the General Assembly is well situated to deal with
that phenomenon in all its aspects and dimensions.
Secondly, the Plan of Action is not balanced in
the way it seeks to address the conditions conducive
to violent extremism. It focuses extensively on national
aspects through a limited approach that stresses
mainly the issue of human rights without addressing
other dimensions. The Plan also largely fails to refer
to the conditions that lead to violent extremism at
the international level, especially with regard to the
denial of the rights to self-determination of people
who are under the yoke of occupation. We cannot talk
about violent extremism without mentioning foreign
occupation, which is the main incubator of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and of the violent
extremism that leads to terrorism.
Thirdly, it might be useful to take note of the
experience in preventing this phenomenon gained by

16-0366615/29

A/70/PV.84

countries that share a border with countries that might
be suffering from that phenomenon. In that regard,
we wish to point out the initiatives undertaken by the
Sudanese Government to strengthen the culture of
dialogue and moderation with a view to combating
bigotry. The Government has also created certain
institutions to address that issue.
Fourthly, the Plan of Action addresses the conditions
conducive to violent extremism in a certain country. The
Plan makes reference to a number of internal challenges
that are important and essential in that regard. At the
same time, however, the Plan fails to refer to external
elements, especially interference in the internal affairs
of States in a manner that runs counter to the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law in order to serve certain political interests. Such
interference threatens the stability, unity and territorial
integrity of the affected States and disrupts their
welfare and development. Unilateral sanctions are also
one of the aspects that threaten international peace and
security and lead to international tension.
The Plan of Action addresses an important problem
that demands concerted international efforts in order
to combat that phenomenon. The Plan of Action should
not refer to any elements that do not enjoy consensus
and that might lead to disagreement and might distract
Member States from their main task. Therefore, my
delegation expresses its concern over the reference in
of paragraph 50, sub-paragraph (e), to the International
Criminal Court. The international community should
support efforts aimed at ensuring accountability in
cases where national measures cannot adequately
address grave violations, including through the referral
by the Security Council of cases to the International
Criminal Court or to an ad hoc tribunal.
Members are well aware of the politicized
relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. The Sudan believes that,
owing to those paragraphs, the Plan of Action could
lead to political disagreement and run counter to the
aim of concerted international efforts to combat the
phenomenon of violent extremism. That also applies
to paragraph 58, sub-paragraph (b), which calls
for integrating the prevention of violent extremism
into the mandates of special political missions and
peacekeeping operations and the activities of the United
Nations country teams. That reference gives rise to a
number of questions and concerns. It is inadvisable
for the Plan of Action to include references that run
16/29

12/02/2016

counter to the international consensus on combatting
violent extremism and terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations.
Resolution 70/254, which the Assembly adopted
today, stresses that the international community
stands united in combatting violent extremism. It also
stresses the importance of continued objective dialogue
aimed at addressing the shortcomings of the Plan of
Action and at building on its positive elements. My
country would like to reiterate its readiness to engage
constructively and positively in the deliberations on the
Plan of Action in various forums. We look forward to
a world of peace, security, stability and respect for the
Charter and international law and without interference
in the internal affairs of States through an international
political and economic order characterized by justice,
transparency and impartiality — a system that seeks to
achieve prosperity and development for all the nations
of the world.
Ms. Lehto (Finland): Finland aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.
Finland warmly welcomes the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
and the adoption of resolution 70/254.
Violent extremism is not a new phenomenon, and we
have been working to counter it for decades. However,
violent extremism has increased rapidly in recent years,
and alarming new forms have developed. Moreover,
it has become evident that security-based counterterrorism measures alone are not sufficient and need to
be complemented by a more comprehensive approach.
We need to send a clear and unified signal to the
world that violent extremism is not acceptable and
that the international community is taking the threat
seriously. Moreover, we need to widen and deepen our
cooperation further, with more emphasis on prevention.
Prevention should be used as a proactive approach with
real potential both for addressing immediate security
concerns, such as recruitment by extremist groups, and
for achieving sustainable long-term results.
It is clearly preferable, and certainly more costeffective, to prevent violent extremism than to be
forced to address its many adverse consequences. But
to succeed, that requires a concerted, multidisciplinary
effort at all levels — local, national, regional and
international. The Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
16-03666

12/02/2016

is an important and timely step forward. We should be
ready to move towards its implementation.
Finland has had a national action plan on
preventing violent extremism since 2012. The plan is
currently being updated through wide consultation
with stakeholders. I would like to take this opportunity
to share briefly with the Assembly some of our own
experiences and provide a few concrete examples.
Finland’s national prevention measures are based
on a comprehensive and inclusive approach. Violent
extremism has a tendency to reinforce itself, and
its various forms feed each other. If we concentrate
on preventing only one form, there will be room for
other types and other groups to grow. This approach
is also aimed at gaining wide support and acceptance
for the measures among various communities. It is
extremely important to have broad cooperation among
the various authorities, organizations and communities.
We have created several models in which various actors
work together.
First, our “net tip” system enables the public to
submit non-emergency information to law enforcement
authorities about any suspicious material found on the
Internet. In addition, we will be creating a national
help-line service, targeting families whose members
are planning to leave for conflict areas or have already
done so. Our Information House seminars provide
training for local-level actors, such as schools and
social workers, in identifying cases where people
may be planning to leave for conflict areas and
enabling such actors to intervene, in cooperation with
other authorities.
I would also like to mention the so-called anchor
model, in which multidisciplinary professional teams
work with vulnerable young people who are at risk of
committing crimes and direct them to the appropriate
services. The teams consist of police officers, social
workers, mental health professionals and youth workers.
Finally, we have the exit model, based on a concept
developed by non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
to deal with individuals who are planning to leave for
conflict areas, have already travelled to them or have
recently returned to Finland. It will work in parallel
with the anchor model and is designed to be applicable
to all forms of violent extremism.
The role of young people in the prevention of
violent extremism is essential. Young people have to be

A/70/PV.84

more aware and better prepared to recognize and reject
propaganda and attempts to provoke them to violence.
A key element in achieving that goal is to improve
young people’s integration into society, recognizing
them as relevant actors and decision-makers and giving
them a role in preventing violent extremism. Education
plays a crucial role in developing a sense of civic
responsibility and intercultural understanding and is
yet another facet of the inclusive approach. In October,
Finland’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Young
Muslims Association organized a joint round table
on Finnish foreign policy relating to conflict areas,
human rights and democracy. Our Minister for Foreign
Affairs opened the discussion, and I am happy to say
that the response to the event was very positive and
highly encouraging.
Religious communities can also play a significant
role in preventing violent extremism. Our Government
cooperates with Finn Church Aid, a Finnish NGO with
great experience in peacebuilding work in conflict
areas, in order to involve religious communities and
otherwise utilize its expertise domestically. Religious
communities in Finland are currently creating a socalled shoulder-to-shoulder approach designed to help
them support one another in concrete situations where
a group is under threat or has become the target of hate
crimes. Finland is also a founder of and the main donor
to the global Network for Religious and Traditional
Peacemakers, which seeks to improve mediation
efforts by supporting the positive role of religious and
traditional leaders.
Research shows that there is a correlation between
gender equality and a decrease in violent extremism.
Societies that are relatively gender-equal are less prone
than others to violent extremism. Empowering women
and ensuring their full participation in decision-making
are therefore essential building blocks in efforts to
counter violent extremism.
The prevention of violent extremism is not a unique
or isolated project but should be seen as an integral
part of the everyday work and activities of a wide
range of actors. The importance of working together
cooperatively cannot be overstated, and that applies at
the international, regional and national levels, as well
as among all relevant authorities, organizations and
communities. A comprehensive and inclusive approach
seeks to ensure both the effectiveness and the broad
acceptance of the measures chosen.

16-0366617/29

A/70/PV.84

I would like to conclude with a reference to a recently
published joint opinion piece by the Foreign Ministers
of Finland and Sweden, in which they write about
mediation as an effective way to prevent conflicts. It is
far less costly, they said, than trying to fix something
that is already broken; it safeguards development gains
and, most importantly, it saves lives. The same can be
said about the prevention of violent extremism.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly endorses, supports and welcomes
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action for Preventing
Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
In welcoming that initiative today, the General
Assembly has declared with one voice that we stand
united — united against violent extremism, united in
defiance of its hatred and united in solidarity with its
victims. We have all shared the sorrow, anger and pain
that the actions of groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and Boko Haram have brought. The Plan of Action
that the Secretary-General has presented is pragmatic,
comprehensive and flexible enough to adapt to the
evolving threat. It offers Member States and the entire
United Nations system a strong foundation for better
coordination, and it contains recommendations for
action that we must all consider. I would particularly
like to draw attention to its call for robust national
action plans, designed in consultation with civil society
and communities and founded on respect for human
rights and the rule of law. If we are to succeed, all
States must act on that concrete recommendation in
their different ways.
The United Kingdom looks forward to contributing
our experience and analysis gained in tackling the
threat and its root causes and to learning from others.
Our national approach centres on partnerships — with
faith communities and others, civil society, the private
sector, young people and other individuals. We do that
across the whole of Government, including front-line
agencies, because violent extremism is too complex
a challenge for any single body to solve. Everything
we do, domestically or internationally, is calibrated to
support that agenda. But of course every Member State
has its own unique circumstances and solutions to the
challenges of violent extremism. So let us all share our
experiences in a spirit of dialogue, and in turn learn
from best practices elsewhere.
Today is just the beginning of that conversation,
and we are hearing some different points of view. I
18/29

12/02/2016

welcome that. Debate is healthy, and this is a complex
issue. The United Kingdom looks forward to continuing
the discussion in the coming weeks. The conference
announced by our Swiss colleague on preventing
violent extremism, which is to be held in Geneva in
April, is an excellent opportunity to pursue the debate,
and we hope for full attendance.
But as we exchange views, we should be mindful
of the fact that the terrorists and extremists are also
watching and listening to us. They need to know that
today we have shown our determination to take action.
We have shown that what unites us against their threat
far outweighs that which divides us. And by focusing
on the root causes of terrorist violence, we prove our
commitment to preventing, and not just countering,
that threat.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We would like to thank the
President for convening today’s debate, which affords
Member States the opportunity to express their views
on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We welcome the
Secretary-General’s initiative and believe that we can
best address violent extremism and develop effective
responses by taking into account the views and
experiences of Member States.
Pakistan fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Pakistan reiterates its principled position against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We also
endorse the view expressed by the Secretary-General
that violent extremism is an affront to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. At the same time,
we believe that a lack of respect for the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and a
willingness to violate them can also lead to violent
extremism. There is no agreed definition of violent
extremism, just as there is none for terrorism.
The conditions under which violent extremism
can morph into terrorism are also open to different
interpretations, and that warrants assessment of the
phenomenon in broader and more considered terms. We
all agree that violent extremism and terrorism should
not be associated with any country, race, religion,
culture or nationality. We deplore any attempt to do so
and urge the international community to ensure that
16-03666

12/02/2016

that understanding is fully reflected in its members’
national and international actions.
Pakistan has consistently called on the international
community to address the root causes of terrorism and
the conditions and breeding grounds that give rise to it.
We have also always urged that respect for human rights
and the rule of law be maintained in efforts to counter
terrorism, so that such efforts do not prove counterproductive. That is why we have consistently stressed
a balanced implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288),
including its pillars I and IV. We are pleased to note that
the international community is finally acknowledging
the need to go beyond security- and military-centred
counter-terrorism measures and to adopt a more
comprehensive approach. That is something that
Pakistan has long advocated, since it ensures that the
underlying factors that drive terrorist violence can be
addressed in their entirety. We are therefore surprised
and dismayed that relatively little attention has been
given to some of the most obvious international factors
that have so decisively influenced the emergence of
violent extremism.
If we are to find effective ways to prevent violent
extremism, we must objectively analyse its full range.
Flawed and partial assessments will lead only to flawed
approaches. If we are to deal with it comprehensively,
we must fully comprehend and recognize both local
and external drivers. Often it is the confluence of and
the interplay among those drivers that lead to violent
extremism. Moreover, in today’s globalized and
interconnected world, we can hardly separate violent
extremism’s local and international contexts and
dimensions. Economic deprivation, political injustice,
social exclusion and the marginalization of people must
be addressed in a wider international context as well as
a local one.
Injustices done to peoples under foreign occupation,
the denial of the right to self-determination, longfestering and unresolved international disputes,
interference in States’ internal affairs and continued
violations of the principles of the Charter create
conditions that violent extremists and terrorists exploit
in order to propagate their twisted ideologies. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, already has a responsibility to address those
issues. Doing so diligently will also help to address
the drivers of violent extremism and the conditions
conducive to terrorism.

A/70/PV.84

Regarding the human-rights-based approach to
preventing violent extremism, Pakistan regrets that
a number of significant and relevant elements have
been either ignored or given too little consideration.
Negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination
and intolerance must all be countered if we are to
prevent violent extremism. Effective implementation of
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18 is important to
the prevention of radicalization. Its violation nourishes
the narrative that violent extremists use to justify their
vile acts. Xenophobia, in particular Islamophobia, is on
the rise in the West. It has so far gone unchecked. It is
unfortunate that unprincipled, xenophobic politicians
have sought to build their political fortunes by
spreading fear and deliberate mischaracterizations of
people of other faiths or cultures. That, too, fuels the
process of radicalization.
We fully subscribe to the need to ensure respect
for international law and human rights in counterterrorism measures. That is what all of us committed
to when we endorsed the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. But what do we make of the foreign military
interventions that have rendered not just societies but
entire countries and regions susceptible to the chaos
in which violent extremism thrives and grows? Do we
realize the impact of the so-called surgical counterterrorism strikes that violate States’ territorial integrity
and that have resulted in thousands of civilian casualties
and left entire communities angry and determined to
avenge such impunity? The fact is that 15 years after
we committed to making the world more peaceful and
terror-free, it has become a much more dangerous place.
We must revisit the response that was used to counter
terrorism and violent extremism and that has yielded
this sorry outcome.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s call for
national action plans to prevent violent extremism,
I can report that my country has already initiated a
number of steps towards curbing that threat at the
national, regional and international levels. Eight of
the 20 action points of Pakistan’s national plan for
countering terrorist violence pertain to preventing
violent extremism. We are fully cognizant of our
national challenges and are making focused efforts
to undertake educational reforms, prevent misuse of
the Internet and social media, promote tolerance and
reform our criminal justice system.
My Government has focused on the potential
of young people in particular. The Prime Minister’s

16-0366619/29

A/70/PV.84

youth programme is geared to providing educational
scholarships,
vocational
training
and
skills
development, as well as loans to young entrepreneurs.
We are also partnering with the United Nations in a
skills-development and engagement programme for
youth, aimed at preventing violent extremism. Pakistan
has led a number of initiatives promoting interfaith
and intercultural harmony. Just a week ago, during
World Interfaith Harmony Week, we organized a side
event at the United Nations on countering xenophobia,
inviting a number of scholars of different faiths, who
presented their successful initiatives on building
interfaith harmony.
At the international level, we remain committed
to supporting all efforts aimed at preventing violent
extremism and terrorism in a balanced manner,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. Finally, I would like to say that the
international community must meet this difficult
challenge in a coordinated and unified manner, taking
into account the views of all Member States.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Violent extremism is a major
concern for the international community, including
Turkey. The most recent General Assembly resolution
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review (resolution 66/282), facilitated by
Turkey, urges all Member States to unite against violent
extremism in all its forms and manifestations.
There is no question that security measures based
on the rule of law, such as the interception, deterrence
and prosecution of terrorists, remain the fundamental
pillar of counter-terrorism efforts. However, we are
also convinced that a broader approach is necessary, if
we are to prevent young people from being attracted to
terrorist groups, make our societies more resilient in the
face of extremist narratives and rehabilitate radicalized
individuals. Turkey therefore fully supports the view of
the Secretary-General that the international community
should adopt a comprehensive approach, encompassing
not only security-based measures but also systematic
ones that address the drivers of violent extremism at the
local, regional and global levels.
As the guardian of universal ideals and concerted
international action, the United Nations should play
a crucial role in leading the efforts to address such
drivers at the global level, laying out basic principles
and assisting Member States in designing and
implementing their national strategies. In that regard,
20/29

12/02/2016

Turkey welcomes the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). As we
underlined at the briefing on 15 January, we believe the
Plan of Action will be an important reference document.
Turkey, along with the Netherlands, is co-chairing
the Global Counterterrorism Forum and actively
contributes to its efforts within our Organization.
In that regard, I should point to the Forum’s Ankara
Memorandum on Good Practices for a Multi-Sectoral
Approach to Countering Violent Extremism. Together
with the United States, Turkey is also leading an
initiative within the Forum aimed at addressing the life
cycle of radicalization.
I would like to emphasize the fact that radicalization
to violence is not limited to a specific ideology or belief
system and cannot be associated with any country,
religion or culture. It takes different forms, all of which
must be addressed with equal determination. The
United Nations is best placed to ensure a balanced and
comprehensive approach to the issue. It is important to
accurately diagnose the drivers of radicalization if we
are to produce effective policies to address them.
We are concerned about the rising levels of
intolerance, discrimination and stigmatization on the
basis of faith and ethnicity. Such attitudes aggravate
marginalization and alienation, thereby providing
terrorist groups with new areas to exploit. We need
to take a resolute stance, if we are to cut off that
vicious cycle.
My Government is ready to fully support the
Secretary-General’s efforts. We will actively contribute
to the ensuing discussions, beginning with the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, let me
say that the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
The Netherlands supports the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
and welcomes the Assembly’s adoption this morning
of resolution 70/254. As Mr. Albert Koenders, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, said during his briefing to the United
Nations Group of Friends against Terrorism last month,
“Terrorism today is a multi-headed monster. Terrorists
are ruthless, resourceful and skilled at reinvention.” The
Plan of Action that we are discussing today will enable
16-03666

12/02/2016

A/70/PV.84

the international community to be equally ruthless,
resourceful and skilled in preventing the phenomenon.

and the tenth anniversary Review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June.

The Netherlands believes that international
cooperation is key to preventing violent extremism.
Countries must look beyond national borders
and stay ahead of the curve together. Through its
international efforts, the Netherlands reaches out to
its allies and partners in order to build capacities and
share best practices. As Co-Chair with Turkey of the
Global Counterterrorism Forum, we promote further
international cooperation through that important
multilateral platform, which works closely with various
relevant United Nations agencies. With a working group
that focuses on the prevention of violent extremism
and through the related Hedayah International Centre
of Excellence for Countering Violent Extremism, in
Abu Dhabi, the Global Counterterrorism Forum is well
positioned to mobilize expertise on extremism, work on
international coherence and provide best practices and
tools for implementing the Plan of Action. The same
goes for initiatives such as the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund.

I asked just now if we were truly willing to
work together. Well, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands ready to intensify its efforts to work with the
United Nations and other Member States to prevent
the multi-headed monster that we call terrorism
from striking.

Nationally as well as internationally, the
Netherlands focuses on identifying and tackling the
root causes of radicalization. Within the framework
of our comprehensive national action programme for
preventing violent extremism, at the local level we
maintain intensive and long-lasting contacts with
community and religious leaders, police officers,
teachers and social workers who work on a daily
basis with youngsters who may become radicalized.
Although the strategy has proved useful, the number of
Dutch foreign terrorist fighters travelling abroad is still
rising every month, which is worrying. It is therefore
important that we continue to combine our national
efforts to prevent violent extremism with international
cooperation. The crucial factor is mutual trust. Do
we trust each other enough? Do we share enough
information? And are we truly willing to work together
even more closely to prevent violent extremism?
Prevention is better than taking action after the
event. Stopping today’s radicals from becoming
tomorrow’s terrorists can succeed only if we take action
both nationally and internationally. The Netherlands
is looking forward to seeing the Plan of Action
implemented by the United Nations and its Member
States, and to engaging in further discussions on the
subject in the context of the Geneva conference in April

Mr. Heumann (Israel): I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s debate on an important issue. I also wish to
express my thanks to the Secretary-General for his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) and
our appreciation for the hard work of the President’s
Office, which has enabled us to adopt today’s resolution
70/254 on the Plan of Action by consensus and thus
send an important message from this Hall.
When our children are not safe in their schools
and our families are not safe in their homes, then we,
as an international community, have failed. We have
failed to stand up to terrorism, failed to resist those who
spread hatred and failed to fight back. No country is
safe today, and no continent is immune to the horrific
consequences. Today, violent extremist ideologies drive
the most brutal and violent terror attacks that we have
ever seen. The emerging stories shock the conscience
of humankind. At the same time, the flow of foreign
fighters to such terror organizations remains strong,
with more civilians being radicalized and recruited
every day.
When analysing the issue of violent extremism,
we often hear that poverty, unemployment and
marginalization drive people to become terrorists.
Those are indeed core factors. But we must not
ignore the fact that some terrorists also come from
prosperous families, live in countries with open and
equitable societies and enjoy the full benefits of a
university education.
So while social and economic factors are important
considerations, we must not delude ourselves. Young
people from all walks of life and all environments are
being drawn to violent extremism. If we are not clear
about what drives that process, we will not be able to
overcome it. And here we must be clear — the real
and most basic threat we face is extremist ideology
itself. Therefore, if we truly want to defeat violent
extremism and terrorism, we must attack radical
extremist ideology at its source. It is the ideological

16-0366621/29

A/70/PV.84

core that spurs terrorism, emboldens its sponsors
and motivates terrorist recruitment, operations and
growth. Today, we acknowledge that the prime driving
forces behind the ideology of violent extremism are
incitement and indoctrination. We see youth being
brainwashed — lured by manipulative leaders to a life
of extremism that sanctifies death instead of life.
Efforts to counter incitement and radicalization
are among the most effective tools at our disposal. We
must promote education that teaches peace instead
of hate, tolerance instead of violence, and mutual
understanding instead of martyrdom. Community
leaders and cultural, religious and political figures
play a crucial role in promoting counter-radicalization
efforts. We must make every effort to ensure that the
key voices of moderation are heard, and that they defeat
the forces of extremism.
Unfortunately, in Israel the threat of terrorism is
all too real. For decades, Israel has been at the forefront
of confronting terror and radical ideology. Over the
course of the past few months alone, 30 Israelis have
been killed by terrorists, and over 300 have been injured
in hundreds of attacks. Israel has long understood that
in order to counter terrorism, we also have to counter
violent extremism, and that is an integral component
of our national counter-terrorism strategy. We have
supported organizations that build bridges between
citizens of different religions and beliefs through
educational, cross-cultural and interfaith meetings. We
believe that tolerance and understanding of the other
are the best way to defeat extremism and radicalism.
Israel welcomes the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action. It is Israel’s strong conviction that only a
unified and proactive stance will enable us to get ahead
of the phenomenon of violent extremism, mitigate
the next wave of foreign terrorist fighter recruits and
prevent the horror attacks of tomorrow. At the same
time, the implementation of the Plan must be done in
concert with, and not in place of, our ongoing counterterrorism measures.
Our final point is that just as violent extremism
knows no boundaries, so too must our efforts be united
in order to prevent it. We must not allow excuses for
terror — no ifs, ands or buts. Terror is terror is terror.
The Secretary-General’s Plan offers an opportunity
for cooperation, but we must avoid detracting from its
promise. Some in this Hall seek to infuse politicization
into this discussion, but that background noise must
22/29

12/02/2016

not be allowed to hijack this important topic. The
goal of countering terrorism is simply too important.
Now, more than ever, as violent extremism tears our
world apart, it is imperative that we stand together. It
is imperative that we not use the fight against terrorism
as a camouflage to single out one country and score
cheap political points. That will lead these discussions
to a gridlock.
The State of Israel stands ready and willing to play
an active role in the crucial endeavour.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to state my
delegation’s support for the statement made earlier
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important initiative.
I welcome the adoption of resolution 70/254, which
takes note of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). Today, we are
facing a grave challenge to international peace and
security, which is also undermining our efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. Increasingly, as
we push back against extremists in particular countries,
they lash out elsewhere. Our challenge further increases
with our inability to reach a precise definition of
extremism, which has no specific religion, nationality
or culture. The manner in which some extremist groups
affiliate Islam with their destructive actions is a serious
offense to a religion that is compassionate in nature.
Furthermore, the individuals recruited, in particular by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS, to abuse
Islam’s name have done so in an attempt to justify their
extremist ideas and criminal acts.
The Secretary-General notes in his report on
the Plan of Action that extremism does not arise in a
vacuum. There are incentives that drive people towards
extremism, such as conflicts, civil wars and human
rights abuses. In addition, the proxy war that some
countries are waging to achieve their despicable plans
further aggravates the situation. That requires us to
work together to help countries resolve their differences
and halt the threat of extremism. The Plan of Action
needs to address other factors that propel extremism,
most notably foreign occupation and State terrorism.
The Plan must also address the issue of accountability
for States that compromise the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
16-03666

12/02/2016

The United Arab Emirates supports, as a priority,
the Secretary-General’s call for the development of
regional plans to prevent extremism. We would like to
emphasize the following points. The first concerns the
promotion of good governance and the rule of law. My
country has enacted a number of laws to ensure that
the issue of extremism is addressed through the rule
of law. Secondly, with regard to the inclusion of local
communities and the countering of hate narratives, the
United Arab Emirates supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative to promote the participation of youth in society.
There are 1.8 billion young people in Arab societies.
They make up more than half of the population. The
United Arab Emirates has integrated its own youth
into decision-making processes and the prevention of
extremism, inter alia by recently appointing a 22-yearold female minister to preside over the United Arab
Emirates International Youth Council.
My country has supported the appointment of Emirati
women to leading roles in all fields. That can be seen in
the recent appointment of the first Arab woman leader
of a parliamentary national assembly. The United Arab
Emirates also supported Security Council resolution
2242 (2015), which stresses the importance of women’s
participation in the maintenance of international peace
and security, and we have supported the project carried
out in collaboration with the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women on
countering violent terrorism.
We support the Plan of Action’s emphasis on
promoting dialogue and engaging religious leaders in
the promotion of the values of peace. In the United
Arab Emirates, the Muslim Council of Elders in Abu
Dhabi is working to unify efforts to eliminate extremist
messages that threaten human values and the principles
of Islam.
The conquest of extremism requires long-term
strategies aimed at winning the war of ideas, especially
in the social media, which have been used to spread
extremist ideas. Therefore, the United Arab Emirates
is working through international centres of excellence
for countering violent extremism to expose messages
from extremist groups. One such centre was launched
by the United Arab Emirates in cooperation with the
United States.
There is a need for regional plans of action to
prevent extremism, which does not respect borders, as
mentioned by the Secretary-General. The United Arab

A/70/PV.84

Emirates has joined 33 other Islamic countries in the
first Islamic coalition against terrorism, led by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, to eliminate extremist ideas
and preserve Islam.
The United Arab Emirates strongly believes
that the Secretary-General’s initiative should serve
as a blueprint for coordinating all efforts to combat
extremism. It supports the existing mechanisms,
including the important work of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, the enhancement of which
was graciously made possible by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. The United Arab Emirates also believes that
a plan to that effect should be evaluated and approved
during the review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in June. That would help us in our
efforts to seek new ways to curb extremism, as the
existing tools, such as United Nations Security Council
sanctions, are not effective.
We believe that the road to prosperity and lasting
peace lies in the promotion of tolerance and pluralism.
We confirm our commitment to supporting our partners
in their fight against extremist groups wherever they
may be. Our responsibility towards others is part of
our obligation as a member of the Islamic nation and of
humankind at large.
Ms. Vraila (Greece): I wish to thank the President
for organizing this timely and important debate on the
prevention of violent extremism. We believe that it
provides a really good opportunity to exchange views
on promoting our overall response to that alarming
phenomenon.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following from a national point
of view.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674),
a timely initiative that provides useful guidance to
Member States in their efforts to adopt effective and
inclusive policies to face that complex challenge.
Violent extremism is a continuously evolving global
threat, neither constrained by borders nor limited to
any single ideology. It requires concerted action and
a comprehensive response. We need a holistic, firm,
multifaceted and multidisciplinary approach that will
also focus on the conditions conducive to the spread of
extremist ideology.

16-0366623/29

A/70/PV.84

Prevention is an essential element in our strategy
and must be a priority, as clearly envisaged in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We need to
focus on prevention through effective means, as well as
on building inclusive and accountable institutions and
Government practices. That is, of course, a challenging
endeavour, requiring a combination of measures derived
from various disciplines and involving working beyond
Governments by engaging local communities, religious
leaders and civil society. One of its most important
aspects is the need to address the radicalization that
leads to terrorism and the spread of violent extremism
through the Internet.
We recognize the central role of youth in our
comprehensive approach to counter this fast-evolving
challenge. Younger generations are our future and
are therefore the key to our success. They are the
main targets of terrorist and extremist propaganda.
Extremists keep finding new ways of engaging with
youth through networking sites, online video channels
and radical chat rooms, and they have succeeded in
spreading their propaganda very widely, rapidly and
effectively. We must build on the potential of young
people and empower them to achieve their ambitions
through quality education, proper job opportunities and
a decent living. Enhancing the values of coexistence,
respect for diversity and the rejection of violence will
render societies immune to hate-based ideologies.
Debates in the General Assembly and the Security
Council and the relevant resolutions have underlined the
importance that the international community attaches
to addressing conditions and factors leading to the
rise of radicalization, violence and violent extremism
among youth. To strengthen preventive and proactive
action, education is an important factor. Education can
promote open-mindedness and tolerance, respect for
human rights and the rule of law.
Women and girls are frequent targets of radical
ideologies and terrorism. In the fight against violent
extremism, the role played by the empowerment of
women is of major importance. Engaging women as
credible messengers of counter-narratives against
violent extremism could prove instrumental in the
implementation of policies aimed at reducing the appeal
of radicalization.
In the turbulent new international landscape,
respect for the other, tolerance for the different, and the
quest to find unity in diversity are a central message to
24/29

12/02/2016

be promoted. The extremists perpetrate crimes against
humanity, destroy centuries-old religious and historic
monuments and undermine the foundations of peaceful
and democratic societies. Our duty is to protect
human rights and freedoms and the multicultural and
multireligious nature of societies.
It is in that contex,t and subsequent to the
international conference organized in Athens in
October 2015 on religious and cultural pluralism and
peaceful coexistence in the Middle East, that Greece
is founding a centre/observatory for religious pluralism
in the Middle East and the Mediterranean. It will be
a forum for interreligious dialogue and will encourage
interaction between political and religious leaders,
the academic community and non-governmental
organizations aimed at identifying problems affecting
the freedom of religion or belief and cultural pluralism
in the region.
The fight against violent extremism becomes
crucial in efforts to protect the multi-ethnic and
multiconfessional nature of societies. Shortsighted policies based on xenophobia, exclusion and
unilateralism and a single-minded focus on security are
bound to undermine our efforts to effectively address
the sources of the phenomenon of violence, including
violent extremism.
The United Nations, in making full use of its
agencies and toolkit, is the international institution best
positioned to effectively mainstream efforts, create the
basis for a more strategic vision and encourage longterm and sustainable engagement at national levels.
Member States should actively engage in order to
ensure the success of this process.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Allow me to
start by thanking the President for providing us with
an opportunity to start exchanging views on the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
presented last month by the Secretary-General. I
would also like to reiterate Brazil’s appreciation for
the Secretary-General’s leadership on that issue. The
Plan of Action illustrates his genuine commitment
to addressing, in a balanced manner, one of the most
pressing challenges of our time.
Before addressing specific elements of the Plan of
Action, I would like to make some observations of a
conceptual nature. Brazil welcomes the assertion in the
Plan of Action that it applies only to violent extremism
as and when conducive to terrorism. We also note with
16-03666

12/02/2016

appreciation that that very expression was incorporated
into resolution 70/254, which was just adopted.
That conceptual precision is not a minor one, since
terrorism and violent extremism are not synonymous
nor automatically correlated. Racism, xenophobia and
homophobia, for example, can lead to expressions of
violent extremism, which are heinous in themselves, but
not necessarily related to the commission of terrorist
acts. And the strategies that are needed to overcome the
former are different from those appropriate to efforts to
counter terrorism.
In that regard, Brazil fully endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that conflating the concepts
of terrorism and violent extremism “may lead to the
justification of an overly broad application of counterterrorism measures, including against forms of conduct
that should not qualify as terrorist acts” (A/70/674,
para. 4).
We still lack, however, a precise consensus
definition of violent extremism and its relationship with
terrorism. We must therefore guard against abuses,
including to human rights, that might arise owing to
that legal gap.
Based on the commitment to make prevention
work, the Plan of Action can be considered a welcome
counterweight to the emphasis on military approaches
witnessed during the first 15 years of the twentyfirst century. It is also in line with our joint efforts to
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in terms
of prevention, as demonstrated by the simultaneously
ongoing review processes on peace operations, the
peacebuilding architecture, and women and peace and
security. Brazil is pleased to acknowledge that the
very title of the Plan of Action reflects the centrality
of prevention.
Violent extremism conducive to terrorism can
be effectively countered only with an approach that
takes into consideration the underlying causes of such
extremism. Legitimate grievances that push individuals
towards radicalism need to be understood and tackled.
Intolerance leading to terrorist acts is more likely to
thrive where social, political, economic or cultural
exclusion has taken root. While it would be erroneous
to establish an automatic chain of causality between
poverty and violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
it is possible to state that people are less susceptible
to radicalism in inclusive societies. As recognized
by the Secretary-General, vulnerability to extremist

A/70/PV.84

narratives is frequently related to the erosion of an
individual’s prospects — especially those of younger
people — owing to marginalization and unemployment.
The United Nations can play a more effective
role in fostering prevention. It is regrettable that
the Organization’s capacity to achieve progress in
that regard has been severely limited by its current
budgetary practices. The promotion of development
and human rights — which recognizably contribute to
prevention — is underfunded, while the bulk of available
resources go to responding to peace and security
challenges stemming from often-preventable conflicts.
Not a single country is immune to violent extremism
conducive to terrorism, regardless of its size and
resources. Foreign terrorist fighters have been recruited
in prosperous societies. As was rightly assessed by
the Secretary-General, the phenomenon cannot be
explained solely by a lack of access to economic
opportunity. Terrorist groups such as Da’esh have been
attracting recruits by offering them a sense of purpose,
belonging and identity that they have failed to acquire
elsewhere. Genuinely combating exclusion — in law
as well as in practice — can go a long way towards
neutralizing extremist narratives and ensuring that our
societies develop resilience to radicalization.
Discriminatory laws, especially those enabling
population profiling, are inconsistent with respect
for diversity and the acknowledgment of our
common humanity. Brazil has learned that promoting
inclusiveness requires active outreach on the part
of the State to the most fragile, vulnerable or remote
populations in our territory in order to provide them
with access to justice and to basic services.
In his recommendations to Member States, the
Secretary-General rightly attributes relevance to
fighting exclusion. Brazil is convinced that another
critical element to be incorporated in our strategy to
prevent violent extremism is to address the refugee
crisis. We cannot turn a blind eye to those who have
had to flee their home countries to survive conflict.
Societies that have been demonstrating solidarity
towards refugees are contributing significantly to
tackling a major driver of that phenomenon. As pointed
out by former United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees António Guterres, a world that rejects refugees
would provide extremists with the best propaganda
tool that they could wish for in the recruitment of new
supporters, including inside the very countries that

16-0366625/29

A/70/PV.84

seek to close their borders to refugees. In other words,
it is inconsistent to uphold the notion of a collective
responsibility to protect civilians in situations of
conflict and then turn one’s back on the very civilians
fleeing conflict when they knock on your door.
The Secretary-General is correct in stressing that
conformity with international law is a prerequisite for
the effectiveness of our efforts against terrorism and
violent extremism. If measures are implemented in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations or other
bodies of international law — including human rights,
humanitarian and refugee laws — their legitimacy
will have been compromised, rendering them
counterproductive. Terrorist groups aim to provoke
Governments into overreaction so as to explore the
narratives of abuse and oppression. Unfortunately,
many are falling into their trap.
The use of the Internet and social media by terrorist
organizations illustrates the evolving nature of the
challenge that we are facing. Having been conceived
to bring people together, those platforms are now
also being used to incite hatred and promote terrorist
recruitment. While acting against that sort of misuse,
we must simultaneously guard against transgressions
of the freedom of expression and the right to privacy.
We should simultaneously foster digital inclusion, since
the Internet and social media are powerful tools for
channelling messages of respect and dialogue.
The Secretary-General is also correct in his
diagnosis that protracted and unresolved conflicts
often lie at the root of violent extremism. We regret
that the Plan of Action does not sufficiently address
the international community’s responsibility to solve
conflicts in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. We should not underestimate the recruitment
power engendered by a sense of oppression and
exclusion triggered by foreign occupation in particular.
The dissemination of violent extremism cannot be
dissociated from our collective failure to deal with
ongoing crises in the Middle East, especially the IsraelPalestine conflict. Our strategy to prevent violent
extremism must include a call for efforts to bring peace
founded on justice to conflicts that directly or indirectly
fuel terrorist agendas. The Security Council has yet to
live up to its responsibilities in that regard.
Today’s meeting represents the beginning of a
debate on the recommendations presented by the
Secretary-General and other Member States with
26/29

12/02/2016

regard to how to prevent violent extremism. We look
forward to further discussing those issues in the Geneva
conference in April and during the review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Let me at the outset
thank the President for organizing this debate on the
Secretary-General’s report on the Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, contained in document
A/70/674. My delegation welcomes the opportunity to
focus on the pandemic that goes by the name of violent
extremism. This modern-day plague is destroying
societies, haemorrhaging communities and disrupting
State structures. From regions in conflict to the streets
of distant cities, it is extracting a deadly price. At this
stage, we would like to offer our remarks outlining
our approach to the issue, even as we await a detailed
discussion on the subject.
First, the report adopts a sagacious approach by
not attempting to enter into the divisive minefield of
defining the phenomenon that goes by the name of
violent extremism. We in the General Assembly would
once again have been subjected to theological debates,
even though the need now is for action. The approach
of indicating pathways to address the problems with
the best tools that we have, rather than going down the
route of definition, has our support.
Secondly, given the variety of social, political,
economic, psychological and cultural factors in play,
there can obviously be multiple pathways leading
to the growth of violent extremism. Hence, the
interconnectedness between security and development
as a central philosophical tenet of the approach outlined
in the Plan of Action is understandable. That also
augurs well for a role for the United Nations, which
has long experience in stringing together intersectoral
partnerships to address multidimensional issues
through potentially multiple routes. However, we
feel that the Plan of Action is full of prescriptions to
Member States, but it is low on what the United Nations
will do to assist Member States in this venture.
We acknowledge that addressing this malaise is
primarily the responsibility of Member States, and
many are already confronting the problem as best as they
can. Nevertheless, we need substantive value-addition
from the United Nations in the endeavour. Even more
important than what we face is how we can respond
to the threat. What we are tackling is not merely a
local contagion that can be addressed unilaterally; it
16-03666

12/02/2016

is a global contagion. Global links, franchise relations,
homegrown terrorism and the use of cyberspace for
recruitment and propaganda all present a new level of
threat. We need significant options for international
cooperation, which, unfortunately, we do not discern in
the Plan before us today.
Thirdly, it is our view that the current architecture
at the United Nations is not sufficient to tackle the
virus that threatens us collectively. The Plan of Action
provides no solution to that shortcoming. For example,
where is the single contact point that will assist Member
States that seek United Nations assistance in preventing
violent extremism? Having gone through the entire Plan
of Action, we did not, unfortunately, find an answer to
that simple and basic question.
Fourthly and finally, even when all the numerous
prescriptions listed in the Plan of Action are
implemented, there will still be cases where we will
not be able to prevent determined instances of violent
extremism metamorphosing into terrorism. It is our
view that no grievance whatsoever — I repeat, no
grievance — can justify resorting to terrorism. While
emphasizing prevention, we should not shift our focus
from ensuring that violent extremists are also subject to
the full force of the law, as they pose an imminent and
continuing danger.
India is a nation of many faiths and great diversity
of beliefs. It is a nation whose unity is strengthened by
its pluralism. It is our firm belief that, ultimately, it is
the values represented by open and tolerant societies
that are the best foil to the forces of violent extremism.
Guided by that approach, we look forward to discussing
the issues presented in the Plan of Action in greater
detail at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let
me first congratulate the President for convening
this debate on the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).
The Kingdom of Morocco believes that preventing
violent extremism, which leads to terrorism, must be
among the priorities of the United Nations in facing
the global threat of terrorism. That threat has become
worldwide in scale, and no State or society is spared.
Accordingly, Morocco has not hesitated to support the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action.
Several factors have come together to fuel the
violent extremism that leads to terrorism, including the

A/70/PV.84

repercussions of the economic and financial crisis, which
led to the unemployment of our young people; wars that
have led to displaced persons and millions refugees;
shortcomings in good governance, democracy, justice
and the rule of law; and xenophobic provocations and
Islamophobia. All of that demands concerted action on
the part of all States Members of the United Nations,
which has the duty to help Member States to take
ownership of the development of their national action
plans to prevent violent extremism while fully enjoying
their sovereignty. It is therefore important to support
the educational and technical cooperation provided
to Member States and to encourage South-South and
triangular cooperation. In that regard, we welcome the
cooperation programmes developed in the framework
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
The prevention of violent extremism in all its
forms, including that leading to terrorism, is part of
Morocco’s national strategy to combat terrorism. That
strategy revolves around a three-pronged approach to
security and strengthening anti-terrorist laws: human
development, religious reform, and de-radicalization. It
is also consistent with many elements of the national
plan of action to prevent violent extremism.
Religious reform has included, among other
things, the training of young imams and preachers in
the values ​​and precepts of true Islam. In March 2015,
His Majesty the King inaugurated the Mohammed
VI Institute for the Training of Imams, Morchidines
and Morchidates, which is open to all countries of
the world. A deradicalization, rehabilitation and
integration programme for foreign terrorist fighters has
also been launched. Morocco is faithful to its mission
to share and exchange expertise with other African
countries and has begun religious cooperation with a
number of African and European countries that have
concluded cooperation agreements with Morocco on the
training of imams and morchidates at the Mohammed
VI Institute.
The Kingdom of Morocco will spare no effort to
bring religious leaders of all faiths to discuss ways to
mitigate the exploitation of religion that fuels violent
extremism leading to terrorism. Therefore, in Fez in
April 2015, the Kingdom of Morocco organized the first
forum on the role of religious leaders in preventing the
incitement to hatred, which was resulted in the adoption
of the Fez Declaration. That forum underscored the
importance and relevance of interfaith cooperation in

16-0366627/29

A/70/PV.84

12/02/2016

the fight against all forms of discrimination, xenophobia
and incitement to hatred.

more appropriate role for the United Nations, which
must lead us in that area.

In addition, from 25 to 28 January, under the
patronage of His Majesty King Mohammed VI,
Morocco organized in Marrakech a conference on the
protection of religious minorities in Muslim societies.
In his opening speech at the conference, His Majesty
the King stressed the importance of cooperation
among the followers of all religions in confronting
the challenges of discrimination and intolerance. The
conference adopted the Marrakesh Declaration, which
called, among other things, for a review of education
and religious programmes with a view to highlighting
the virtues of cohabitation, tolerance and coexistence
among all religions. That is the only way to counteract
the hate speech of Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their associates.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco welcomes
the value added by the complementarity of the
Plan of Action to both the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy — the implementation
of whose pillars will contribute effectively to its
application — and the Security Council resolutions on
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism, in
particular resolution 2178 (2014), which links violent
extremism to terrorism.

From the outset, the Kingdom of Morocco has
supported the adoption of a short and procedural
resolution welcoming the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral and at least taking note of the Plan of Action.
The draft resolution circulated on 9 February by
the President of the General Assembly, following
consultations with Member States, provided an
opportunity to move forward and bring together all
positions for the adoption by consensus this morning of
resolution 70/254.
The fifth review meeting on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, scheduled for
June, and other relevant forums will provide optimal
opportunities to examine other, related issues. The
recommendations presented by the Secretary-General
are relevant, in particular on the issues of young people
and the fight against violent extremism in the media
and the Internet, as well as in other sectors.
Integrating the prevention of violent extremism
into the activities of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions may jeopardize or complicate
the specific mandates of such operations and missions.
That said, the Plan of Action represents an important
basis for fighting violent extremism and for creating a
space of consensus among all the countries of the world
to face that global phenomenon. Violent terrorism and
violent extremism do not allow us to remain apart. On
the contrary, we must come together and bring together
all forces and efforts and, above all, demonstrate
tolerance and acceptance of the other. The entire
international community must do it together with a
28/29

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force team and other United Nations entities directly
involved in establishing preventive mechanisms within
the global approach of the United Nations to the
fight against violent extremism, which is conducive
to terrorism. Kazakhstan welcomes the initiative of
the Secretary-General to address the phenomenon of
violent extremism, as well as his efforts to that end.
We are all aware of the impact of terrorist groups
operating in various parts of the world. It is therefore
necessary to mobilize regional structures, such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, so as to maintain security in the vast area
covered by those organizations. Closer coordination
with the International Criminal Police Organization is
also an absolute necessity.
In addition, Governments must come forward
to share intelligence about terrorist groups and their
movements and about funding sources for strengthened
action. At the same time, support and technical
assistance, training, resources and equipment need
to be provided to weaker States so that they can fight
violence and extremism in their territories and along
their borders.
Given the situation with regard to violent
extremism, my delegation would like to mention the
proposal of the President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, to establish a United-Nations-led counterterrorism coalition with a unified mechanism to
defeat that scourge and bring perpetrators and their
supporters to justice. Such an entity would bring
16-03666

12/02/2016

together and strengthen all the existing United Nations
structures into a well-coordinated global effort. In
our view, the current United Nations mechanisms,
including the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, should be made legally binding through
relevant Security Council resolutions. Thus the speedy
adoption of a comprehensive document on the issue of
international terrorism is most critical.
We call on all delegations to support such a bold
and forward-looking approach, as well as to develop
further the recommendations of the Secretary-General
to prevent violent extremism, as reflected in his Plan
of Action (A/70/674). Kazakhstan believes that the
strategy of the Secretary-General should represent a set
of coordinated actions by the international community
to prevent the emergence and escalation of violent
extremism. We commend and support the Plan of
Action as a whole and resolution 70/254, adopted today
on thissubject.
We urge that no action be taken that could lead to the
destruction of the foundations of statehood or facilitate

A/70/PV.84

the emergence and growth of extremist sentiments
in society. Peace and security are interrelated. It is
obvious that the world has not done enough to invest
in sustainable development. Therefore, Kazakhstan has
proposed that Member States allot 1 per cent of their
national defence expenditure to the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals Fund.
Kazakhstan hosted a regional conference on
countering violent extremism on 29 and 30 June 2015,
as a follow-up to the summit on that theme held earlier
in Washington. This May, my country will convene a
high-level forum entitled “Religions for Peace” under
the patronage of the President of the General Assembly.
The forum aims to demonstrate how religious unity
can be harnessed to combat the destructive nature of
terrorism and violent extremism.
Kazakhstan stands ready to join the multilateral
action of the United Nations system and Member States
aimed at achieving a peaceful and secure world.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

16-0366629/29
