SECURITY COUNCIL
‘. ,
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

Y&AR

2471st

MEETING:

NEW

6 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2471)
Adoption of the agenda

. .... .. .. ... .. .... .. .. ... ... ... .. ...

1

.. ... .. .... ... ... .. ... .. .... .. .. .... .. ... ... ...

1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council ($05949);
Letter. dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951) .*..................,..................................

1

WPV.247 1 and Corr.1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoIutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

~.
::.
-:.
.-:.
. \
.:.-. .
::. .
..-_
::>
:..:_.
.:. .

.

2471st MEETING
Held

in New York on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe..
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2471)
Adoption

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1595 1)
The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Chargk d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Councli (S/15949);

6 September

1983, at 11 a.m.

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2470th meeting, I invite the representative of
Canada and the Observer for the Republic of Korea to
take places at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Australia, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Japan and New Zealand to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
and Mr. Kin (Republic of Korea) took places at the Council
table; Mr. Joseph (Australia). Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kuroda (Japan) and Mr. Harland
(New Zealand) took the places reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the repre-sentatives of Bangladesh, Belgium, Italy, Liberia, Nigeria,
the Philippines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Spain and Sweden, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mrs.
Jones (Liberia). Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Moreno
Salcedo (Philippines), Mr. Syder (Portugal), Mr. Koroma
(Sierra Leone), Mr. de PiniPs (Spain) and Mr. Amneus
(Sweden) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following documents:
S/15954, containing a letter dated 2 September from the
representative of Thailand addressed to the President of
the Council, and S/15955, containing a note verbale dated
2 September from the Mission of Chile addressed to the
Secretary-General.

4. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
Most of the world outside the Soviet Union has heard by
now of the Korean Air Lines flight 007 carrying 269 persons between New York and Seoul, which strayed off
course into Soviet airspace, was tracked by Soviet radar,
was targeted by a Soviet SU-15, whose pilot coolly, and
after careful consideration, fired two air-launched missiles
which destroyed the Korean air liner and apparently its
269 passengers and crew.

or when it happened, or what Soviet officials knew about
its fate. We know, because we know what the Soviet
pilots, who intercepted the Korean air liner over the Sakhalin Island, said to their ground controllers during the
SO-minute period from 1756 to 1848 hours on 31 August
while they tracked, discussed and destroyed the Korean
air liner and its passengers,
9. The United States Government, in cooperation with
the Government of Japan, has decided to spread the evidence before the Council and the world. It is available on
the video tape which will be played. On this tape you will
hear the voices of pilots of Soviet interceptors, which
included three SU-15 Flagons and one MiG-23 Flogger,
including the SU-15 pilot who pulled the trigger which
released the missiles that destroyed Korean Air Lines
flight 007.

5. This calculated attack on a civilian air liner, unarmed,
undefended, as civilian air liners always are, has shocked
the world. Only the Soviet people have still not heard
about this attack on Korean Air Lines flight 007 and the
death of the passengers because the Soviet Government
has not acknowledged firing on the Korean air liner.
Indeed, not until 5 September did Soviet officials acknowledge publicly that Korean Air Lines flight 007 had disappeared in its icy waters. The Soviet Government has not
been silent about the plane, however. It has merely lied.

10. While it is obvious that the pilots are acknowledging
instructions from ground controllers, those instructions
are not audible. What we are about to play back for you is
the intercepted tape of the actual air-to-ground reports. It
is, of course, in Russian. On the monitor screens you will
see simultaneously the original Russian and the English
translation. Through your audio system you will listen to
these voices in translation into all the working languages
of the United Nations. Immediately following my presentation the Russian-to-English
transcript will be made
available to all who may wish to study it. After this meeting of the Security Council an audio cassette, on which
voices are still clearer, will be provided to any interested
Mission. Nothing was cut from this tape. The recording
was made on a voice-actuated recorder and, therefore, it
covers only those periods of time when conversation was
heard. Let us now listen to the tape.

6. On 1 September, Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Gromyko, announced:
“An unidentified plane, coming from the direction
of the Pacific Ocean entered the airspace of the Soviet
Union over Kamchatka Peninsula, and for the second
time violated the Soviet airspace over the Sakhalin
Island. The plane did not have navigation lights, did
not respond to queries and did not enter into contact
with the radio control service. Fighters of the antiaircraft defence, which were sent aloft towards the
intruder plane, tried to give it assistance in directing it
to the nearest air field, but the intruder plane did not
react to the signals and warnings from the Soviet tighters and continued its flight in the direction of the Sea
of Japan.”

The following is a transcript of the tapes as played aloud
and displayed in the Security Council chamber. The tapes
and transcript were furnished by the United States
delegation.

7. The next day, 2 September, TASS repeated Mr. Gromyko’s charge that Soviet airspace had been rudely violated by “an unidentified plane” which, “in violation of
international
regulations . . . flew without navigation
lights”. TASS referred to efforts to establish contacts with
the plane, “using generally accepted signals, and to take it
to the nearest airfield in the territory of the Soviet
Union”. They also said:

“VOICE: Soviet radar began tracking the Korean
air liner at 1551 GMT. At 1635 GMT, the Soviets
noted the 747 actually was flying over their land mass.
At 1728 GMT, a Korean air liner was flying over the
Sea of Okhotsk the same time a US reconnaissance
flight RC-135 was landing at a base on the Aleutian
Islands. The RC-135 had been flying a routine mission
in support of the SALT compliance agreements’ off the
Kamchatka Peninsula. At 1826 GMT, a full hour after
the US reconnaissance flight had landed, the Korean
air liner was destroyed near the Soviet Sakhalin Island
1,200 miles away.

“Over the Sakhalin Island, a Soviet aircraft fired
warning shots with tracer shells along the flying route
of the plane.
“Soon after this the intruder plane left the limits of
Soviet airspace and continued its t%ght towards the Sea of
Japan. For about 10 minutes, it was within the observation zone of radio location means, after which it could be
observed no more”. [247&h meeting, para. 48.1

“The tape you are about to hear begins at 1756 GMT,
one hour before the Korean air liner wasshot down. The
communication in from four Soviet tighter pilots talking
to their ground controllers while tracking the Korean air
liner.”

8. Yesterday, when Soviet General Romanov finally
admitted that the Korean plane had crashed, killing
numerous people, he again asserted the jet liner was flying
with its lights out. That is what TASS said. That is what
Soviet officials said. But we do not have to wonder about
what really happened, to the air liner or to its passengers,

(interpretation from Russian)*
l Due to the poor
sound quality of the tapes, which were unintelligible, this interpretation
was made not from the tapes, but on the basis of
the transcript
furnished
in Russian and English by the United States
delegation.

2

“4,500 (metres).
“Course 280.
“Executing.
“Executing.
“I see it visually and on radar.
“Roger.

“Course 100 in a climb to 8 (000 metres).
“I didn’t understand. What course? My course is 100.
“I am executing.
“Course 50.
“(Answer)
“On course 240.
“I see it.

“Executing

“I have dropped my tanks.
“I dropped them.

“Roger. Understood. I’m flying behind.
“Course 30 -

8,000 (metres).

“Executing.
“I see it. I’m locked on to the target.
“Roger.
“The target isn’t responding to IFF.
“The target’s course is 240 degrees.
“(The weapons system) is turned on.
“Roger. It’s still on the same course for now.

“Executing course 100.
“Roger.
“Distance to airfield?
“Roger.
“Altitude 4,900.
“I’m executing.
“I didn’t understand.
“I am executing.

“Roger.
“Roger. I have (enough) speed. I don’t need to turn on
my after-burner.
“My fuel remainder is 2,700.
“I’ve dropped my tanks: one at 4,000, one at 3,800.

“Fuel remainder, three metric tons.
“Roger. Repeat the course.
“To the left, probably. Or to the right.
“Carry out course 260.
“On course 260.
“Understood.
.
“Course 220 - 7,500 (metres).
“Roger.
“Should

10 (degrees) left.

“Course 230.
“the target’s course is ftill the same “Executing.
“I am in lock-on.

240.

“Course 240.
“The target’s course is 240.

I turn on the weapons system?

“Understood.
“163 needs to drop his wing tanks.
“Yes, it has turned.

“Yes.
“Repeat the azimuth.
-“IO01 (Take control of me) from Karnaval. Azimuth 45,
distance 60.
“Roger.
“Deputat sees me (on radar).

“The target is 80 degrees to my left.
“Executing (course) 240.
“Course 240.
“Roger.
“Executing (course) 220.

“Deputat

is inquiring:

Do you see the target or not?

“Do you see (it)?
“Are you calling 8057

“Executing.
“(Course) ‘245 (degrees) for 163? Executing.
“Course 220.
“I didn’t understand.
“Roger. (The target’s strobe) light is blinking.
“Course 245 - 7,500 (metres).
“8,000 (metres).
“Roger.

Who’s calling 805?
“I see it.
“Karnaval does not see (unspecified).
“Repeat.
“Executing.
“The AN0 (air navigational lights) are burning. The
(strobe) light is flashing.

‘Course

“Roger. I’m at 7,500, course 230.

280.
3

“I am closing on the target.
“I have enough time.

“I am closing on the target. I am in lock-on. Distance
to target is 8 (kilometres).

“Repeat.
“Executing.

“I have already switched it on.
“On a course of 30.
“ZG. Missile warheads locked on.

“I am flying behind the target at a distance of 25. Do
.-you see,me?,
I . ” .

!‘I have executed. the launch.
‘?he target is destroyed.
“I am ‘breaking off attack.

“(Call)
‘.
‘-, ‘.
“Fiddlesticks. I’m going, that is, my Z.O. (indicator) is lit.
(The missile warheads are already locked on.)
“Answering.
“I answered.
“I need to approach-it

“What are (my) instructions?
“(Call)
“(The indicator/s for) my wing tanks lit up. The fuel
remainder differs by 600 litres for now.
“Fuel remainderI_ 1,600.

(closer).

“I’m turning, lock-on
.off and I’m approaching the
.I
target.
“(For) 163?
“I have broken off lockpn.
“(Right now) I can’t see it.
”
“Exactly. I have executed (unspecified).
“Executing.
“Yes, I’m approaching the target. I’m going in closer.“The target’s (strobe) light is blinking. I have already
approached the target to a distance of about two
(kilometres).
The target is at 10,000 (metres).
“I see both, distance 10 (and) 15 kilometres.
“What are the instructions?
“Roger.
“The target is decreasing speed.
“I am going round it. I’m ‘already ‘moving in, front :of
the target.
f r
“I have increased speed.

“I am executing. What is the distance to the airfield?
“Roger.”
i%e speaker continued:
11. ‘The transcript that we have just heard needs little
explanation. Quite simply, it. establishes that the Soviets
decided to shoot down a civilian air liner, shot it’down,
murdering the 269 persons on board, and lied about it.
The transcript ‘of the pilot’s cockpit conversations illuminates several key points; The interceptor pilot who shot
down Korean Air Lines flight 007 had the air liner in sight
for over 20 minutes before tiring his missiles. Contrary to
what the Soviets have repeatedly stated, the interceptor
pilot saw the air liner’s navigation lights and reported that
fact to the ground on three occasions. Contrary to Soviet
statements, the pilot made no mention of tiring any warning shots-only the tiring of the missiles, which he said
struck the target. Contrary to Soviet statements, there is
no indication whatsoever that the interceptor pilot made
any attempt either to communicate with the air liner or to
signal it to land in accordance with accepted international
practice. Indeed, the Soviet intercepter planes may be
technically incapable of communicating
by radio with
civilian aircraft, presumably out of fear of Soviet pilot
defections;

“No. It is decreasing.speed.
“It should have been earlier. How can I chase it? I’m
already abeam of the target.

12. Perhaps’ the most shocking fact learned from the
transcript is that at no point did the pilots raise the question of the identity of the target aircraft, nor at any time
did the interceptor pilots refer to it as anything other than
“the target”. The only activity bearing on the identity of
the aircraft was a statement by the pilot of the attacking
interceptor that “The target isn’t responding to IFF.”
That means that the aircraft did not respond to the electronic interrogation by which military aircraft identify
friends or foes. But of course-neither the Korean air liner
nor any.other civilian air liner could have responded to
IFF; because commercial aircraft are not equipped to do
so.

“Now I have to fall back ‘a bit from the target.
“Repeat.
.’
“The target’s altitude is 10,000 (metres).
“From me it, is located 70 degrees to the left.
“I’m dropping back. Now. I will try a rocket.
“12 (kilometres)-to
the target. I’see both.
“I’m in a. right turn on a course of 300.
“Executing.
’

(

”

‘Roger. I am’in lock-on.
“I am turning to a course of 30.
“Roger.

13. We know that the interceptor pilot who shot down
Korean Air Lines flight 007 flew behind, alongside and in
front of the air liner, coming at least as close as two

;.
4

17. Recently the Soviets have implied that Korean Air
Lines flight may have been mistaken for a United States
aerial reconnaissance flight, but that is no more persuasive. The Boeing 747 was on a routine, scheduled flight.
At the time it was shot down the United States reconnaissance plane referred to by the Soviets had been on the
ground’for more than one hour, more than 1,500 miles
away. Moreover, the United States does notfly reconnaissance missions in Soviet airspace. We do regularly operate
aircraft in international airspace to monitor Soviet compliance with SALT’, and other arms control agreements.
The Soviet Government knows what our usual flight patems are and can readily identify these missions.

kilometres before dropping back behind the plane to tire
his missiles. At a distance of two kilometres under the
conditions prevailing at that time it was easily possible to
identify a 747 passenger air liner. Either the Soviet pilot
knew what he was firing at, or he did not know his target
was a civilian passenger air liner. If the latter, then he fired
his deadly missiles without’knowing
or caring what they
would hit. Though he could easily have pulled up to
within some number of metres of the air liner to assure its
identity, he did not bother to do so. In either case, there
was shocking disregard for human life and international
norms.
14. In the days following the destruction of Korean Air
Lines flight 007, Soviet leaders and the Soviet press have
said repeatedly’that they do not understand what all the
fuss is about. They began by accusing the United States of
creating a hullabaloo about nothing, and more recently
they have accused us of a provocation, implying, though
never quite saying, that we provoked them into shooting
down an air liner that strayed into their space, provoked
them into violating the internationally agreed upon standards and practices of behaviour. They have spoken as
though a plane’s straying off course is a crime punishable
by death. .They have suggested that “like any selfrespecting State” they are doing nc more than looking
after their sovereignty, which they shall permit no one to
violate. They have claimed, still without acknowledging
that they shot down the Korean air liner, that “Our antiaircraft defence has fulfilled its duty for the defence of the
security of our motherland.”
They have suggested that
they may have mistaken the Korean air liner for an American reconnaissance plane, but still do not admit that they
attacked and destroyed it.

18. Finally, neither the United States nor any other
country upset about the slaughter of the 269 passengers
on Korean Air Lines fI.ight 007 is creating a hullabaloo or
exaggerating the importance of the event. We are protesting very’ important violations of the norms of civilized
conduct on which international aviation rests and without
which it will not be possible for any of us to board air
liners and fly across continents and oceans without fear of
becoming the object of a murderous attack.
19. To a degree we rarely consider, international air
travel depends on networks of mutual trust that we will
not shoot down one another’s air liners, kidnap, jail or
poison passengers and crews. Why did the Soviet Union
violate these norms? Why have they lied about it? The
reason most often advanced to explain why the Soviet
pilot shot down the air liner is that it was a mistake, the
mistake of a trigger-happy pilot who, with his ground
controller, followed a philosophy of shoot now, identify
later; but if pilot error was responsible for this tragic mistake, why has the Soviet Government not said so? Why
has it lied? And why is it complementing its murderous
attack on Korean Air Lines,flight 007 with a lying attack
on the United States for provocation and aggression?

15. But none of these lies, half-lies and excuses can withstand examination. Straying off course is not recognized
as a capital crime by civilized nations. No nation has the
sovereign right to shoot down any person or vehicle that
may stray across its border in peace time. It is interesting
in this regard to refer to the statements made by the Soviet
Government at the time that it was strenuously rejecting
the complaint of the Government of Sweden of an
encroachment into Swedish territorial waters. At that
time the note addressed to the Government of Sweden by
the Soviet Union said:

20. As I considered this question, my mind returned to a
debate that took place in the Security Council some 21
years ago, when my predecessor, Governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, called the attention of the Council to the
unmistakable evidence that a series of facilities for launching offensive nuclear missiles were being installed in the
western hemisphere. The Soviet representative, Mr.
Zorin, flatly denied those charges and, as Soviet representatives so often do, coupled his denial with .a vicious
attack on the United States. Calling our attention to
threatening
Soviet behaviour, Zorin asserted, only
masked the United States own aggression and-piracy. But
Adlai Stevenson too had evidence to back up his charge,.
photographic evidence as irrefutable as the audio tapes we
have heard today. The fact is that violence and lies are
regular instruments of Soviet policy. Soviet officials regularly behave as though truth were only a function of force
and will; as if the truth were only what they said it is; as if
violence were an instrument of first resort in foreign
affairs. They occupy Afghanistan and accuse the United
States of interference in its internal affairs; they create
massive new European vulnerabilities with .their SS-20s
and accuse the North Atlantic Treaty Organization of
seeking to upset the balance of power.

’ “What sober-minded person, to say nothing of military specialists, can suppose that a submarine in a
surface run with running lights on and running diesels,
the noise of.which was heard over a large distance, in
night time and in poor visibility conditions could
engage in ‘impermissible* activities?’
16. There are internationally agreed upon standards for
intercepting unwelcome aircraft. Those, internationally
agreed upon standards call for serious efforts at identification, verification and warning and-if
the case is
serious-for intercepting the intruder and forcing it to
land or ‘to leave one’s airspace. Sovereignty neither
requires. nor permits shooting down air liners in
peacetime.
5

.’

the truth were only what they said it is; as if violence were
an instrument of first resort in foreign affairs. They
occupy Afghanistan and accuse the United States of interference in its internal affairs; they create massive new
European vulnerabilities with their SS-20s and accuse the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization of seeking to upset
the balance of power.

flight 007. We ask our colleagues to join with us in the
coming days in the effort to wrest from this tragedy new
clarity about the character of our world and new, constructive efforts to render us all more secure, in the air and
on the .ground.
26. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation has already had occasion to express its view of the
unworthy attempts of the American Administration
to
involve the Council in a provocative anti-Soviet spectacle.
It should be perfectly obvious to one and all that the
representatives of the United States are motivated not by
any feelings of humanitarianism
or concern about the
security of civil aviation, but primarily by their own antiSoviet instincts and their desire to step up their psychological warfare against the Soviet Union.

21. We think otherwise. We believe that truth is as vital to
co-operation and peace among nations as among people. It
is depressing to consider seriously our global prospects if
those prospects must be built on relations devoid of truth,
devoid of trust. It is depressing to consider a world in which
a major nation, equipped with the most powerful modem
weapons, believes it has a sovereign right to tire on a commercial air liner lost over its territory.
22. These Soviet actions and claims illuminate the Soviet
conception of appropriate relations among nations in
peace-time. They illuminate the world in which we live and
work and make policy. Of course, some sophisticated
observers believe that the destruction of flight 007 was
neither the work of an isolated Strangelove unconcerned
about human life-nor of that Strangelove and his ground
controller-but
was instead a deliberate stroke designed to
intimidate: a brutal, decisive act meant to instil fear and
hesitation in all who observed its ruthless violence, much as
the destruction of an Afghan village or the imprisonment of
the monitors of the Helsinki Final Act are intended to
secure compliance through terror. Whichever the casewhether the destruction of flight 007 and its passengers
reflects only utter indifference to human life or whether that
destruction was designed to intimidate-we
are dealing
here not with pilot error, but with decisions and priorities
characteristic of a system. Not only did Soviet officials
shoot down a stray commercial air liner and lie about it,
they have callously refused offers of international participation in search-and-rescue efforts, in spite of clearly stated
international standards and recommended practices of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), which
call on States to “grant any necessary permission for the
entry of such aircraft, vessels, personnel or equipment into
its territory and make necessary arrangements with a view
to expediting such entry”.

27. With a stubbornness that would really be worthy of a
better cause, the United States has quite openly tried to
make political capital out of the incident which occurred .
with the South Korean air liner by making unpardonable
speculations about the human tragedy which took place,
thus casting aspersions upon the Soviet Union and its
peace-loving foreign policy. The United States is attempting to make use of this incident in order to give fresh
impetus to the arms race.
28. A typical example was yesterday’s televised statement by the United States President. The burden of that
statement was an appeal for new military allocations, a
further spiralling of the arms race. It even made direct
reference to such specific types of weapons of mass
destruction as MX missiles.
29. It is well known that American propaganda has no
equal when it comes to the job of disinformation. However, through this curtain of propaganda new facts are
daily emerging, and these facts do not tit in with Washington’s original version of the incident involving the South
Korean plane.
30. Today’s statement by the representative of the
United States is simply a further deliberate attempt to put
the discussion on the wrong course. It is an attempt to
avoid an answer to certain central questions.

23. We are reminded once again that the Soviet Union is a
State based on the dual principles of callousness and mendacity dedicated to the rule of force. Here is how Lenin
described the dictatorship of the proletariat in 1920. He
said: “The scientific concept of dictatorship means nothing
more than unrestricted power, absolutely unimpeded by
law or regulations and resting directly on force”.

31. It is an irrefutable fact-and indeed, it has not been
denied by American representatives-that
the intruder
plane had been in Soviet airspace for some considerable
time. It penetrated 500 kilometres inside Soviet territory.
It ignored every attempt made by the Soviet ground services and air forces to identify it. It was unwilling to land at
the nearest Soviet airfield. At the same time, as the Japanese Kyodo News Service indicated, that plane was in
radio communication with Japanese groundcontrol services up to the very moment it disappeared.

24. It is this principle of force, this mentality of force,
that lies at the root of the Korean Air Lines tragedy. This
is the reality revealed to the world by the tragedy. It is a
reality we must all ponder as we consider threats to peace
and human rights that face us today..

32. The version that suggests that the plane’s radio
equipment was out of order and that its crew was unable
to reply to the signals being sent to it obviously does not
stand up under critical examination. This is borne out by
the Soviet planes to establish contact with flight 007, a

25. The United States deeply believes that immediate
steps should be taken, here in the United Nations, to
decrease the likelihood of any repetition of the tragedy of
6

communication was sent from that plane stating that the
navigational equipment on the plane was working normally. The South Korean air liner was equipped with a
triple system of autonomous navigational computers
which gave the crew all possible data on the flight of the
plane, including a tracing of the coastline. The possibility
of a simultaneous failure of even two of those three computers is extremely small. That being the case, why did the
plane stubbornly continue to fly inside Soviet airspace?

36. Something further should be said about the general
circumstances in which this gross violation of Soviet airspace by the South Korean air liner occurred. Contrary to
what has been suggested here by the representative of the
United States, there have recently been deliberate violations of Soviet State borders by American, planes. Such
violations, committed
with assumed impunity,
have
become more and more systematic: such violations
occurred in 1982 on 22 February, 13 March and 4 and 7
May. There have been 12 similar violations so far this
year-including
one on 4 April by planes from the
aircraft-carriers Midway and Enterprise. In those instances the Soviet Union made offtcial protests. There was,
however, no response from the United States. On the contrary, the activities of American reconnaissance planes
near the air borders of the Soviet Union have increased.

33. This fundamental question entails a whole concatenation of other questions involving a gross, lengthy and
obviously pre-planned violation of the airspace of the
Soviet Union. That raises the following very important
question which requires clarification: Why did the United
States authorities and Japan, whose ground services were
directing the flights of planes on that route, knowing that
that plane had been for some time in Soviet airspace, fail
to take the necessary steps to put an end to that gross
violation of the Soviet Union’s sovereignty? Why did the
ground services of the United States and Japan do nothing
at all to warn the crew that the plane had violated the
Soviet Union’s air boundaries and, furthermore, in an area
closed to overflights by foreign aircraft? Why did they not
make an attempt to contact the Soviet authorities in this
connection? Why was there such criminal casualness and
such obvious readiness to risk human lives?

37. On 31 August, on the eve of the South Korean
plane’s invasion of the airspace of the Soviet Union, and in
that same area, seven flights by American reconnaissance
planes of the RC-135 type were recorded. From 1745 to
2049 hours, Moscow time, in an area directly contiguous
to the point at which the South Korean plane entered
Soviet airspace and at a height of 8,000 metres, a reconnaissance plane of that type was observed carrying out
manoeuvres. At the same time three United States warships appeared very close to Soviet waters.

34. The American side originally tried to answer these
questions by saying that the relevant United States services knew about the South Korean plane’s change of
course only from a subsequent analysis of data received
from monitoring posts. That assertion, however, has also
turned out to be invalid. As we have learnt from the
American press the United States was closely following
the actions of the intruder plane with the help of information satellites and other technological means.

38. On 31 August at 2000 hours, 800 kilometres northeast of the town of Petropavlovsky-on-Kamchatka,
a
Soviet radar station discovered an unknown plane with
radar characteristics similar to those of the RC-135 that
was on course towards the Kamchatka Peninsula also at
the height of 8,000-9,000 metres. Subsequently the Soviet
ground stations tried to establish communication with it
regarding the violation. However, the aircraft did not
reply and continued on the same course, going even
deeper into the Soviet airspace. So as to identify the aircraft and give it assistance, air defence planes were
launched to meet it. There was no reaction by the intruder
to their commands. It continued on its flight with its navigation lights turned off, which was characteristic of flights
by American reconnaissance planes. The intruder flew
over the Kamchatka territory and in fact directly over the
Soviet naval base and other military sites. When the
intruder approached Sakhalin Island, another group of
air defence planes was sent aloft to meet it which once
again tried to establish contact with it and to conduct it to
the nearest Soviet airport. However, the intruder not only
continued on the same course without responding to the
Iwarning manoeuvre carried out by the Soviet planes, but
also changed its course entering the airspace directly over
the southern part of Sakhalin Island and flew over the
Soviet naval base while at the same time altering its altitude. It was only thereafter that a warning shot was fired
with tracers from the Soviet plane.

35. The American Administration
has very reluctantly
admitted that there was an American RC-135 reconnaissance plane in the same area which was, at a certain stage,
following a course exactly parallel to that of the South
Korean aircraft and that, in at least one instance, it did
intersect that course. This American reconnaissance plane,
by the way, could indeed have been used to turn the South
Korean Boeing 747 back to international airways in time,
or at least to inform the Soviet side’through the relevant
American services as to the reason for its being within
Soviet airspace. However, the appearance of that American reconnaissance plane close to the South Korean air
liner suggests something else: it may in fact have been
determining the coordinates and the nature of the activities of the radar stations of the Soviet air defence services,
which had been set in motion to observe the behaviour of
the South Korean air liner in Soviet airspace. In this connection, the following fact is also signlicant: American and
Japanese authorities have avoided publicizing any recordings they have of conversations between the South Korean
pilot and the ground services, although the South Korean
plane was over the territory of the Soviet Union and in
contact with those services for some time.

39. All these facts in aggregate suggest strongly that the
course and nature of the flight carried out by the South
Korean air liner was not fortuitous, but rather a scenario
that had been prepared for this tragic event long before.
7

40. The actual state of affairs, which is apparent to all,
despite efforts to distort it, clearly indicates who bears
responsibility for the downing of the South Korean air
liner and who sacrificed the lives of many people. Those
people lost their lives not because of the Soviet Union, as is
so loudly proclaimed in the West: they are additional victims of the cold war whose apologist and pursuer is the
present United States Administration.

member of the Council, so as to contribute to fair discussions of the matter in the Council.
46. The Japanese Self-Defence Forces recorded the
uncoded communications between the Soviet fighter plane
and its ground control station before and after it fired on
the Korean aircraft in the early dawn of I September. That
recording contains the communications transmitted by the
pilot of the Soviet lighter plane which are at the crux of the
incident. The transcription which the United States delegation presented a little while ago provided us with the communications extensively, so I will refer only to the crucial
parts. The time is Japanese Standard Time.

41. The Soviet delegation takes this opportunity to
repeat that regret has been expressed in the ruling circles
of the Soviet Union concerning the victims of this tragic
event. At the same time, we vigorously condemn those
who planned and executed this inhuman act of provocation and who now are not only trying to rid themselves of
the guilt but are also using this occasion for unsavory
political purposes.

“3.21 35’ The target’s (strobe) light is blinking. I’have
already approached the target to a distance of about
two (kilometres).
“3.25 11’ I am closing on the target. I am in lock-on.
Distance to target is 8 (kilometres).
“3.25 16’ I have already switched it on.
“3.26 20’ I have executed the launch.

42. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council chamber and to make his statement.
43. Mr. KURODA (Japan): My delegation made a statement on this item at the Council’s meeting on 2 September [247&h meering]. We are compelled, however, to
make this urgent intervention in the light of the extremely
regrettable attitude of the Soviet Union following the
shooting down of a Korean aircraft.

“3.26 21’ The target is destroyed.”
That piece. of evidence demonstrates the truth beyond any
doubt. There is only one truth. We once again demand
that the Soviet Union candidly acknowledge the facts and
deal with this incident in a forthright and responsible
manner.

44. As my delegation has already made clear at the meeting on 2 September, after thoroughly examining the available data the Government of Japan is convinced that
Korean Air Lines flight 007 was shot down by a missile
fired by a Soviet jet fighter off the shore of Sakhalin, near
Kaiba Island, on 1 September. But despite our repeated
demands, the Soviet Union has not admitted that the
Korean Air Lines aircraft was shot down by a Soviet fighter and it has failed to offer a satisfactory explanation
based onconcrete data to the countries concerned, including Japan, of what actually took place. Moreover, the
Soviet Union has not replied in a responsible manner to
Japan’s repeated request that it cooperate in search operations. This failure to respond constitutes a disregard of
humanitarian principles and a violation of the Chicago
Convention of International Civil Aviation.* Furthermore,
the Soviet Union, through TASS, its official press agency,
has been trying to shift its responsibility to other countries,
including Japan, by distorting the facts and falsely denying
that it bore any responsibility at all for the downing of the
plane. In so doing, it totally disregards the feelings of the
bereaved families of the passengers aboard the Korean
aircraft and grossly offends the sentiments of the people of
all the countries concerned. This Soviet attitude is utterly
deplorable and should be strongly denounced.

47. in a series of statements ‘issued by TASS, the Soviet
Union has made accusations against Japan, charging that
although the Japanese air traffic control authorities were
aware that the plane
“had been for some time in Soviet airspace, [they had
failed to take the necessary steps to put an end to that
gross violation of the Soviet Union’s sovereignty.”
48. Furthermore, the Soviet Union would have the world
believe that the Korean aircraft violated Soviet airspace for
the purpose of conducting spying and reconnaissance
activities. However, at the core of this incident is the fact
that the Soviet Union shot down an unarmed and defenseless civilian aircraft carrying crew members and 269 passengers of many nationalities, including 28 Japanese. The
various assertions made by the Soviet Union are entirely
groundless and simply skirt this central issue. They are
nothing but an attempt to conceal the essential nature of
the incident. Its statements are unfriendly and detrimental
to the efforts of the international community to determine
the facts and bring about a settlement of this tragic
incident.
49. The Soviet action is inhuman and outrageous. It
contravenes international
law and internationally
accepted norms for the safety of international civil aviation,
and has impaired the order regarding its safety. It must
never .be condoned and deserves our denunciation.

45. Under these circumstances, the Japanese Government decided to make public the evidence it has obtained
in order to prove to the,world that the Korean aircraft
was in fact shot down by a Soviet fighter plane. The Japanese Government has presented the evidence to the Council through the United States of America, which is a

50. The evidence Japan provided today makes it clear
that the five-point demand which the representative of the
8

Republic of Korea made to the Council on 2 September
[ibid.] against the Soviet Union is a legitimate one. That
legitimate demand will doubtless gain the support of the
entire world.

What is more, it was exacted upon people who were innocent of any wrongdoing.

51. The Government of Japan once again strongly
denounces the unlawful and barbarous act of the Soviet
Union. We call upon the Soviet Union to fulfil its obligations under international law and observe humanitarian
principles by acting promptly and in good faith. -This
includes presenting to the countries concerned a full report
of the facts.

59. My Government, therefore, strongly urges that an
immediate investigation of this incident be undertaken.
Among other things, the inquiry should determine exactly
what happened, pinpoint where the responsibility lies,
demand an accounting from those responsible, as well as
ensure appropriate and adequate redress for the families
of the victims. Moreover, measures should be taken to
ensure that similar acts of violence are prevented or
avoided in the future.

52. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

60. We trust that this body, and the whole international
community, will agree to conducting this inquiry, with the
full cooperation of those directly concerned.

53. Mr. MORENO SALCED.0 {Philippines): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and, through you, the members
of the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity to
speak on the very grave issue before us. I would have
spoken on 2 September had the structures of time not
prevented me from doing so. Before proceeding, let me,
first of all, felicitate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. Your eminent qualifications ensure that the
work of the Council will be in good hands.

61. To the families of the victims we extend our sincere
and profound condolences. My Government, for its part,
is extending every possible assistance to the relatives of
the Filipinos who perished under such tragic circumstances.

54. May I also extend our appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of France, whose handling of the
work of the Council during his term reflected his great
diplomatic skills and leadership.
55. In the early hours of Thursday, 1 September, a civilian aircraft of the Korean Air Lines, with 240 passengers
and 29 crew members on board, disappeared. It is now
established that the aircraft had been flying in Soviet airspace. It is also established that a Soviet fighter plane fired
in the direction of the ill-fated aircraft.
56. All the information presented to this body and to
the world by different sources up to now indicates that the
Korean plane went down from a missile tired by a Soviet
military aircraft, thus sending to their deaths 269 hapless
and innocent victims. We therefore voice our outrage,
condemnation and protest over this wanton act.
57. My Government and people, like the rest of the
international community, await a satisfactory explanation
of the loss of so many innocent lives.’ Twenty-four of the
unfortunate passengers on board the plane were Filipino
citizens or persons of Filipino origin, including women
and children, who were on their way to visit’the land of
their birth.
58. Apart from the resulting tragic loss of’human lives,
this incident brings into focus the nature of innocent passage of commercial aircraft throughout the world, and to
what extent prohibitions or sanctions and penalties should
be imposed on transgressions against national airspace. In
this particular case, although the Korean commercial aircraft had entered Soviet airspace, the action taken against
it was unjustifiably disproportionate to the act objected to.

62. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Liberia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make her statement.
63. Mrs. JONES (Liberia): The delegation of Liberia,
Sir, is pleased to see you presiding for the month of September. Your proven skills as a negotiator are a good
augury, and we wish you success in your leadership of the
Council during its present meetings. We also extend our
appreciation to your predecessor for his leadership during
the month of August.
64. At a time when the whole world, on the eve of the
thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, was calmly
looking forward to peaceful deliberations, our hopes were
dashed by the baser instincts of man-by his instinct to
disturb the peace.
65. The wilful, calculated shooting down of an unarmed
civilian aircraft carrying 269 helpless, hapless passengers
has aroused the concern and anger of all peace-loving peoples. The delegation of Liberia, accordingly, registers ‘in
this public manner the anger, concern and outrage of the
Government and people of Liberia over the loss of the
lives of those people. We also extend sympathy to the
Korean people in their period of mourning and sadness.
66. This wanton, brutal act of killing helpless people has
created a puzzle in the minds of millions: My delegation
wishes to inquire and to demand an explanationas to how
a nation can express its desire and yearning for peace and
human understanding and at the same time shoot down
an aircraft carrying helpless civilians.
67. As long as all nations, large and small, rich and
poor, super-Power and lesser Power, share a common
living space, we also share a responsibility to the world
community regarding our actions .and conduct. If we are
truly and sincerely working for peace how,can the Soviet

action be convincingly explained? Peace is not achieved
by bullets or grandiose statements issued in the assemblies, congresses and presidiums of the-world, but rather
on the level of daily human interaction. The Soviet Union
owes the entire world, and the Korean people in particular, a factual explanation of the incident, in the name of
human decency and dignity.

can inflict on mankind. Everyone who has flown in an
aircraft-including
everyone in this chamber--can identify with the fate of the helpless air passengers, who may
not even have been aware that they were in any kind of
danger, with no warning having been given, so swift is the
act of modem warfare. We are left behind to agonize over
their fate and to hold our breath, wondering whether this
will happen again.

68. The delegation of Liberia further calls for the payment of adequate compensation to the bereaved families
by the Soviet Union. We request that an investigation, by,
inter 4Zi4, officials of ICAO should be undertaken. In the
name of justice and humanity the Soviet Union must be
called upon to punish those responsible for the shooting
down of a passenger aircraft, because that act cannot be
condoned.

74. In the name of our common humanity, in the name
of international law and order, we ask the Soviet Union to
give the world the whole story, realizing as we do from
their own Tolstoy’s War and Peace that the worst thing is
for good men to keep silent when a wrong has been done.
75. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Sweden. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

69. The delegation of Liberia further requests that the
Council spare no effort in condemning it, because it is our
view that it would be unreasonable to contend that the
violation of a nation’s airspace by a civilian aircraft with
clear markings and identification justifies the use of such
excessive force. It would have been far better had the
Soviets forced the aircraft to land, as they did in the case
of another Korean airliner in 1978.

76. Mr. AMNEUS (Sweden): I should like to thank the
members of the Security Council for giving Sweden this
opportunity to address the Council on the matter of the
destruction of a Korean Air Lines Boeing 747.
77. Although the exact circumstances surrounding the
disappearance of the civilian Korean air liner remain to be
determined, we must now assume that the aircraft was
shot down by Soviet interceptors. If this assumption is
correct, my Government, as a Member of the United
Nations and with one of its citizens among the passengers,
condemns this unlawful and callous act causing the death
of 269 innocent people. We also wish to express our sincere
condolences to the many families of different nationalities
who have suffered a heavy loss through this tragedy.

70. The shooting down of the -Korean plane is in gross
violation of international civil aviation regulations. It is
an act which seriously affects the operations of international air services and undermines the confidence of
people in the safety of civil aviation. We ask, was the
aircraft identifiedas a civilian or military aircraft before
the shooting? What happens if weather conditions cause
an aircraft to go off course-which is not an international
violation of a country’s airspace? Must it be shot from the
air?

78. This act constitutes a violation of fundamental rules
of international law, a violation of accepted humanitarian
principles and a violation of agreements concerning civil
air transportation.

71. The tendency of super-Powers to over-react when
provoked should be checked. If it is not, such behaviour
foreshadows dire events. More and more, future trends
will reveal helpless and powerless civilians becoming casualties in super-Power rivalry. The rules governing the space
age and space-age technology leave much to be desired.
Such a peace-time calamity is as grotesque as any war-time
calamity.

79. It is of great importance that principles of international law are respected in the field of civil aviation. The
air traffic system is based on the presumption that all
States will protect the lives of innocent air passengers. A
civilian aircraft should, in times of peace, under no circumstances be subjected to action that might imperil its
safety. This principle is valid also in cases where navigation faults may lead the aircraft into restricted areas. In
cases of interception of civilian aircraft the respect for
human life should take precedence over the protection of
territory.

72. There have been peace-time disasters in land, sea
and air transport, but none has been so calculated and so
wilfully carried out as the recent grotesque, sadistic act,
which should not have occurred in these so-called modern
times.
73. It is sad to think that such an act could have occurred as if extraterrestrial beings from Saturn or Jupiter
had been visiting Earth in an unfamiliar, unrecognizable
spacecraft. The shooting down of a civilian aircraft as if
it were from outer space, from another planet, is indeed
regrettable. It illustrates the clear danger of the stockpiling of deadly armaments: given a confused set of variables
and options, there may soon be a temptation to put those
armaments to practical use. These creatures of man are
intended not to be looked upon and admired as objects of
arts, but to be admired for the devastating attacks they

80. It is a well-known fact that the Soviet Union has
severe rules of its own for the protection of the State
boundary, enabling Soviet units to use force even against
civilian aircraft. Such rules and instructions are not in
accordance with generally accepted norms of international law relevant to civilian transportation.
81. All countries having air traffic to and from the
Soviet Union have a right to demand that Soviet authorities do not use force against their aircraft in cases of navi10

gational faults. All civilian aircraft must be treated in a
manner that eliminates risks to the safety of the aircraft
and its passengers. Interception routines must be applied
in such a strict way as to eliminate any risk for mistake
with regard to the identity of intercepted aircraft.

84. There is an obvious risk that the destruction of the
Korean aircraft will entail a setback for recent attempts to
relieve tension in the world. It is the fervent hope of my
Government that this should not happen.
7?te meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

82. It is vital that incidents of this nature do not occur in
the future. It is essential that the Soviet Union provide all
information necessary to enable the international community to investigate the incident. No nation has a right to
withhold information relevant to a matter of this nature.

NOTES
’ Interim
Agreement
between
the United
States of America
and the
Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics
on certain
measures
with respect
to the limitation
of strategic
offensive
arms (SALT-l)
(United
Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 944, No. 13445) and Treaty between
the United
States
of America
and the Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics
on the
Limitation
of Strategic
Offensive
Arms
(SALT-II)
(see CD/53/Appendix
IWVol.
I, document
CD/28).
2 United
Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 15. No. 102.

83. It has been clearly demonstrated during the preceding meeting [ibid.] that this fatal incident threatens to
worsen an already tense international climate.

11

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributori throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write IO: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Lcs publicaticins des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Its librairles et Ies agences dCposiraircs
du monde entier. Informez-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous k : Nations Unies.
Section do venbs. New York ou Centve.
fCAK IlOJlYYMTb
M3.QAHWl QPl-‘AHM’JAUMM
OG-bEBMHEHHbIX
HALWin
~?J.tJIIIHHIoprNUf~&tHH O6aenHHeHHblx HamR MOXHO KyI7HTb 6 KHHXHbIX
%taUi31fHa\’
II areHTcrnax no acex pafloHax MHpa. Haaonwe cnpaew 06 waawax a aauw YHIIHHOU
Mara3HHe ww nwwwe no aapecy: OpraHwawn
06aenIiHeHHb~x Hauufi, Ccxuun no
nponare n3naHIiR, HbK)-i?OpK
wnw %HeBa.
COMO
CONSEGUIR PUBLiCAClONES DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones lhdas esth en venta en librerias y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Venras.
Nueva York o G&bra.

Litho

in U&ted

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-October

1991-2.050
