A /72/PV.29

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

29th plenary meeting

Monday, 9 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Llorentty Solíz
(Plurinational State of Bolivia), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/519)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. Therefore, if there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee that is before the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
begin to take action on the recommendation contained
in the report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/519), I
would like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take a decision in the same manner as was
done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United

Nations”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/2).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 140.
Agenda items 9 and 14
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(A/72/3)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/255)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
connection with agenda item 9, I would like to recall
that, pursuant to resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004,
the Assembly, on the recommendation of the General
Committee, decided, at its 2nd plenary meeting, held
on 15 September, to consider agenda item 9 in its
entirety in plenary meeting, on the understanding that
the administrative programme and budgetary aspects
should be dealt with by the Fifth Committee.
At the same meeting, the Assembly took note of the
clarification that, in implementing resolution 58/316 to
consider item 9 in its entirety in plenary meeting, the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31537 (E)

*1731537*

A/72/PV.29

relevant parts of chapter I of the report (A/72/3) that
are under agenda items already allocated to the Main
Committees would be considered by the Committee
concerned for final action by the General Assembly.
In connection with agenda item 14, members will
recall that, pursuant to resolution 57/270 B, of 23 June
2003, the Assembly decided to consider under the
item the chapters of the annual report of the Economic
and Social Council relevant to the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including through the participation of the
President of the Council in its discussions.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Cristián
Barros Melet, Vice-President of the Economic and
Social Council, to introduce the report of the Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to introduce to the General Assembly
the 2017 report (A/72/3) of the Economic and
Social Council.
In 2017, the Economic and Social Council built
on the initial phase of implementation, follow-up and
review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and related commitments and integrated lessons learned
from years 1 and 2.
We have made a good start, but further work,
coordination and innovation are needed. We must
ensure that the impact of the Economic and Social
Council system as a whole is greater than the sum
of its parts. That includes the work of its segments
and forums, functional and regional commissions
and expert bodies. As a Bureau member during the
2017 session, I can attest to the Economic and Social
Council’s commitment to strengthening its support
to Member States and development partners. Let me
briefly outline some of the highlights of our work from
the past year.
First, the Economic and Social Council built
on its successes in the follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and Addis Ababa
Action Agenda. The High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development was held under the theme
“Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a
changing world” and reviewed a subset of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in depth. During the
three-day ministerial segment, 43 countries presented
their voluntary national reviews. Common themes in
2/6

09/10/2017

those reviews included the importance of bringing all
the parties together in a multi-stakeholder approach to
implementation, as well as the critical importance of
involvement at the highest levels of Government. In
addition, the Forum was enriched by 147 side events,
nine learning courses, several special activities, an
SDG business forum and a partnership exchange.
The second Economic and Social Council Forum
on Financing for Development follow-up demonstrated
its importance as an inclusive platform for discussion
of a range of key issues. The outcome document
(E/FFDF/2017/3) reaffirmed the key elements of the
Addis Ababa Agenda and included new commitments
on policies and actions, such as the acceleration of
national and international efforts, sending a strong
signal of our commitment to multilateralism and the
global partnership for sustainable development.
Secondly, the Economic and Social Council’s
2017 session established a shared understanding of
the adjustments needed to enable the United Nations
development system to get better results in a changing
development landscape. The Economic and Social
Council’s two-year dialogue on the longer-term
positioning of the United Nations development system
laid the foundations for a landmark resolution (71/243)
on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
the United Nations system, adopted by the General
Assembly in December 2016. The resolution requested
that the Secretary-General lead a process of change
by presenting proposals and rallying the development
system around those proposals.
In July, the Secretary-General presented the
Economic and Social Council with an outline of
his reform proposals, seeking the views of Member
States in order to develop the proposals in detail this
autumn. The proposals include the two remaining
mandates — the system-wide strategic planning
document and the proposal on the resident coordinator
system. The Economic and Social Council continues
to be the main forum for ongoing consultations on the
repositioning exercise and the implementation of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review. Member
States used the Economic and Social Council’s 2017
segment on operational activities for development to
address implementation of the resolution in detail.
Thirdly, the engagement of stakeholders in the work
of the Economic and Social Council and the United
Nations development system continued to intensify. The
17-31537

09/10/2017

role of the Economic and Social Council as a platform
for multi-stakeholder participation is unrivalled. Last
year, 460 non-governmental organizations obtained
consultative status with the Council, a new record, and
the meetings of the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations were webcast, thereby helping to improve
communications and transparency.
The Economic and Social Council’s Youth Forum
continues to grow in terms of participation and impact
and underlines the potential of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development for promoting solidarity and
action among young people in all countries. Young
people are eager to be involved in implementing the SDGs
in concrete ways, including through youth advisory
councils, grass-roots-driven solutions and participation
by youth representatives in Member States’ delegations
to the High-level Political Forum. The Economic
and Social Council also continued to collaborate
with key partners through its Partnership Forum and
Multi-stakeholder Forum for Science, Technology and
Innovation. The participants in the Partnership Forum
emphasized the importance of developing a common
set of core guidelines and principles on partnerships for
the entire United Nations system.
Fourthly, the Economic and Social Council
continued to strengthen its leadership role in
identifying new issues and promoting reflection,
debate and innovative and comprehensive thinking. In
2017, the Council devoted time to the issue of achieving
Sustainable Development Goal 9 by organizing a
special meeting and two preparatory events in Africa.
That has resulted in the expansion of two concrete
initiatives of the United Nations system for supporting
infrastructure, industrialization and innovation — the
Country Partnership Programme of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
and the Accelerated Agriculture and Agro-industry
Development Initiative, led by UNIDO, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development.
The President took the Chair.
The Economic and Social Council also worked to
deepen our understanding of the nexus between peace
and sustainable development, building on last year’s
joint meeting with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
joint meeting on the situation in the Sahel underlined
the importance of addressing the root causes of poverty
while avoiding a disproportionate emphasis on security.

A/72/PV.29

The comprehensive report discusses all of this
in greater detail. On behalf of the 2017 Economic
and Social Council Bureau, we would like to thank
Member States and our partners in the United Nations
development system for their continued strong
collaboration and support. Under the guidance of its
new President, Mrs. Marie Chatardová, I am sure that
in 2018 the Economic and Social Council will build
on the achievements of this session. We look forward
to continuing its close working relationship with the
General Assembly in support of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mr. Sinha (India): We would like to congratulate
the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic on
her assumption of the presidency of the Economic and
Social Council and to assure her and the new Bureau
of our steadfast support for their work. We would
also like to take this opportunity to commend the
outgoing President, the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe, and his Bureau for their stewardship of the
Council’s activities in the previous session. We thank
the delegation of Chile for presenting the report of the
Council (A/72/3) today.
India attaches great importance to the work of the
Economic and Social Council and welcomes its 2017
report, which gives helpful details of its activities.
Since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Economic and Social Council, with
its well-planned working methods, has been able to give
special attention to implementing and following up on
the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social, environmental
and other related fields contributing to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
We note with appreciation its enhanced activities
related to the 2030 Agenda, including organizing the
Forum on Financing for Development follow-up, the
segment on operational activities for development, the
Partnership Forum, the integration segment and the
Multi-stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and
Innovation, as well as the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development, the special meeting of the
Council on international cooperation in tax matters,
the Youth Forum in New York, and the humanitarian
affairs segment in Geneva, among others.
We would like to commend the Economic and Social
Council for convening the High-level Political Forum,
the second of its kind since the adoption of the 2030

17-315373/6

A/72/PV.29

Agenda. The Forum offered a place for policymakers
from around the world to exchange ideas on how to
accelerate the implementation of the far-reaching
2030 Agenda consistently and effectively. It included
well-organized presentations of voluntary national
reviews by 43 countries, including my own, as well as
in-depth reviews of the progress that has been made
on seven specific Sustainable Development Goals, and
the adoption of a ministerial declaration on the theme
“Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a
changing world”.
India presented its voluntary national review in
the spirit of sharing experiences, including successes,
challenges and lessons learned, with a view to
accelerating the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
We have integrated the SDG framework into our
national development strategies. India’s success in
sustaining robust economic growth aimed at eradicating
poverty should make a major contribution to the global
achievement of the SDGs. As it does, it will bring
forth technologies and pathways for progress that can
be shared with other developing countries in order to
enable them to achieve sustainable development as well.
In a spirit of South-South solidarity, India continues
to expand its development partnerships over a wide range
of capacity-building sectors with fellow developing
countries in various continents, especially those in more
vulnerable situations. In June of this year we established
the India-United Nations Development Partnership
Fund, with the aim of enhancing our contribution to
South-South cooperation as a means to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We are happy to note that the theme for the next
High-level Political Forum will be “From global to
local: supporting sustainable and resilient societies in
urban and rural communities”. It is our expectation
that the Economic and Social Council will address
sustainable development challenges through the prism
of poverty eradication as its central and overarching
objective. We also commend its effort in organizing the
second Forum on Financing for Development followup, which provided a useful platform for substantive
deliberations with representatives of intergovernmental
bodies and the senior management of the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and which acknowledged the necessity for a wider and
global framework for financing for development in the
spirit of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
4/6

09/10/2017

India has a historic association with the Economic
and Social Council, whose first President was
Sir Ramaswamy Mudaliar, who played an important
role in formulating the sections on it in the Charter
of the United Nations. In line with its role as a large
developing country, India has played an active role in
the Council’s deliberations and activities.
The architect of the Economic and Social Council
Chamber at United Nations Headquarters famously
left its ceiling unfinished, signifying that the work of
development is never finished. While the United Nations
development system entities are individually taking
important steps to mainstream the 2030 Agenda into
their work and programmatic instruments, a systemwide approach should be strengthened. We would like
the Council to be more purposeful, action-oriented
and policy-relevant. It should keep the interests of
developing countries at the centre of its work, and its
policy recommendations should lead to positive change
on the ground and in the lives of ordinary people around
the world.
Last but not least, as we plan various forums in this
session, we would like to have a balance between the
time allocated for panel discussions and that available
for deliberations among Member States, or we will
run the risk of making our processes academic, at the
expense of the Council’s ownership by Member States.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate India’s
commitment to the work and activities of the Economic
and Social Council and to constructive engagement in
its work in the coming months.
Mr. Alsharrah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to take note of the report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/72/3). The various reports
we have been presented with will help us to achieve
the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals,
at every level.
Along with our various development partners,
we had already made considerable progress on
the Millennium Development Goals, enabling us
to achieve sustainable development and economic
growth. Tremendous efforts were made to achieve a
successful outcome for the July 2015 third International
Conference on Financing for Development in Addis
Ababa and to take into account the various changes
our development plans have undergone, enabling us to
move forward after September 2015 while taking into
17-31537

09/10/2017

consideration the national particularities and varying
development levels of developing countries in the
framework of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals.
We also saw the holding of the twenty-first session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, at which
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change was adopted.
There we worked to establish concrete measures
to combat climate change based on the principle of
collective responsibility and expressed our desire to
work alongside other States to fulfil our obligations and
ensure that no one is left behind.
This has been part of a process of consultation
with all stakeholders with the aim of eradicating
poverty in all its forms and aspects and to tackle that
challenge, which is the most important one we face at
the global level as we work to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are grateful to a number of
Member States as well as to the entities and agencies
of the United Nations, particularly the Economic and
Social Council, of which we were a member from 2013
to 2015. We have seen various reforms in the Economic
and Social Council that have made it possible for it
to become a truly effective and equitable platform
for Member States and for our efforts to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals, with significant
effects for the results achieved. We hope that the
Council will continue to make progress in that regard
in the years to come, particularly through its High-level
Political Forums, as well as in the context of the Forum
on Financing for Development follow-up.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of
continued cooperation for tackling the major challenges
that prevent developing countries from assisting those
in highly fragile social categories, especially States
dealing with extremely difficult circumstances. It
is essential to ensure that they too are given the
opportunity to achieve prosperity. In that regard, all
countries should share this responsibility in tackling
these difficulties together. We must work together for
sustainable development and ensure that developing
countries have access to the sustainable and predictable
financing that they need in order to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. They need conducive
conditions and new and innovative financing options to
do so. Since the developed donor States have committed
to providing such support and assistance to developing
countries, we urge that they fulfil their commitment to

A/72/PV.29

allocating 0.7 per cent of their gross domestic product
to official development aid.
The State of Kuwait has made great efforts, especially
under the leadership of Sheikh Sabah Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, to contribute to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals so that people all over
the world can benefit from mechanisms and initiatives
to eradicate poverty, reduce their debt — especially
foreign debt — and combat the effects of climate
change. It is essential that we continue to move forward
on this path under the auspices of the United Nations.
In that regard, we have a created the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development, a groundbreaking step
that has enabled us to help neighbouring States to
achieve development and see genuine changes on the
ground. We have also contributed to many international
partnerships, a tradition for Kuwait, which has been at
the forefront of joint development and humanitarian aid
efforts for a long time.
We have therefore been advancing our efforts to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030
by establishing a number of policies and measures
aimed at fulfilling the Goals at the national level, based
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We have also integrated that effort into our various
national strategies, including our new vision for
“Kuwait 2035”, a strategy designed to position Kuwait
as a leading State on the cultural, social and economic
fronts in our region by 2035. In that regard, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for the vision he
has outlined for reforming and revitalizing the work of
the United Nations in order to enable it to help States
around the world achieve stability and development.
We firmly believe in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It can be achieved if we States show the
necessary political will, work together and abide by our
various commitments.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): The major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social
and environmental fields have resulted in ambitious
and transformative global development frameworks.
My delegation sees their overarching objective as
eradicating poverty and achieving inclusive and
sustainable development growth while leaving no one
behind. In that regard, they complement and reinforce
one another in ensuring a prosperous and decent standard
of living for all, while respecting development’s three
dimensions, economic, social and environmental.

17-315375/6

A/72/PV.29

Despite the uneven and mixed progress that has
been made in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, we know that if we cannot
overcome our current complex and interconnected
challenges, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
will not be met by 2030, particularly in the least
developed countries. While we all agree, therefore, that
adopting ambitious and universal master plans is the
right way to go — and one that we still consider an
achievement of multilateralism — if the international
community cannot translate them into concrete
actions, a major opportunity will be missed, with
serious consequences for millions of people around
the world, whose faith in the United Nations and in its
States Members’ capacity and willingness to deliver on
collective promises would be undermined.
Without in any way underestimating the current
problems we face, if the world recommits with the
same optimism and political determination that it has
demonstrated in endorsing the intergovernmentally
agreed-on frameworks, it will indeed be possible to end
poverty, combat climate change and mobilize sufficient
resources. Moreover, what we achieved through the
Millennium Development Goals can serve as lessons
and inspiration for finishing our unfinished business.
My delegation would therefore like to underscore that
what we require is a genuine and revitalized global
partnership and multi-stakeholder collaboration for the
full and timely implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework,
the Paris Climate Change Agreement and the New
Urban Agenda.
It will also be imperative to strengthen coordination
and coherence in the follow-up to decisions taken by
United Nations conferences and forums. In that regard,
the ministerial declarations of the Second Forum on
Financing for Development and the 2017 High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development should
be implemented to address the many gaps that remain
in fulfilling the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, thereby
creating an international environment more conducive
to the realization of the 2030 Agenda.

6/6

09/10/2017

Developed countries should honour their
commitments to providing sufficient financial
assistance and transferring appropriate technologies
for developing countries, particularly least developed
countries, in order to complement national efforts.
In addition, as a universal body, the United Nations
has an important role to play in the full and timely
implementation of our global development frameworks.
My delegation would like to stress the importance of
further enhancing synergy among United Nations
entities and other global bodies, with the objective of
supporting Member States in their efforts to implement
the SDGs. In that regard, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which we hope
will further strengthen the development effectiveness
and efficiency of the United Nations system, anchored
in national ownership and leadership.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on these items.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the report of the Economic and Social Council,
contained in document A/72/3?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 9 and 14.
Agenda item 117
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Specific meeting focused on development
The President: In accordance with resolution
60/265, dated 30 June 2006, on the follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit, a specific meeting
focused on development should be held. I have been
informed that no Member State has requested to take
the floor under this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-31537
