52

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Invites the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fund to consider this matter in depth at its
next session and to submit a report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its thirty-first session.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3409 (XXX). Unified approach to development
analysis and planning

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the importance of the aims and
policies recommended in its resolutions 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1747 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, which contains
recommendations concerning the unified approach to
development analysis and planning by the Governments
of various countries,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, 19 containing a
definition of a unified approach to development analysis
and planning, and of the report by the Joint Inspection
Unit 20 on the feasibility of applying a unified approach
in the work of the regional commissions,
Believing that unified planning at the national level
is one of the most effective tools to promote economic,
social and human development and to provide increasing opportunities to all people for a better life,
Reaffirming that each State has the sovereign and
inalienable right to choose its economic and social system in accordance with the will of its people without
outside interference,
l. Considers it appropriate to regard a unified air
proach to development analysis and planning at the
national level covering all sectors of the national economy, public and private, as a means for the attainment
of balanced social, economic and human development;
2. Believes that the application of a unified approach is connected with carrying out basic social and
economic structural changes;
3. Recognizes that, among other measures, stn:ngthening of the public sector will contribute to effective
national planning;
4. Invites Governments to take account of the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolution 17 4 7
(LIV) in the application of a unified approach to development analysis and planning;
5. Endorses the application of a unified approach
to development analysis and planning in the regional
commissions and other United Nations bodies concerned;
19 See E/CN.5/519.
20 See E/5430.

6. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts
to integrate the activities related to the social and economic aspects of development within the Secretariat;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to study the question of a unified
approach to development analysis and planning with
a view to preparing proposals for action-oriented guidelines thereon;
(b) To prepare a report on the application by Governments of a unified approach to development analysis
and planning in conjunction with the preparation of a
report by the Secretary-General for the next biennial
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade as provided in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV),
taking into account the contributions made in this regard by recent major United Nations conferences;
(c) To submit that report to the Commission for
Social Development at its twenty-fifth session and to
the Committee for Development Planning at its thirteenth session for their analysis and appropriate recommendations;
8. Requests that the report mentioned in paragraph 7 ( b) and ( c) above be fully taken into account
in carrying out the biennial review and appraisal of the
International Development Strategy;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with the Director of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, suggestions
for pilot projects on the practical application of a
unified approach to development, taking into account
the reports mentioned in the third preambular paragraph above, and to submit these suggestions to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session;
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
analyse and appraise the progress made in this field in
conjunction with its review and appraisal of the International Development Strategy at its sixty-third session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-second session the item entitled "Unified
approach to development analysis and planning", with
a view to considering the economic as well as the
social aspects of that question.
2420th plenary meetinR
28 November 1975
3434 (XXX). Dissemination of information and
mobilization of public opinion regarding the
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 establishing the United Nations Habitat and
Human Settlements Foundation as from 1 January 1975,
Convinced that the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion among Member
States would be an important factor in creating greater
awareness of the problems of human settlements and
would thus promote the increased efforts required in
the sphere of international co-operation,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Foundation,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to stimulate and
intensify efforts to mobilize public opinion in all coun-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

tries in support of the objectives and policies of t~e
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation, having due regard to national policies,
programmes and development priorities;
2. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as
other non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of human settlements, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
broad dissemination of infmmation referred to above.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3435 (XXX).

United Nations Environment
Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendations 24, 36, 37, 74, 85 and
l 02 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment21
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to
16 June 1972,
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVII), 2996
(XXVII) and 2997 (XXVII) <;>f 15 December 19~2
concerning, inter alia, co-operation. between Sta!e~ _m
the field of the environment, international respons1b1hty
of States in regard to the environm~nt and the es~ablishment of the Governing Council of the Umted
Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling its resolution 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
Noting resolution IV of the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975, 22 condemning the
colonialist Powers and/ or aggressors that have neglected to remove the materi~l remnants of w~rs and
acts of aggression, such as mmes, and demanding th~t
they should remove such material remn~nts of t~eir
acts, indicate their whereabouts and proVIde techrucal
assistance for their removal,
Recognizing that most developing countries have
been subjected to foreign occupation and exposed to
wars waged by certain colonialist Powers, thus incurring tremendous losses of lives and property,
Emphasizing that it is the duty of the international
community to take adequate measures to protect and
improve the environment, including, in particular, the
continuation and strengthening of international cooperation in this field,
1. Recognizes that the development of certain developing countries has been impeded by the mat~rial
remnants of those wars, the most important of which
are mines, which continue to be present in their territories;
2. Condemns the colonialist Powers which have neglected to remove those material remnants of such
wars, particularly mines, and considers them to be
responsible for any material and moral damage suffered by the countries in which such mines were placed;
2 1 See

Report of the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.U.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. II, sect. B.
22 See A/10217 and Corr.I, annex I.

53

3. Calls upon those States which took part in tl1ose
wars to make available forthwith to the affected State
all information on the areas in which such mines were
placed, incl_uding maps indicating the position of those
areas, and on the types of mines;
4. Calls upon those States which created this situation to compensate forthwith the countries in which
such mines were placed for any material and moral
damage suffered by them as a result thereof and to
take speedy measures to provide technical assistance
for the removal of such mines;
5. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to undertake a study
of the problem of the material remnants of wars, particularly mines, and their effect on the environment,
and to submit a report on the subject to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3436 (XXX). Conventions and protocols in the
field of the environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 23 adopted at Stockholm on 16 June 1972, which was intended, inter alia,
to promote international law in the field of the environment,
Recalling with appreciation decisions 24 (Ill) of
30 April 1975 and 35 (III) of 2 May 1975 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,24
Expressing the conviction that the development of
adequate environmental law is an essential supporting
measure for the implementation of the policies, strategies and recommendations of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that a number of global and
regional conventions and protocols in the field of the
environment have been negotiated and adopted since
the adoption of the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,
Concerned that existing international conventions or
protocols in the field of the environment have not yet
received the wide acceptance and application they
deserve,
Convinced of the need for further elaboration of
conventions and protocols in the field of the environment,
1. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to iake such measures as may be necessary for the realization of the
objectives and the implementation of the strategies relating to the programme of the United Nations Environment Programme in the field of national and international environmental law and, in particular, to take
measures designed to provide technical assistance to
23 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment
( United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.11.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. I.
24
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.
