S/2004/425

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 May 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 25 May 2004 from the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith my letter to the Secretary-General dated
20 May 2004, regarding the humanitarian situation in Darfur (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would circulate this letter as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Elfatih Erwa
Permanent Representative

04-36483 (E) 260504 260504

*0436483*

S/2004/425

Annex to the letter dated 25 May 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
Referring to my meeting with you on 17 May 2004, on the humanitarian
situation in Darfur, I have been closely following up with my Government all the
issues raised at the meeting and previously discussed in your message to H.E. the
President of the Republic.
Although I am still waiting to receive from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs the list of 65 visa applications claimed to be pending, I am
nevertheless pleased to inform you in this regard that my Government, with a view
to addressing those issues, has today taken the following actions:
1.
Granting of entry visas within 48 hours to all humanitarian workers from
the United Nations, donors, the Red Cross and international non-governmental
organizations.
2.
Suspension of the travel permit procedures to Darfur; from now on a
simple notification to the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs will suffice.
3.
Commitment to continue to take further measures to facilitate the entry
and clearance of equipment imported to be used for humanitarian purposes.
4.

The above measures will be effective on Monday, 24 May 2004.

5.
The Government of the Sudan has appealed to the African Union to
expedite the deployment of the ceasefire observers as an important step in further
facilitating the humanitarian activities.
6.
The Government has appealed to the population to return to their
villages, reaffirming its commitment to provide security and protection. In this
regard the Ministry of the Interior has set up a special security plan to achieve that
objective.
Please find enclosed the communiqué on the new measures issued today by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs.
While conveying these positive developments, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of my Government to continue its full cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community in its quest to alleviate the humanitarian
situation of its citizens.
(Signed) Elfatih Erwa
Permanent Representative

2

S/2004/425

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate

Joint Communiqué by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs on humanitarian aid for Darfur
Given its national responsibility to provide humanitarian aid to citizens in
Darfur; confirming its commitment to implement the protocol on the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the ceasefire agreement, both signed at N’Djamena on 8 April
2004; aware that the citizens need to receive humanitarian aid and that they must be
allowed to return to their homes to prepare the harvest; desirous of mitigating the
impact of the war and facilitating the task of Sudan’s humanitarian partners, the
Government of the Sudan has decided as follows:
1.
To issue humanitarian workers in Darfur representing United Nations
agencies, donors, the Red Cross and non-governmental organizations with entry
visas directly through Sudanese diplomatic missions abroad within 48 hours of the
date of submission of the visa application, these visas to be valid for a period of
three months;
2.
To suspend measures currently in force in respect of travel permits to
Darfur for a period of three months and to be satisfied with entry visas only,
together with notification of the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs of the name of the
person concerned and the programme of his or her mission;
3.
To continue taking measures to facilitate the entry of supplies required
for humanitarian work in Darfur by specialized agencies;
4.

These measures shall apply as of Monday, 24 May 2004;

5.

Further details are available from the Ministry for Humanitarian Affairs.

In harmony with this improved access for the purpose of facilitating
humanitarian work, the Government of the Sudan has called upon the Organization
of African Unity to expedite the deployment of ceasefire monitors to Darfur to
facilitate the flow of humanitarian aid and contribute to improved stability in the
region. It has also urged the inhabitants to return rapidly to their homes, while the
Government for its part commits itself to implementing the plan of the Ministry of
the Interior to provide security and protection.

3
