S/2011/455

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 July 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 22 July 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached communication dated 7 July 2011,
which I have received from the Chair of the African Union Commission, Jean Ping,
regarding the decision on the situation in Libya by the seventeenth Ordinary Session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, held in
Malabo on 30 June and 1 July 2011 (see annex).
Also attached is the document containing the proposals for a framework
agreement on a political solution to the crisis in Libya as presented by the African
Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee on Libya and endorsed by the Assembly of the
Union.
I should be most grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-43114 (E) 100811

*1143114*

S/2011/455

Annex
The just-concluded seventeenth Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union deliberated extensively on the situation
in Libya. More specifically, the Assembly endorsed the proposals for a framework
agreement on a political solution to the crisis in Libya, as presented by the African
Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee, within the context of the African Union road
map and the relevant provisions of United Nations Security Council resolution 1973
(2011).
The proposals build on the outcome of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
held in Pretoria on 26 June 2011, which, inter alia, welcomed Colonel Muammar
Gaddafi’s commitment to an inclusive dialogue process with the participation of the
Transitional National Council of Libya, as well as acceptance of not being part of
the negotiation process. They were presented to both the Libyan Government and
the Transitional National Council in Malabo. The African Union plans to convene,
as soon as possible, negotiations between the Libyan parties to discuss these
proposals in Addis Ababa, with the facilitation of the United Nations and the African
Union, as well as the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union.
As the conflict in Libya enters its sixth month, with the attendant
consequences for the civilian population, as well as for long-term security and
stability in that country and in the region as a whole, it is critical that we step up our
efforts to encourage the Libyan parties to seek a political solution. It is our
conviction that the proposals endorsed in Malabo offer a viable basis for bringing
the current conflict to an end, ensuring the effective protection of the civilian
population and ushering in a political process that will make it possible to meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people for democracy, the rule of law, good
governance and respect for human rights.
I should be most grateful if you would circulate the present letter and the
attached documents to the Security Council members for their information and
action as appropriate. We very much look forward to your personal support and to
that of the Security Council. We are committed to working closely with you and
your Special Envoy to effectively assist the Libyan people overcome the serious
challenges they are currently facing.
I would like to seize this opportunity to thank you for your active involvement
in the efforts to promote peace on our continent and enhance the already strong
partnership that exists between our two organizations.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

11-43114

S/2011/455

Enclosure 1
Decision of the Assembly of the Union on the situation in Libya
The Assembly:
1.
Takes note, with appreciation, of the report of the African Union Highlevel Ad Hoc Committee on Libya on its activities since the Extraordinary Session
of the Assembly of the Union, held in Addis Ababa on 25 May 2011;
2.
Pays tribute to the Ad Hoc Committee and to its members for the
commitment and determination with which they are carrying out the mandate
entrusted to them by the 265th meeting of the Peace and Security Council, held on
10 March 2011, and reaffirmed by the Extraordinary Session of the Assembly of the
Union, held on 25 May 2011;
3.
Reaffirms all earlier African Union decisions on the situation in Libya
and its conviction that only a political solution will make it possible to fulfil the
legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people and preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of the country. In this respect, the Assembly stresses the continued
relevance and validity of the African Union road map as articulated by the Peace
and Security Council at its 265th meeting;
4.
Endorses the Proposals for a Framework Agreement on a Political Solution
to the Crisis in Libya, as presented by the Ad Hoc Committee, within the context of
the African Union road map and the relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions;
5.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit these proposals to the Libyan
parties, namely the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the Transitional
National Council of Libya, and to engage them on that basis, including through the
early convening of negotiations under the auspices of the African Union and the
United Nations, with the support of the League of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the European Union;
6.
Urges the Libyan parties to demonstrate the required political will, place
the supreme interest of their country and people above any other consideration, and
extend the necessary cooperation to the High-level Ad Hoc Committee;
7.
Further urges African Union international partners, in particular the
United Nations Security Council and its members and relevant bilateral partners, to
support the African initiative and the search for a political solution, as the best way
of achieving the mutually reinforcing objectives of peace, democracy, the rule of
law and national reconciliation in Libya. The Assembly underscores that the role of
the African Union is formally recognized by the Security Council in its resolution
1973 (2011) and is fully consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the unique contribution that the Ad Hoc
Committee can make for the resolution of the current crisis;
8.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to report regularly to the Peace and
Security Council and to its eighteenth Ordinary Session on its efforts towards a
political solution to the crisis in Libya.

11-43114

3

S/2011/455

Enclosure 2
Proposals to the Libyan Parties for a Framework Agreement on a
Political Solution to the Crisis in Libya
1.
The following elements are proposed within the context of the road map of the
African Union for the peaceful resolution of the conflict in Libya and the communiqué
of the meeting of the African Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee on Libya, held
in Pretoria on 26 June 2011, including Colonel Muammar Qaddafi’s commitment to
an inclusive dialogue process with the participation of the Transitional National
Council of Libya and acceptance of not being part of the negotiation process, as
well as Security Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
2.
Their objective is to bring the current conflict to an end, ensure the effective
protection of the civilian population, including the provision of humanitarian
support, and usher in a political process that will make it possible to meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people to democracy, rule of law, good
governance and the respect for human rights.

National dialogue
3.
The Libyan parties shall immediately start negotiations, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) and the African Union road
map, which will address the following issues: an immediate suspension of
hostilities, a humanitarian pause, a comprehensive ceasefire, national reconciliation
and arrangements relating to the transition, as well as the agenda for democratic
transformation.
4.
The national dialogue shall be held under the auspices of the African Union
High-level Ad Hoc Committee and the United Nations, through the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, with the support of the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the European Union.
Ceasefire
5.
Without prejudice to the outcome of the national dialogue, the ceasefire shall,
among others, entail the following:
(a) Lifting of the siege imposed on cities and cantonment of all troops,
militias and armed elements from all parties;
(b) End to all attacks against, and abuses of, civilians, including Libyans
who were forced to flee their country;
(c) Release of all prisoners and other individuals detained in relation with
the current hostilities;
(d) Facilitation of unrestricted and unhindered access to the civilian
population by all international humanitarian agencies and workers.
6.
The arms embargo, as provided for in the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolution 1970 (2011), shall remain in place on the entire Libyan territory,
until the completion of the transitional period and the holding of general elections.

4

11-43114

S/2011/455

7.
The measures relating to the imposition of the no-fly zone, as provided for in
Security Council resolution 1973 (2011), will be lifted by the Security Council at an
appropriate date, in any event not later than the entry into force of the comprehensive
ceasefire and the deployment of a credible and effective monitoring mechanism.
8.
The parties commit themselves to request the United Nations, working closely
with the African Union and the League of Arab States, to establish and deploy an
effective, credible international mechanism, including a sizeable peacekeeping
force, to, inter alia:
(a) Monitor the respect of the ceasefire and compliance of the parties with
their commitments;
(b)

Provide protection to the civilian population within its mandate;

(c) Undertake other related tasks, including support to the transition and
peacebuilding.
9.
The mechanism, as mentioned above, shall be authorized by the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and provided with
all resources required for the effective implementation of its mandate.
10. Pending the deployment, as envisaged above, interim arrangements shall be put
in place, which shall involve the establishment and deployment of an international
mission mandated or authorized by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
11. The ceasefire shall be linked to, and followed by, a political process, which
will commence with a consensual and inclusive transition period and culminate in
democratic elections to enable the Libyan people to freely choose their leaders.
Arrangements relating to the transition
12. The parties commit themselves, following the national dialogue, to establish a
transitional period during which the necessary reforms to meet the aspirations of the
Libyan people will be undertaken.
13. The transitional period shall culminate with democratic elections to enable the
Libyan people to freely choose their leaders. The elections shall be internationally
monitored.
14.

The transitional period will be underpinned by the following principles:

(a) Commitment to democracy, good governance, rule of law and respect for
human rights;
(b)

Inclusivity, in order to bring on board all stakeholders;

(c) Consensus, as a way of providing a broad-based support to all decisions
that will be taken during the transition.
15. The transitional period shall entail a transfer of power to an interim
Government, to be put in place immediately upon the conclusion of the national
dialogue, as well as to other institutions that shall be agreed upon. The transitional
period shall be managed in an inclusive manner.

11-43114

5

S/2011/455

16. A provisional Constitutional Charter will determine the tasks and length of the
transitional period, as well as the institutions of the transition and their composition,
functions and powers.
17. The institutions of the transition shall elaborate and adopt a draft Constitution
and the legislation which is necessary for the conduct of the transitional tasks, as
well as for the completion of the political reforms which would address the root
causes of the Libyan crisis.
18. The national dialogue shall be completed within a period of 30 days maximum,
unless the parties and other stakeholders decide otherwise.

Confidence-building and other accompanying measures
19. The parties commit themselves to work towards healing and national
reconciliation, including considering the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission.
20. The parties commit to agree on and adopt an amnesty law with respect to acts
and other offences committed in the course of the current conflict. The scope and
modalities of such a law shall be agreed upon during the national dialogue.
21. The parties commit to refraining from disseminating messages instigating
hatred and violence and from any other action that may undermine reconciliation
among the Libyans.
22. The parties commit themselves to requesting the Security Council to lift the
freeze of Libyan assets as provided for in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011),
to the benefit of the interim Government.

Role of the international community
23. The international community, represented by the African Union, the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the European Union, commits itself to supporting the process and agreements
reached among the Libyan stakeholders.
24. In this respect, the international community is expected to take the following
steps:
(a) Deploy monitors to verify compliance with the suspension of hostilities
mentioned above;
(b) Put in place an effective, credible international monitoring mechanism
and peacekeeping force to verify the ceasefire, protect the civilian population and
take other required steps for the successful conclusion of the peace process in Libya;
(c) Support the implementation of the transitional tasks, including through
the provision of the required expertise and advice;
(d) Facilitate the supply of the Libyan population in basic food commodities
and medicines;

6

11-43114

S/2011/455

(e) Facilitate the lifting of the sanctions imposed on Libya, in particular the
unfreezing of the Libyan assets abroad, to meet urgent humanitarian needs, support
the functioning of the transitional institutions and other related priorities;
(f) Take measures, including sanctions, against all those who would
undermine the transitional process.

11-43114

7
