A/77/414

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 76

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Sarah Zahirah Ruhama (Malaysia)

I. Introduction
1.
The item entitled “United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law” was included in
the provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly
pursuant to Assembly resolution 76/110 of 9 December 2021.
2.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee.
3.
The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 19th, 20th and 36th meetings,
on 20 and 21 October and 18 November 2022. The views of the representatives who
spoke during the Committee’s consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant
summary records. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/515).

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.15
5.
At the 36th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Ghana , on behalf of
the Bureau, introduced a draft resolution entitled “United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law” (A/C.6/77/L.15).
6.
At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.15,
without a vote (see para. 7).
__________________
1

22-26245 (E)

A/C.6/77/SR.19, A/C.6/77/SR.20 and A/C.6/77/SR.36.

251122

*2226245*

A/77/414

III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee
7.
The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolution:

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in which the General
Assembly established the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law to contribute
towards a better knowledge of international law as a means of strengthening
international peace and security and promoting friendly relations and cooperation
among States,
Reaffirming that the Programme of Assistance is a core activity of the United
Nations and that it has provided the foundation for the efforts of the United Nations
to promote a better knowledge of international law for more than half a century,
Recognizing the major contribution of the Programme of Assistance to the
teaching and dissemination of international law for the benefit of lawyers in all
countries, legal systems and regions of the world for more than half a century and the
importance of ensuring the successful continuation of the Programme for the benefit
of present and future generations of lawyers,
Emphasizing the important contribution of the Programme of Assistance, in
particular the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law and the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, to the furtherance of United
Nations rule of law programmes and activities,
Reaffirming that the increasing demand for international law training and
dissemination activities creates new challenges for the Programme of Assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the Programme of Assistance effectively
reaching its beneficiaries, including with regard to languages, while bearing in mind
limitations on available resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Programme of Assistance 1 and the views of the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in
the report,
Noting with satisfaction that resources have been provided under the programme
budget for the organization of the United Nations Regional Co urses in International
Law on an annual basis and the further development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law,
Noting that the 2020 Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on
the Law of the Sea has been postponed until 2023 owing to the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the
teaching of legal disciplines at all universities,
__________________
1

2/6

A/77/515.
22-26245

A/77/414

Convinced that States, international and regional organizations, universities and
institutions should be encouraged to give further support to the Programme of
Assistance and to increase their activities to promote the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those
activities that are of special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Reaffirming that in the conduct of the Programme of Assistance it would be
desirable to use as far as possible the resources and facilities made available by
Member States, international and regional organizations, universities, institutions and
others,
Reaffirming also the hope that, in appointing highly qualified lecturers for the
seminars to be held within the framework of the fellowship programmes in
international law, account would be taken of the need to secure the representation of
major legal systems and balance among various geographical regions,
Regretting that the COVID-19 pandemic has had an impact on the activities
planned for 2022 under the Programme of Assistance,
Welcoming the interim capacity-building measures 2 developed by the Secretariat
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
1.
Reiterates its approval of the guidelines and recommendations contained
in section III of the reports of the Secretary-General, 3 in particular those designed to
strengthen and revitalize the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in
response to the increasing demand for international law training and dissemination
activities;
2.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out the activities specified in his
report 4 in 2023, including the following activities to be financed from provisions in
the regular budget:
(a) The International Law Fellowship Programme, with a minimum of
20 fellowships;
(b) The United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Africa, for
Asia-Pacific and for Latin America and the Caribbean, with a minimum of 20 fellowships
for each course;
(c) The continuation and further development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law, including the availability of its Historic
Archives in the official languages of the United Nations;
(d) The dissemination of legal publications and lectures of the Audiovisual
Library to developing countries to the extent that there are sufficient resources;
3.
Also authorizes the Secretary-General to further expand the activities
referred to in paragraph 2 above, to be financed from voluntary contributions received
pursuant to paragraphs 17, 26 and 27 below;
4.
Commends the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat for the cost-saving measures undertaken with regard to the International
Law Fellowship Programme and the United Nations Regional Courses in
International Law to increase the number of fellowships for the training programmes
__________________

Specified in the report of the Secretary-General A/77/515.
A/70/423, A/71/432, A/72/517, A/72/517/Corr.1, A/73/415, A/74/496, A/75/389, A/76/404 and
A/77/515.
4
A/77/515.
2
3

22-26245

3/6

A/77/414

financed from provisions in the regular budget, takin g into account the number of
applications for these programmes;
5.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to award additional fellowships for the
training programmes from available resources under the programme budget for the
Programme of Assistance and from voluntary contributions received pursuant to
paragraph 27 below;
6.
Urges the Secretary-General to conduct interactive online workshops
when the training programmes referred to in paragraph 2 above cannot take place in
person owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, from the existing available resources under
the programme budget for the Programme of Assistance and from the voluntary
contributions received pursuant to paragraph 26 below;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider admitting, for participation in
the training programmes, self-funded candidates present in the host country or from
countries willing to bear the entire cost of their participation;
8.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to award a minimum of one scholarship
in 2023 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law
of the Sea, subject to the availability of funds from voluntary contributions and
limitations that may be imposed owing to the COVID-19 pandemic;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include resources under the
proposed programme budget for 2024 for the International Law Fellowship
Programme, the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Africa, for
Asia-Pacific and for Latin America and the Caribbean and for the continuation and
further development of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities
conducted under the Programme of Assistance and, in particular, for the efforts to
strengthen, expand and enhance the international law training and dissemination
activities within the framework of the Programme in 2022;
11. Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for supporting the
establishment of an alumni network of participants of the training programmes
organized under the Programme of Assistance;
12. Commends the Secretary-General for the continuation and further
development of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law as a
major contribution to the teaching and dissemination of international law around the
world, and notes with appreciation the efforts of the Codification Division to enhance
the accessibility of the Audiovisual Library by making all lectures in the Lecture
Series available as podcasts;
13. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations legal publications
prepared by the Office of Legal Affairs, and once again requests the Secretary General to issue the publications referred to in his previous report 5 in various formats,
including hard copy publications, which are essential for developing countries;
14. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the Codification
Division to bring up to date the United Nations legal publications, which greatly
enhanced the timely issuance thereof and made possible the preparation of legal
training materials, and encourages the Division to continue to explore ways of
sustaining such efforts into the next budget cycle, subject to the availability of
resources;

__________________
5

4/6

A/70/423, para. 45.
22-26245

A/77/414

15. Notes with satisfaction the issuance of publications by the Codification
Division, as specified in the report of the Secretary-General;
16. Expresses its appreciation for the issuance of the English-language edition
of the International Law Handbook: Collection of Instruments as a valuable resource
for international law education on a broad range of core subjects of international law
in its training programmes and for academic institutions in developing countries to
promote international law education in those countries;
17. Also expresses its appreciation for the issuance of the Recueil de droit
international: Collection d’instruments, the French language equivalent of the
International Law Handbook, and requests Member States to provide the voluntary
contributions necessary to ensure the completion of such a handbook in the other
official languages of the United Nations, as well as its dissemination in developing
countries;
18. Requests the Codification Division to continue to maintain and expand its
websites listed in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General as an invaluable
tool for the dissemination of international law materials as well as for advanced legal
research;
19. Requests that interns and research assistants be enlisted for the preparation
of materials for the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
20. Welcomes the efforts of the Codification Division to revitalize and conduct
the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law as an important training
activity;
21. Expresses its appreciation to Chile, Ethiopia and Thailand for their efforts
in preparing to host the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law in
2022;
22. Expresses its appreciation to the African Union for the valuable
contribution that it continues to make to the United Nations Regional Course in
International Law for Africa;
23. Once again encourages the Codification Division to cooperate with the
African Institute of International Law, dedicated to offering higher learning and
research in international law needed for the development of Africa, in the
implementation of the relevant activities under the Programme of Assistance;
24. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy of International Law for
the valuable contribution it continues to make to the Programme of Assistance, which
has enabled candidates under the International Law Fellowship Programme to attend
and participate in the Fellowship Programme in conjunction with courses at the
Academy;
25. Notes with appreciation the contributions of the Hague Academy to the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, and calls
upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable consideration to
the appeal of the Academy for a continuation of support and a possible increase in
their financial contributions, to enable the Academy to carry out its activities,
particularly those relating to the summer and winter courses, regional courses and
programmes of the Centre for Studies and Research in International Law and
International Relations;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme of
Assistance and periodically to invite Member States, universities, philanthropic
foundations and other interested national and international institutions and
organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the
22-26245

5/6

A/77/414

financing of the Programme or otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible
expansion;
27. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions for the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law and for the United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law organized by the Codification Divis ion as an important
complement to the International Law Fellowship Programme;
28. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made
voluntary contributions to support the Programme of Assistance;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session on the implementation of the Programme of Assistance in 2023
and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee on the Programme of
Assistance, to submit recommendations regarding the Programme in subsequent
years;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session
the item entitled “United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law”.

6/6

22-26245
