UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/636
13 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 AUGUST 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
7 August 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-21731 (E)

130897

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 2

Annex I
Letter dated 7 August 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
seventh monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 35,000 SFOR troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all members of NATO and from 20
non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (23 June-20 July), there were no significant
changes in the overall size and composition of the force. SFOR has continued to
conduct reconnaissance and surveillance by means of ground and air patrols, and
to make random inspections of weapons cantonment sites. During the period,
approximately 3,500 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, while the SFOR
helicopter fleet flew 109 hours.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to provide close air support if necessary.
4.
On 10 July, on the basis of an indictment issued by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the Hague, SFOR forces in the vicinity of
Prijedor acted to detain two persons indicted for war crimes. One,
Milan Kovacevic, was immediately transferred to representatives of the Tribunal,
in accordance with procedures contained in the May 1996 memorandum of
understanding between the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Powers in Europe
(SHAPE) and the Tribunal. The other, Simo Drljaca, fired at the SFOR soldiers
as they approached and challenged him for the purpose of detaining him. One
SFOR soldier was wounded in the process. Drljaca was killed when fire was
returned in self-defence. Immediately after the incident, SFOR took appropriate
measures to increase awareness of the security situation and of possible threats
to SFOR and other personnel.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
Overall, the parties are assessed as being substantially compliant with the
military provisions of the Peace Agreement. The situation in the theatre
remains generally stable, despite increased tensions in the Republika Srpska.
6.
The attitude towards SFOR throughout the Republika Srpska in the aftermath
of the Prijedor incident has remained generally negative, but thus far has not
led to any widespread or significant actions by the general populace. The main
reactions to the incident have been non-cooperation and low-level harassment.
Between 13 and 20 July, however, 12 hostile acts were directed at international
organizations and SFOR troops deployed in the Republika Srpska. In most cases,
explosive devices were used, with the purpose of intimidation. Damage was
relatively minor, but one SFOR soldier was slightly injured by flying glass.

/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 4

Newspaper editorials and media comment on the events that led to the death of
Drljaca have been hostile and in many cases inaccurate.
7.
During the reporting period, SFOR carried out a total of 559 site
inspections: 194 combat and infrastructure sites belonging to the Bosniacs; 184
to the Bosnian Croats; 179 to the Bosnian Serbs and 2 to the Federation. As a
result of these site inspections, and routine SFOR monitoring of activities in
the area, the following weapons were confiscated: from the Bosniacs, 180 rifles
and 2 mortars; from the Bosnian Croats, 11 rifles, 2 light machine guns,
2 mortars, 12 rocket launchers, 3 howitzers and 2 M53 anti-aircraft systems;
from the Bosnian Serbs, 20 SA7 launchers, 17 long-barrelled weapons and
1 pistol; and from civilians, 3 long-barrelled weapons, 9 pistols and 1 small
machine gun. Most of the confiscated weapons have been destroyed, and the rest
will be destroyed shortly.
8.
SFOR monitored a total of 870 training and movement activities: 347 by the
Bosniacs, 244 by the Bosnian Croats, 278 by the Bosnian Serbs and 1 by the
Federation.
9.
SFOR continues its efforts to facilitate freedom of movement.
Implementation of the new SFOR/International Police Task Force (IPTF) checkpoint
policy, established in May, has led to a further decrease in the number of
illegal checkpoints: over the period, 23 illegal checkpoints were dismantled 2 Bosniac, 3 Bosnian Croat, 12 Bosnian Serb and 6 unidentified. Republika
Srpska police forces have not been supportive of SFOR and IPTF activities, and
have accused SFOR of improper weapons confiscation and checkpoint dismantlement,
which they claim undermine their policing capabilities. Republika Srpska police
continue to use illegal checkpoints on a limited basis. Overall, there has been
a marked increase in the movement of people and goods around the country, with a
large number of people crossing the Inter-Entity Boundary Line every week for
planned visits or events.
10. Demining activity has increased over the summer months, with the Entity
Armed Forces, under SFOR supervision, removing 2,260 explosive devices from 249
mined areas. With effect from 30 June, and until 12 August, training has been
restricted to platoon size and below for the Bosniac Second Army Corps, the
Third Bosnian Serb Army Corps and the Bosnian Croat ORASJE Group as a result of
their non-compliance with the countermine campaign.
11. On 27 June, there were two meetings of the Subcommission on the
Inter-Entity Boundary Line, between the Federation/Bosniac and Serb delegations
and between the Federation/Croat and Serb delegations. The Bosniacs and Serbs
discussed exchanges of territory in Western Bosnia, while the Croats and Serbs
discussed areas along the Posavina corridor. Progress was made at both
meetings. A further meeting of the Subcommission on the Inter-Entity Boundary
Line scheduled for 4 July, was postponed until 11 July at the request of the
Republika Srpska delegate, but was subsequently cancelled because that
delegation decided not to participate. Nonetheless, the Republika Srpska
submitted four map proposals for the Inter-Entity Boundary Line corrections in
the Doboj pocket and in the Kijuc and Posavina areas. These proposals have been
delivered to the other parties.

/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 5

Cooperation with international organizations
12. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to offer assistance to the
international organizations in theatre. This support is provided both by local
forces and by SFOR's Combined Joint Civil-Military Task Force.
13. SFOR continues to support the Joint Election Operation Centre of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and has provided 7
headquarters SFOR staff and 11 Civic-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) staff to the
Centre. SFOR is also working with other members of the international community
to plan for security operations during the September municipal elections period.
An elections response group will be formed shortly, composed of representatives
from SFOR, the other international organizations in theatre and the parties, in
order to respond to any crisis which might develop. SFOR is also involved in
supporting the efforts of the Office of the High Representative to improve
access to the media, aiming to create better conditions for free and fair
elections. The Information Campaign Radio (Radio MIR) has recently moved
location in order to ensure better coverage, particularly into the Eastern part
of Republika Srpska, and SFOR is assisting the Office of the High Representative
and the OSCE in the establishment, respectively, of the Open Broadcast Network
and the Free Elections Radio Network. An SFOR Media Action Working Group has
also been established, with the aim of revitalizing the information campaign.
14. SFOR continues to support OSCE in its responsibilities under the Article IV
Subregional Arms Control Agreement. Recently, officials representing the
Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office met with SFOR officials
in Sarajevo in order to design a format for use by SFOR when passing cantonment
data to OSCE experts in Vienna. This new format, which is already in use, means
that the data being passed to OSCE is much more suited to the organization's
needs. SFOR also remains ready to transport heavy weapons from cantonments to
reduction sites, where they are destroyed under the terms of the Article IV
Agreement.
15. SFOR continues to support IPTF through surveillance, communications,
transportation and the ability to call for armed reinforcements. SFOR also
provides general area support to IPTF.
16. Support continues to be provided to the Office of the High Representative,
through the provisions of SFOR technical experts, assistance in
telecommunications and engineering, air transportation and through the
information campaign. SFOR is working with the Office of the High
Representative, OSCE and others in providing balanced access to information
through the Bosnian media and expanding coverage by alternative television and
radio networks. This support will continue on a routine basis.
17. Over the reporting period, SFOR and the Office of the High Representative
held several meetings with the parties on the initiative to open up to civilian
traffic the regional airports of Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla. SFOR and the
Office of the High Representative have held consultations with the Parties to
try and resolve outstanding issues and work will continue.

/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 6

18. SFOR continues to support the Office of the High Representative in the
establishment of a fully functioning Standing Committee on Military Matters
(SCMM). SCMM has still to agree its rules of procedure, a revised version of
which has been issued by the Office of the High Representative. The Joint
Presidency has addressed the issue on several occasions without reaching final
agreement, although outstanding issues have now been narrowed down to membership
and chairmanship.
19. SFOR provides direct liaison to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on a permanent basis as a member of the
International Housing Commission, chaired by UNHCR. Local SFOR forces
contribute substantially towards facilitating refugee returns through
information gathering, coordination with UNHCR and other organizations,
negotiations with local authorities and close monitoring of the situation on the
ground.
20. SFOR is currently providing assistance in over 250 civil projects ranging
in cost from DM 500 to over DM 1 million. Notable projects include: the
management of the Brcko-Tuzla rail project; support to the telecommunications
emergency reconstruction plan and the disposal of expired drugs for the World
Health Organization.
21. On 12 July, the Combined Joint CIMIC Task Force hosted a working group
meeting to design a strategy for prioritizing and accelerating small projects
throughout the theatre, the main objective being to prioritize, track and
coordinate a system to identify funding sources and then to link them up with
CIMIC project coordinators in the Multi-National Divisions. Priority will be
given to those projects which provide the most incentive to economic, social and
political stability at the municipal level.
22. SFOR also provides a liaison team to the World Bank. Senior liaison
officers will meet later in August to discuss the allocation and administration
of the funds pledged by the Government of Japan for economic recovery in the
Republika Srpska.
23. Several international organizations have had to curtail travel in selected
areas of the Republika Srpska as a result of the unrest there. As noted above,
there have also been isolated acts of harassment or violence, with the result
that CIMIC Task Force liaison teams have received numerous requests from the
other international organizations in theatre to review internal security and
employee safety policies and plans. The Task Force expects additional such
requests from OSCE, the Office of the High Representative and UNHCR as the
municipal elections approach.
24. A first specially conducted NATO course on international security for
Bosnian military and defence officials was held at the NATO school in
Oberammergau, Germany, from 23 June to 4 July. Military and defence officials
representing both entities and the three ethnic groups in the country
participated. Approximately half of the course was devoted to the challenges of
the peace consolidation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the speakers
included Ambassador Eide, the United Nations Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Bosnia, as well as UNHCR officials. The course fully realized
/...

S/1997/636
English
Page 7

the overall objective of contributing to the process of reconciliation, and it
is intended to conduct further such courses in December 1997 and January 1998.
Outlook
25. The overall situation in the theatre is expected to remain stable, despite
continuing increased tension in the Republika Srpska. SFOR will continue to
carry out its mission firmly but fairly, without tolerating any recourse to
force or violence, or the unauthorized deployment of military or paramilitary
forces. Temporary force adjustments within each Multi-National Division for the
election period are expected to be made in mid-August.

-----
