United Nations

S/PV.5588

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5588th meeting
Wednesday, 13 December 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Qatar)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Martínez Gramuglia
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Ikouebe
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
Mr. De La Sablière
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Shinyo
Mr. Orozco
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2006/906)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-65731 (E)

*0665731*

S/PV.5588

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2006/906)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Finland, Serbia and
Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. RaskovicIvic (Serbia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joachim Rücker,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Rücker to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/906, which contains the report of the

2

Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I shall now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rücker.
Mr. Rücker: First of all, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council for your invitation here today to brief the
Council on where we stand in Kosovo. I would also
like to welcome the Council’s invitation to Prime
Minister Çeku to be present here today at this
important discussion on Kosovo’s future.
Status continues to dominate the agenda of
everyone concerned with Kosovo. Of course, after
more than seven years of international administration
and of local capacity-building and after Kai Eide’s
finding that the status quo is not tenable, the timelines
attached to the process are of particular importance.
Anxiety has clearly risen, following the decision to
delay the proposal on status until after the Serbian
elections on 21 January. Keeping momentum in the
status process will thereafter be a key factor in heading
off a feeling of uncertainty regarding the way ahead,
which would be a potential source of instability.
At the same time, important work on standards
continues as a top priority of both the Kosovo
Government and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
sometimes have the impression from our international
interlocutors that, with all the focus on the status
process, the implementation of standards has been
forgotten or pushed aside. That is not at all the case.
Standards remain at the core of our daily work, with
particular concentration on the 13 priority areas set by
the Contact Group earlier this year, most of which have
been fulfilled by the Kosovo Provisional Institutions.
The Government, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Çeku, has continued to demonstrate effective
leadership on standards implementation, strengthening
central and local government institutions and
transitioning governance-building and reform to the
longer-term platform of European integration through
the European Partnership for Kosovo. The Assembly
has passed and I have promulgated key legislation
prioritized by the Contact Group, including a law
firmly establishing the equal official status of the
Albanian and Serbian language throughout Kosovo and
laws on religious freedom and cultural heritage,

06-65731

S/PV.5588

containing provisions of particular importance to the
Serbian Orthodox Church. The Kosovo Government
has also undertaken steps to ensure freedom of
movement by agreeing to take over the responsibility
from UNMIK to operate the freedom of movement bus
and train system.
One noteworthy area of progress has been the
effort to create the conditions for returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). This week, the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC) will complete a six-month
project in the village of Svinjare, near Mitrovica, to
repair damage to homes and improve local
infrastructure. That has been one of the largest and
most high-profile projects undertaken by the KPC, and
its successful completion demonstrates the KPC’s
ability and willingness to serve all the people of
Kosovo. Despite the success of the project, the Kosovo
Serb IDPs have still not returned to Svinjare. I appeal
to Belgrade to encourage them to do so. Nonetheless,
the criteria on which the Institutions of SelfGovernment should be judged are their actions to
create the conditions for returns.
Another example: in Babus, another village, the
keys to 83 reconstructed houses will be ready to be
handed over on 20 December. However, the nongovernmental organization implementing the project
has raised serious concerns with UNMIK that most of
the beneficiaries may not actually return. In short, good
efforts will have limited impact if more is not done —
particularly by Belgrade — to encourage returns when
the conditions for them have been created.
The continuing calls by Belgrade for Kosovo
Serbs to boycott Kosovo institutions have undermined
work done by both UNMIK and the Institutions of
Self-Government to reach out to minority communities
and to end their often self-imposed isolation. The
Serbian Government has still not withdrawn its
directive to Kosovo Serbs to withdraw from the payroll
of the Institutions of Self-Government, despite
numerous calls to do so by the international
community. I appeal to the representative of the
Serbian Government to withdraw that directive.
One of the most frequently cited complaints of
Belgrade and Kosovo Serbs is inadequate security to
allow greater participation in political and social life in
Kosovo. However, police statistics actually show a
sharp drop in incidents that might be ethnically
motivated, and we monitor them very carefully. While

06-65731

there have been serious incidents that attract wide
public attention, this overall improvement in the
situation merits greater recognition. Also, the Kosovo
Police Service has made a concerted effort to improve
overall security for minorities, as witnessed by the
opening of police substations in minority areas and by
active involvement by minority police officers in
policing those areas. Moreover, the crime statistics in
all reporting categories show that there is no
disproportion regarding ethnicity with regard to crime.
That said, we cannot be complacent about where we
are. We continue to put a high priority on all incidents
in which police suspect ethnic or political motives.
UNMIK has also been working intensively to
address another important concern: the supply of
electricity. The difficulties can be traced back to one
core problem. The Kosovo electricity company (KEK),
the energy provider in Kosovo, has inherited an
infrastructure in a state of disrepair, and it does not
have enough funds for repair and investment unless
consumers pay for the electricity they use. We have
recently had some success in improving the payment
culture, but some consumers — including nearly all
Kosovo Serbs — still do not pay and have significant
debts. However, recent talks have been somewhat
encouraging. We are now looking forward to a result
where Kosovo Serbs are finally recognizing and paying
KEK, which will enable it to upgrade the system for
the benefit of all, starting this winter. In that context,
it is also very important that Kosovo can effectively
import additional amounts of electricity, if and when
needed, through the Serbian transmission system.
Overall, much has been achieved this year on
standards. But that does not mean that everything has
been fulfilled. Continuous efforts are needed, as
indicated by the challenges noted in the technical
assessment of standards implementation that is before
members. Progress on many of the standards also
depends on clarity regarding status. We all know that
progress in key areas such as returns is limited by the
lingering uncertainty about Kosovo’s future.
While the status process has clearly been brought
a long way forward this year, momentum needs to be
kept up and a timely status settlement achieved. The
constructive engagement and unity of the Kosovo
negotiating team — which includes opposition
leaders — have contributed substantially to the
progress made in the process so far. It is crucial that all
stakeholders in Kosovo remain committed to the

3

S/PV.5588

process and continue to support the work of Special
Envoy Ahtisaari.
The Contact Group has unambiguously stated that
once the status process has begun, it cannot be blocked.
Resolving Kosovo’s status would benefit the entire
Balkan region, including Belgrade. On the other hand,
further delay would entail significant political and
economic costs for Kosovo, for our neighbours, for the
region as a whole and for the international community.
Delay would be more than just a loss of time. Delay
would raise tensions and play into the hands of
extremists on all sides. And delay would not make a
solution easier; it would make it much more difficult.
No one can have an interest in such an outcome.
Once a status decision is made, UNMIK will need
to provide for an orderly and smooth handover to
future local and international institutions established
under the status settlement. Early and prudent planning
is indispensable in order to achieve that, and transition
planning has now become one of our key priorities. We
need to do as much as possible, without prejudice to
the status process, before the formal transition period
begins with the adoption of a resolution by the
Council.
The transfer of responsibilities from UNMIK to
the future local and international authorities will be a
highly complex task. Let me mention just some of the
elements required.
Kosovo will need a new constitutional
arrangement to replace the constitutional framework,
which relies on UNMIK. The adoption of a new
constitution will naturally be followed by elections.
The entire body of legislation promulgated by UNMIK
will have to be reviewed and necessary amendments
made so that, for example, references to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNMIK
are replaced.
The future authorities will have to take over all
executive functions for which UNMIK still has
operational responsibility. New institutions, which may
include new ministries, will also have to be created to
perform new responsibilities. A wide variety of other
tasks will need to be carried out after the end of
UNMIK’s mandate, such as the handover of our
archives to the future authorities and the production
and issuance of new travel documents and
identification cards to replace the current UNMIK
documents. Those tasks, as well as the implementation

4

of the status settlement, will place substantial strains
on the local authorities. The international community
must support them in this endeavour.
It is also important that the future International
Civilian Office, now being prepared by the European
Union and the United States, will be fully operational
when status comes. Let me reiterate once again: delay
would not make a solution easier; it would make it
much more difficult.
The United Nations has accomplished much in
Kosovo. We now owe it to Kosovo and to you, the
members of the Security Council, to make sure that
this final phase of United Nations administration is
wrapped up in an orderly and responsible manner. I
trust that the Council will help in that endeavour by
keeping the momentum in the status process and by
seeing it through.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Rücker for his briefing.
I give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. It gives me particular pleasure today to
address this body of the world Organization.
Proceeding from a notion that we all share — that
the establishment of lasting peace and security is the
goal to which all people of goodwill are committed —
I would particularly like to emphasize the important
role of the Security Council concerning Kosovo and
Metohija. Its importance is especially great since many
sovereign States view the recent developments in the
western Balkans with increasing alarm, owing to
certain unrealistic assessments with regard to the future
status of Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia is fully prepared to assume its share of
responsibility in the process of successfully resolving
of the question of Kosovo and Metohija, on the basis of
international law and in line with universally acclaimed
democratic values. We are fully confident that the
Security Council will make a crucial contribution in
the spirit of its previous documents, primarily
resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, which
unambiguously reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country.

06-65731

S/PV.5588

It is absolutely clear that only by the systematic,
responsible and gradual management of the
negotiations on the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija will we be able to reach a long-term
sustainable solution. Such a solution cannot be
achieved in haste and should emerge only through
confidence-building, dialogue and negotiations.
Otherwise, new complications may arise. Confidence
and dialogue are conditions sine qua non for any
coexistence. Nervousness, haste and arrogance will not
help. They will only drive us further from a solution.
We have a saying: “Avoid shortcuts — they might be
the wrong way”.
However, I must regrettably inform the Council
about the cruel reality in Kosovo and Metohija, which
testifies to the lack of freedom and security there. From
15 August to 1 December 2006, 75 ethnically
motivated attacks were committed, in which 23 persons
of Serb nationality were injured. The extremists also
targeted members of other communities. The house of
Zecir Zurapi, a member of the ethnic Gorany
community in the village of Gornja Rapca, was blown
up on 1 October 2006. The perpetrators of that terrorist
act, like so many others in the past, have not been
identified. It is significant, however, that immediately
before the attack, Zurapi was involved in plans to have
the Gorany students educated in line with the Serbian
curriculum. As a result, more than 1,000 students in
three schools were not able to attend classes for more
than 30 days.
Over the same period, in the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija, 17 transmitter stations belonging to the
Serbian mobile operator Telekom Srbija were put out
of operation. This is a virtual criminal act that is taking
place before the very eyes of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
because, since 1997, Telekom Srbija has had a valid
licence to operate throughout the entire territory of
Serbia, and has paid all of its taxes to UNMIK and the
Kosovo Provisional Government. That act has further
isolated the Serbian population. It should also be
pointed out that, in the context of all types of
communications, UNMIK has consistently tried, to
varying degrees, to extend its mandate, thus violating
the sovereignty of Serbia. There are many examples of
that in its activities related to the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Union of
Railways, the International Committee for Railway
Transport, the Universal Postal Union and the

06-65731

International Telecommunication Union. All of those
activities are aimed at taking away attributes and
symbols
through
international
specialized
organizations, thus prejudging the final status of
Kosovo and Metohija. In that way, preconditions for
cooperation and confidence are naturally further
undermined.
Furthermore, there have been drastic and
selective electricity cuts. Such discrimination reached
its apogee in the Serbian communities of central
Kosovo and the municipality of Strpce, where one hour
of power supply is followed by 10 to 20 hours of
blackouts. Add to that the fact that there have been 260
inter-ethnic incidents since 24 October 2005, in which
all the victims were Serbs, and the trend becomes more
than obvious.
Let me add another sombre detail: even with the
assistance of UNMIK, we have not been able to make
the Albanian side agree — at least at a declaratory
level — to the need to rebuild the houses of Serbs from
Badovac village who were expelled in the riots of
March 2004. At that time, Serbian houses all over
Kosovo were set on fire and destroyed. People were
expelled, and some were killed.
As for the return of expelled and internally
displaced persons, I would like to recall that, from
1999 to date, as many as 250,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) have not been in a position to return to
Kosovo and Metohija. According to our data, 2 per
cent have returned; according to UNMIK, the figure is
5 per cent. Major demographic and migratory shifts
have taken place in Kosovo and Metohija. The
population in Pristina, the capital, has increased
threefold, and it is currently estimated at 600,000.
There are no more than some 100 Serbs in Pristina.
Before 1999, there were about 40,000 Serbs in Pristina.
As far as Serbian religious monuments, cultural
heritage and religious freedoms are concerned,
Albanians pay lip service to their protection. Serbian
shrines are in fact looted and desecrated on a daily
basis. The church of the Holy Shroud in the village of
Babin Most near Obilic and the church of Saint Petka
in Gojbulja, in the municipality of Vucitrn, were
broken into and ransacked. The orchards of the Devic
monastery, in the village of Lausa in the municipality
of Srbica, were completely destroyed, even though
they were guarded by KFOR and the Kosovo

5

S/PV.5588

Protection Service police after having been set on fire
in March 2004.
Illegal construction close to cultural sites within
the proposed protected zones is rampant. At the end of
September, large-scale construction was begun in the
vicinity of the monument honouring the mediaeval
Serbian Kosovo heroes in Gazimestan, near Pristina.
During the same period, in the neighbourhood of the
village of Velika Hoca — a village that has 13 churches
dating from the twelfth to the fifteenth century — an
industrial facility is being built. There are plans to
build a large hotel close to Gorioc monastery. These
so-called construction activities naturally give rise to
serious concern, since they are being carried out in
close proximity to religious and cultural sites, which,
in the negotiations on the future status of the province,
should be granted the status of protected zones where
urbanization and industrial construction are not
allowed.
Those activities are obviously a deliberate
attempt to prevent the preservation of the cultural and
environmental integrity of the sites. The Government
of Serbia and all the members of the Contact Group are
insisting on that, making the negotiations on cultural
heritage one of their priorities.
It should also be pointed out that attempts are
being made by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment to revise history and to delete all traces of
Serb existence in Kosovo and Metohija. One of the
most flagrant instances of quasi-historical propaganda
by the provisional Ministry of Culture of Kosovo took
place in May 2005 in Paris. The Minister of Culture,
Astrit Haracia, tried to distribute in the UNESCO
building a pamphlet entitled Monuments of Kosova.
The publication makes no mention whatsoever of the
Serbian contribution to the heritage of Kosovo and
Metohija. That publication outraged the participants
and UNESCO officials. Its distribution was stopped by
Søren Jessen-Petersen, who was head of UNMIK at the
time, at the explicit request of our Minister for Foreign
Affairs. Regrettably, the Provisional Ministry of
Culture of Kosovo, even after that unfortunate incident
a year and a half ago, has continued to promote more
or less the same ideas in a different form. On its web
site, www.visitkosova.org, a one-sided historical
version is presented stating that Kosovo and Metohija
has been exclusively the land of the Albanians since
earliest history.

6

The role of UNMIK is, unfortunately, giving rise
to concern. Although it is unambiguously defined in all
documents as a United Nations transitional
administration with a clear mandate, it often assumes
the role of a condominium by seeking to create a State
for Albanians. Almost as a rule, UNMIK has adopted a
sympathetic attitude and ignored Albanian extremism.
I would like to recall that Ambassador Kai Eide,
in his comprehensive review of the situation in
Kosovo, emphasized that, along with the process of
seeking a solution concerning the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija, it is crucially important to
continue with the standards implementation as the only
way forward. Ambassador Eide also pointed out other
very
important
and
substantial
problems.
Unfortunately, for the time being, there are no serious
signs that anyone is willing to recognize at least some
of those perfectly adequate and constructive
recommendations. The Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, said a fortnight ago that
compromise was impossible and stupid. That statement
cast a shadow on the constructive efforts being made,
especially given that compromise is one of the
important principles endorsed by the Contact Group at
its meeting in January 2006.
Anyone can see that organized crime, human
trafficking and corruption are rampant in Kosovo and
Metohija. The drug and arms trade and smuggling
provide a lifeline for the criminal and terrorist
business, before the very eyes of the international
community, the police and the military. Mafia-style
Albanian clans are currently flourishing. The most
recent and alarming incident occurred 10 days ago,
when an Albanian terrorist paramilitary formation in
Kosovo and Metohija began to intercept vehicles,
asking for identification papers and intimidating
passengers. Also, several days ago, on 8 December,
barely a few minutes before a train was scheduled to
arrive, unidentified terrorists blew up railway tracks in
the vicinity of Mijalic village, in the municipality of
Vucitrn. The only passengers in the train were Serbs,
who travel regularly from Priluzje, Plemetine and
Zvecan on this line. The blowing up of the tracks was
yet another horrific terrorist attack against the Serbs.
Difficult as it may be, the situation and the events
in Kosovo and Metohija should be looked at in a
realistic, responsible and objective fashion. Any
precipitous solution would cost the region, the
province itself and the international community dearly;

06-65731

S/PV.5588

instead of achieving a sustainable solution, they would
have to deal with an even more difficult and complex
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. A hasty solution
would set a precedent that would open up a Pandora’s
box.
I must emphasize once again here that the entire
strategy adopted by the Albanian side in the past
actually boils down to not engaging in the status
negotiations. The Kosovo Albanians are idly waiting to
be given yet another Albanian State in the Balkans
within the internationally recognized borders of Serbia.
From the point of view of the interests of the
international community at large, such an outcome is
unacceptable; we cannot but take into account the
facts.
I would like to stress that the solution has to be a
compromise reached in the interests of peace and
lasting stability. It has to be sought, on an agreed basis,
by the two negotiating parties — Serbian and Albanian.
Belgrade, the Government of Serbia and the Serbs of
Kosovo in particular are seeking to reach an agreement
that guarantees a durable solution with respect to their
coexistence in a modern, democratic and decentralized
State.
The Serbian side therefore sees the solution to the
Kosovo problem as based on the implementation of the
principles and specific solutions contained in the
platform of the Serbian negotiating team on the future
status of Kosovo and Metohija. It remains the best way
to resolve the current horrific situation in the province.
A different outcome would create unlawfulness, and
unlawfulness breeds more unlawfulness.
The international community should support, and
demonstrate such support by its deeds, its commitment
to a stable and safe region. That can be achieved only
by taking steps to introduce the rule of law, punish
criminals and terrorists, and create the security and
other conditions necessary to a normal and dignified
life. A life of dignity is not only defined by the
fundamental documents of international law, but is also
embodied in European standards recognizing the
respect of human rights and freedoms.
Of course, my country relies primarily on the
law — domestic law, international law, democratic
principles, agreements and treaties — but first and
foremost on the inviolable principle of justice. We
firmly believe that there is a way out of this situation.
A sustainable solution can be based only on giving up

06-65731

extreme demands and embracing a rational approach
and compromise. In practice, that means substantial
autonomy for Kosovo — the kind of autonomy that no
European or other State has granted to their region so
far. It is there that, despite the obvious difficulties,
there is manoeuvring space for agreement and
compromise. There is manoeuvring space to find a
solution. The talks held so far have not borne fruit,
largely due to the lack of engagement and the
insufficient number of meetings. We propose that the
Vienna talks be immediately resumed in order to define
modalities for the broadest possible autonomy of
Kosovo Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija, with the
participation of the European Union. The talks should
be intensive so as to enable us to obtain results soon.
The threat of violence that is being heard more or
less openly from the Albanian side cannot be accepted
as a rational argument. Perhaps today violence is a
consequence of a conjuncture, but a conjuncture is a
variable. Constants are always better than variables,
and, in this instance, a constant means dialogue,
compromise and rejection of the use of violence.
Serbia voiced its position on Kosovo and
Metohija just a month and a half ago in a fully
legitimate and very powerful fashion. More than half
of registered voters with the right to vote opted in
favour of the new Constitution of Serbia. Its preamble
incorporates the fundamental principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). That constitutional
provision has been practically based on the Charter of
the United Nations, on which this body which I have
the honour to address today is also based. By adopting
the Constitution of their country in a referendum, an
absolute majority of the citizens of Serbia reaffirmed
their commitment to the principle of the inviolability of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of democratic
States and to the inviolability of the borders of the
Republic of Serbia, and thus to the United Nations and
the Security Council.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rücker, for his briefing. I should like also welcome the
presence among us of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and of Mr. Çeku, Prime Minister
of Kosovo, as part of the delegation led by Mr. Rücker.

7

S/PV.5588

The representative of Finland will make a
statement later on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union, with which I fully align myself.

majority of the population in Kosovo, should also
respect the guidelines that were established by the
Contact Group and endorsed by the Security Council.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/906)
stresses the sustained progress that has been made in
standards implementation, in line with the calls of
Council members. This is the case, in particular, with
regard to the priorities identified by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Contact Group with respect to the protection of
minorities and the rule of law.

Mrs. Martínez Gramuglia (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rücker, for his
briefing and his comments on the latest developments
in Kosovo. We welcome the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic. We
also welcome Prime Minister Çeku as part of the
delegation
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Let me
also echo the gratitude expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/906) to the men and women
of UNMIK for their steadfastness and their
commitment to the values and principles of the
Organization as they carry out their daily tasks.
Argentina has been participating in UNMIK with
police, military and diplomatic personnel since the
very beginning of the Mission, and we will continue to
support its work in its upcoming phases as well.

We note with satisfaction the adoption of a
number of laws intended to ensure the protection of
minorities. This is necessary to affirm Kosovo’s multiethnic character. This is a positive development, but it
needs to be built upon. All the standards must be
implemented tangibly and rapidly, in particular with
respect to property rights and the rule of law, and
especially regarding the judicial sector.
We also note the drop in ethnic-based crimes.
Nevertheless, such acts continue to be unacceptable;
beyond the necessary condemnation in words, they
must also be dealt with appropriately through the legal
system.
The report of the Secretary-General stresses the
efforts being made by the provisional authorities to
establish contacts with minority communities; it is thus
all the more disappointing that Serb leaders in Kosovo
continue to remain outside the political process, which
is to the detriment of their community. The Belgrade
authorities should remove all obstacles preventing
Kosovo Serbs from participating in the Provisional
Institutions.
My delegation reiterates its full support for the
negotiating process being led by Mr. Ahtisaari. We note
with regret that the positions of the parties, as the
Secretary-General’s report observes, remain far apart.
We have taken note of the Special Envoy’s
announcement that his recommendations will be
submitted after the parliamentary elections in Serbia.
The Security Council should then take decisions on the
basis of those recommendations, including on adopting
the international presence in Kosovo.
It is important not to delay the resolution of an
issue that weighs on regional stability and impedes the
implementation of the reforms that we all wish to see.
The ultimate solution, which must be acceptable to the

8

The report gives an account, once again, of
sustained progress on standards implementation, with
special emphasis on the 13 priorities identified by the
Contact Group last June. We would like to underline
the willingness of the Provisional Institutions to
implement the standards programme. Without any
doubt, this contributes to strengthening the Kosovo
Institutions. Standards implementation is also a sine
qua non condition for making Kosovo’s European
perspective a reality, and it must continue to be the
core of the efforts throughout the future status process
for Kosovo, and even beyond.
However, it is disappointing that the positive
effects of implementation do not fully benefit the
Kosovo Serb community, due primarily to their own
reluctance to cooperate with the Pristina authorities.
We urge the Kosovo Serb community to act with the
maturity necessary to assume their responsibilities in a
truly multi-ethnic society. The leaders of the Serb
National Council must end their boycott of contacts
with the Provisional Institutions, while Belgrade must
remove without delay all impediments to such
participation.
For their part, the leaders of the Provisional
Institutions must persist vigorously with standards
implementation if they are to accomplish the aim of

06-65731

S/PV.5588

laying the foundation of a multi-ethnic and democratic
society in which all communities live in dignity and
security. All groups that compose Kosovo’s society
must display wisdom at this critical moment for the
future of Kosovo, and their leaders must seize this
opportunity to promote reconciliation and dialogue.
Mr. Rücker has indicated that the political
situation in Kosovo is dominated by the future status
process. It is undeniable that there are differing
expectations regarding the outcome, but we believe
that it is necessary to maintain the momentum in the
process under way, because uncertainty could result in
greater instability. On the contrary, the primary aim of
this process should be to ensure that all those who live
in Kosovo can have a safe, decent, peaceful and
dignified life.
To achieve this, it is essential that any agreed
approach be based on negotiations between the parties,
and not something imposed internationally. This, in our
view, is the basis for any sustainable agreement and we
believe that it should be a priority for the international
community. Any solution must contribute to regional
stability, with a realistic, viable, sustainable agreement
that is in full compliance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It must also be based on and
consistent with the Guiding Principles for the
settlement of Kosovo’s status, formulated by the
Contact Group and endorsed by the Security
Council — in particular, full respect for the territorial
integrity and internal stability of regional neighbours.
Argentina considers that there can be no
prosperous and peaceful future for Kosovo without
complete respect for the diversity of its people. It is
key to stability and to social and economic
development, both in Kosovo and in the entire region,
that the status process concludes satisfactorily, with an
outcome that is acceptable to the majority and at the
same time respects and protects the rights of
minorities.
We call on the leaders of both parties, who have a
historic opportunity in their hands, to demonstrate the
vision and the political will to achieve a settlement that
will enable Kosovo to enter a new phase of its history
and will enable the international community to
continue to support a sustainable solution for the
Kosovo issue in full respect for the principle of
territorial integrity.

06-65731

Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States joins in welcoming to the Council
Special Representative Rücker, Prime Minister Çeku
and Ms. Raskovic-Ivic.
The United States continues to support the role
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is playing in developing meaningful
self-government in Kosovo, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We
appreciate the leadership of Mr. Rücker and the work
he is doing to prepare Kosovo for its future political
status.
The United States is encouraged by the progress
Kosovo is making in implementing the Contact
Group’s standards priorities. Kosovo should make
every effort, with the full support of UNMIK, to
complete all of the priorities and to continue work on
the overall standards for Kosovo, paying particular
attention to respecting individual property rights.
We strongly condemn the 8 December explosion
of a railway line in the municipality of Vushtrri and
note with concern reports of illegal checkpoints being
established in western Kosovo. We call upon all sides
to refrain from violence and to respect the rule of law.
Individuals responsible for the 8 December explosion
and other violent incidents should be brought to
justice. Belgrade must also do its part to help improve
the situation in Kosovo by supporting Kosovo Serb
participation in local institutions, returning cadastral
records taken from Kosovo and working with the
international
community
to
ensure
stability,
particularly in northern Kosovo.
Six and a half years have passed since
international community intervention brought an end to
the fighting in Kosovo. The people of Kosovo — all
the people of Kosovo — deserve clarity about their
future. As the Secretary-General notes in his recent
report on Kosovo, the mere speculation about delay in
the status process has led to a feeling of uncertainty as
to the way ahead and could represent a source of
instability if momentum abates. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s assessment that it is important to
keep the momentum in the political process and
achieve a status settlement soon.
We thank President Ahtisaari for his leadership of
the Kosovo status talks. The United States supports
President Ahtisaari’s decision to present his report
without delay to the parties following the 21 January

9

S/PV.5588

elections in Serbia. To that end, we ask both Belgrade
and Pristina to receive President Ahtisaari’s report with
open minds, a willingness to be flexible on the many
issues under discussion, and an understanding of the
importance of reaching a settlement that helps
accelerate that region’s Euro-Atlantic integration.
As the United Nations-led status process enters
its concluding stages, both sides must be realistic about
the probable outcome. As the Contact Group has stated,
there will be no return of Kosovo to the pre-1999
situation, no partition of Kosovo, and no union of
Kosovo with any other or part of another country.
Additionally, the settlement must solidify Kosovo’s
multi-ethnicity and must also offer real protection for
the political and cultural rights of all communities in
Kosovo. At the same time, the settlement must be
acceptable to the people of Kosovo.
Finally, it is important for UNMIK, as well as the
Pristina and Belgrade authorities, to work closely with
the representatives of NATO, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and others in the international community on the
transition planning needed for the period following the
conclusion of the status process.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Rücker for his
briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo, Mr. Çeku,
at this meeting.
While a form for the final status of Kosovo
dominates the political situation in Kosovo, the
implementation of the Kosovo standards is the
challenge which the leaders of Kosovo must address on
a day-to-day basis. Since the standards include some
important elements which provide the foundation for
governance based on democracy and the rule of law,
Japan would like to reaffirm the importance of
continued implementation efforts by the future
Government in Kosovo, regardless of the final status.
In that regard, we welcome the steady progress
on the implementation of 13 priority areas, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General. In addition, we
appreciate the creation of structures and work plans by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
implement the European Partnership Action Plan, in

10

which the standards are now integrally incorporated.
Those efforts can be regarded as evidence of Kosovo’s
commitment to the continuing implementation of the
standards in the future.
Needless to say, serious work should go into all
standards implementation efforts. However, I would
like to mention the following three points that require
particular attention in light of the anticipated situation
following the settlement of the final status.
First, with regard to functioning democratic
institutions, it is a serious problem that no progress has
been reported on the issue of participation of Kosovo
Serbs in Kosovo’s political institutions. We express our
deep concern, in particular, with regard to the three
northern municipalities’ ongoing boycott of contacts
with the Provisional Institutions, and urge those
municipalities once again to resume their contacts
without delay. To solve that problem, the Government
of Serbia, as a responsible member of the international
community, should respond positively to the
international calls for action on that issue.
Secondly, with regard to the economy, a stable
society will not be achieved through the stabilization of
governance alone, but also requires economic recovery.
The economy of Kosovo is hardly self-sufficient. The
Provisional Institutions need to redouble their efforts to
build the necessary economic system and institutions,
and also to address the issue of youth unemployment,
which some say exceeds 60 per cent. In addition,
special attention should be given to creating job
opportunities for returnees and minority groups.
Thirdly, with regard to the freedom of movement,
the mistrust among ethnic groups, especially the fear
among the Kosovo Serbs and other minority
populations with regard to the majority population, is
an underlying factor that is hindering freedom of
movement. Serbian and Albanian leaders alike
therefore need to take the necessary measures for
confidence-building among the people. That issue,
together with the aforementioned problem of
insufficient job opportunities, constitutes an obstacle to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
For that reason, we call for prompt measures in that
regard.
I would also like to make several points
concerning the efforts of the international community
towards determination of the final status of Kosovo.
First, Japan has been fully supporting the efforts of

06-65731

S/PV.5588

Special Envoy Mr. Ahtisaari and, in that context, we
express our understanding of his decision to present his
comprehensive proposal immediately after the
upcoming Serbian elections. Secondly, we welcome the
careful preparations now under way for the transition
to an international civilian presence after the
withdrawal
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
leadership of UNMIK and the European Union. The
transition needs to take place without any delay upon
the determination of the final status.
Before concluding my remarks today, I would
like to send an important message to all parties. While
the situation in Kosovo will reach a critical juncture at
the beginning of next year, we would like to strongly
urge all parties to act with the utmost prudence to
ensure that the final status will contribute to peace and
security in the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation at today’s
meeting of the Security Council of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and thank her for her
substantive statement.
We listened carefully to the statement made by
Mr. Rücker, head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
would have benefited had Mr. Rücker not exceeded his
mandate and had he properly complied with the
modalities of today’s meeting with regard to his
accompanying delegation.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report.
Despite a few positive advances, the achievements in
implementing the standards established by the
international community with respect to ethnic
minorities cannot yet be described as significant. In
particular, the problem of protecting the religious and
cultural heritage of minorities, decentralization, the
return of non-Albanian refugees and many other issues
are still far from having been resolved.
We commend the enhanced legal basis aimed at
guaranteeing the rights of the non-Albanian population
in Kosovo. Nevertheless, the key problem is still the
same: the growing gap between the existence of
relevant documents and the actual situation in the
province. Unfortunately, it must be said that, at this
stage, the pledges to guarantee the rights and security
of non-Albanians in Kosovo have not yet been

06-65731

implemented. In that connection, we should recall the
conclusion of the Secretary-General that, in order to
ensure confidence-building and stability, it is important
to guarantee that priority be placed not on symbolic but
on concrete measures.
There must be more attention given to the
property rights of non-Albanians, including Orthodox
churches, during the privatization process in Kosovo.
Any mistakes in that regard could well eventually lead
to the establishment of a single ethnic society in
Kosovo.
A precondition for progress in the standards
programme is to enhance security and to combat
organized crime. Without that, freedom of movement,
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and economic recovery will be impossible.
We are concerned that, despite the decrease in the
overall number in ethnically motivated crimes, acts of
violence against the security of Kosovo’s Serbs
continue.
The periodically heard threats that there will be
mass unrest in Kosovo if a decision on status is not
taken by a given date are also a subject of concern. We
can only interpret that as unacceptable blackmail of the
international community or as an attempt by radicals to
incite acts of violence.
We strongly condemn the organization of mass
unrest in Kosovo on 28 November, which included acts
of violence against the UNMIK office in Pristina. We
believe that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Kosovo and the international presence
will keep the situation under control. They must not
allow a repetition of such events in the future.
We share the view of the Secretary-General as
regards the unacceptability of allowing political events
or the timetable to be determined by the street. We are
convinced that any measures to destabilize or stir up
the situation in the province would force the Security
Council to review the situation, which could lead to an
immediate halt of the future status process.
As was highlighted in particular during the recent
meeting in Moscow with the UNMIK delegation and
Mr. Çeku, the Prime Minister of Kosovo, the Kosovo
Albanian leadership has the primary responsibility for
not allowing extremist acts on the territory of the
province that can only lead to complicating the
settlement process. We strongly appeal to the leaders in

11

S/PV.5588

the province to decisively intensify their efforts to
ensure genuine and lasting progress in the
implementation of the standards, in particular those
essential for ensuring a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

not twist anyone’s arms. We need to look more
carefully at the concrete proposals coming from
Belgrade, which demonstrate an attempt by Serbs to
participate in the negotiating process.

The Serbian side must, of course, play its part in
that regard. We understand that the Secretary-General
is disappointed with the non-participation of Kosovo
Serbs in the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment. At the same time, it does demonstrate that
the confidence of minorities in the Institutions
continues to be very low. The majority community
should establish a climate conducive to encouraging
minorities, and Kosovo Serbs in particular, to
cooperate with provincial authorities and participate in
all areas of life in Kosovo.

We see no alternative to a negotiated
compromise, however difficult it may be difficult to
achieve. That is what is most important now.
Condemnation of Belgrade for not showing a
constructive approach or for having prejudged the
status of Kosovo is unfounded. We also wish to align
ourselves with the appeal by the Secretary-General on
all parties to refrain from any unilateral acts or
statements.

Achieving tangible and effective progress in the
standards programme is one of the determining factors
that will influence the rate and outcome of the
negotiating process on the future status of Kosovo
under the mediation of Mr. Ahtisaari, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General.
We welcome the wise decision to suspend the
status talks until the completion of the elections in
Serbia. At this sensitive phase in defining the future
status of Kosovo, it is extremely important to ensure
consistent efforts by Belgrade and Pristina to find an
effective and mutually acceptable negotiated outcome
and to sustain international efforts to assist in
achieving that outcome, on the basis of the
fundamental principles set out in resolution 1244
(1999) and the Contact Group’s documents.
The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out the
need for both parties to show more flexibility and
willingness to compromise in the negotiating process.
They are called upon to find areas of agreement and to
take long-lasting and sustainable decisions. We believe
that that should be the focus of the comprehensive
status proposal that the Special Envoy will eventually
submit to the parties. We expect measures that will
return the future status process to its earlier basis on
internationally agreed principles, which are the only
possible way to resolve the situation in Kosovo. In the
first place, that concerns the need to give priority to
negotiations and a rejection of strict timelines that are
not motivated by the effort to gradually harmonize the
positions of the Kosovo Serbs and Albanians. We must
bring the parties back to negotiations, while taking into
account the interests of both Belgrade and Pristina and

12

In any case, the decision on the future status of
the province will have a universal character. Only a
negotiated decision, rather than a unilateral or imposed
one, regarding Kosovo can be supported by the
Security Council and would avoid setting a negative
precedent in the context of internal crisis resolution.
Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): We too welcome
the participation of Special Representative Rücker,
Prime Minister Çeku and Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic in
today’s debate regarding the future status of Kosovo.
It is indeed the desire of the delegation of Ghana
to be a part of the consensus that will finally emerge in
the Security Council on the future of Kosovo.
Nonetheless, we recognize that this remains an
exceedingly complex issue, given the wide gulf that
persists between the parties. The dilemma is how to
resolve the claim to self-determination by the majority
Albanian population of Kosovo, on the one hand, and
the Serbian Government’s anxiety to preserve the
territorial integrity of the Serbian State, on the other, as
reflected in the provisions of the new Constitution,
adopted in October this year.
In that regard, let me state that Ghana attaches
equal weight to the two conflicting claims, and
believes that all possibilities for a negotiated settlement
of the current impasse must be explored, in conformity
with the principles of international law. In addition, we
are mindful of the fact that there can be no lasting
peace and stability in Kosovo unless the final status
process results in an outcome that guarantees respect
for the rights of all ethnic groups in Kosovo and also
encourages their effective and meaningful participation
in public affairs within a democratic dispensation.

06-65731

S/PV.5588

We believe the current strategy contains the right
elements, with its emphasis on the creation of
functioning democratic institutions that can effectively
entrench the rule of law, ensure the freedom of
movement in a safe and secure environment and
facilitate the return of displaced persons, not to
mention the creation of a vibrant economy for the wellbeing of the people of Kosovo. We are encouraged in
that regard by the actions undertaken by UNMIK and
the Office of the Special Envoy during the reporting
period, both to meet the institutional needs of Kosovo
and to engage the parties on the issues of
decentralization, cultural and religious heritage and
community rights.
Although the progress made so far does not
measure up to expectations with respect to the 13
priorities for standards implementation, it is not for
want of trying. In the absence of a strong political will
to engage their Albanian counterparts, the Kosovo
Serbians have impeded progress.
In that connection, the continuing refusal of the
Serbian minority to participate in the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government — in spite of the
various overtures made by the Government, coupled
with the institutional mechanisms being put in place to
ensure accountability and respect for the rights of all
minorities — is a major challenge. We urge the Kosovo
Serbs and the authorities in Belgrade not to dismiss
those positive overtures as cynical manipulations of the
final status process without subjecting them to a
practical test. And the only way to do so is to become
involved in the process of institution-building that is
shaping the future of their homeland.
At the same time, we find the pattern of hostility
among Albanian youth towards the Serbs particularly
disturbing, as it does not augur well for harmonious
existence between the two communities in future. We
urge that conscious efforts be made to instil in the
youth of the various ethnic groups the values of
tolerance and unity. Otherwise, the current efforts will
indeed amount to nothing but token gestures.
For us, therefore, the critical question today is
whether at this point in time Kosovo has the internal
strength and resilience to withstand the pressures of the
conflicting claims on its future status. And closely
related to that is whether the authorities in Belgrade
and the Kosovo Serbs can be brought around to
accepting an independent and sovereign Kosovo with

06-65731

the levers of power firmly in the hands of an Albanian
majority. Ghana does not have easy answers to those
questions.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I join others in
welcoming the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Joachim Rücker, and thank him for his
presentation. I welcome the presence of the President
of the Coordinating Centre of the Republic of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
and I also welcome Prime Minister Çeku’s presence
among the delegation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.
Greece welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the standards, in particular of the
Contact Group’s 13 priorities for standards
implementation, and stresses the need for the continued
commitment of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in that regard. The effective fulfilment of
the standards, which should by no means be limited to
the 13 points mentioned above, is central in achieving
a sustainable multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo,
living in peace and stability.
The recent adoption of legislation such as the
laws on freedom of religion, the use of languages and
cultural heritage is a significant development, and we
look very much forward to their full implementation.
Progress made in the functioning of the
Ministries of Justice and Internal Affairs marks
positive steps. We emphasize that the prevalence of the
rule of law is key to a working democracy. However,
we note that there seems to be no substantial progress
on decentralization beyond the first three pilot projects,
although originally there were supposed to be five, and
we call on all parties involved to take the process
forward.
We fully support the principled stance of the
Secretary-General with regard to the strong
condemnation of violence. We express our concern
with regard to the recent explosions on railway tracks
in central Kosovo and reports on the setting up of
checkpoints by masked gunmen. We note that attacks
against religious sites have decreased and reiterate that
such incidents should have no place whatsoever in a
modern and democratic society.

13

S/PV.5588

Positive developments have marked the economic
sector as well, aiming at attracting foreign investment
and establishing the Central Banking Authority of
Kosovo. We understand that Belgrade made an offer on
the provision of electricity and that currently UNMIK
and Belgrade are very close to agreeing on how that
offer could be accepted. We would appreciate further
information on those talks, as we very strongly support
any initiative that improves the everyday life of the
population of Kosovo.
As the Secretary-General also mentioned in his
report, concerns still remain with regard to the low
number of minority returns. The limited results cannot
be attributed solely to the lack of economic
opportunity. We cannot ignore the fact that the
perception, or the reality, of security and freedom of
movement remains the elementary factor that
determines progress in that area.
We cannot but stress once more the need for the
involvement of the Kosovo Serbs and the importance
of their engagement with the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government. The participation of the Kosovo
Serbs in those Institutions is key in serving their own
best interests, and we therefore urge Belgrade to
encourage them in that direction.
Finally, with reference to the political process for
the determination of Kosovo’s future status, I would
like to reiterate my country’s position that the best
possible and most sustainable outcome of the future
status process is a mutually acceptable solution. We
therefore welcome the fact that the international
community has realized the need for a certain
flexibility in the timeframe that allows for a more
genuine status process and gives the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, among others, the
necessary time to press on with their efforts on
standards implementation.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rücker, and thank him
for his presentation. We also welcome the
representative of Serbia, Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, and to
thank her as well.
We wish to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for their continued support and assistance in the
implementation of standards in Kosovo and for their

14

efforts to find a solution to the problems in that
country.
We welcome the progress made by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
in their sustained effort to implement the 13 priority
points for standards implementation presented by the
Contact Group. We note from the report of the
Secretary-General that substantial progress has been
made in that regard. We also commend the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo for the
steps they are taking to strengthen democratic
institutions and promote the rule of law in Kosovo.
While we hail the progress in the implementation
of standards, we regret that the issue of the future
status of Kosovo remains in abeyance. Undoubtedly
that has taken more prominence and visibility in the
political life of Kosovo. Nevertheless, we commend
the Special Envoy, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, for all his
efforts in convening further rounds of direct talks
between Belgrade and Pristina. We are, however,
concerned that the positions of the two parties still
remain far apart. We are mindful of the caution given
by the Secretary-General in the report concerning the
impact of the failure to bridge the differences between
the two sides. We are troubled by the risk that further
delay could potentially raise instability in that country.
We therefore reiterate our call to the leaders of
both sides to negotiate in good faith. We appeal to the
Serbian side to encourage Kosovo Serbs to participate
in political institutions and to the Kosovo leaders to
reach out to the Serbs and other minorities. We also
urge them to refrain from any public pronouncements
and unilateral decisions that may be construed by the
other side as being hostile and provocative. Continued
violence that seeks to effect political change is
unhelpful and can only serve to undermine the peace
process.
Since we are about to conclude our term in the
Council, we shall not be members when the Special
Envoy is expected to present his recommendations next
March. However, we believe that it is in the interest of
all the people of Kosovo that they and their leaders use
the opportunity between now and March to promote
reconciliation and dialogue. We urge them to accept
and support the recommendations of the Special Envoy
when they are presented.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Allow me also to join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Rücker for his

06-65731

S/PV.5588

briefing today. On behalf of my delegation, I would
also like to thank Madam Raskovic-Ivic, President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija for her statement. We too
welcome the presence at the meeting of the Prime
Minister of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo, Mr. Çeku, as a member of the
delegation
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be delivered later this afternoon by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. That is why I will limit myself to the following
comments.
In general, we share the positive evaluation of the
developments in Kosovo since the launch of the status
process, as presented in the latest report of SecretaryGeneral (S/2006/906). We would like to join the
Secretary-General’s call to the majority of the
population in Kosovo and to Kosovo’s official
representatives to sustain this strength and to
demonstrate political responsibility, maturity and a
firm dedication to the non-use of violence in achieving
political change in Kosovo and in defining its status.
We call on the Kosovo authorities to take all
appropriate measures to guarantee security for all
citizens and to address the issue of impunity.
Without thorough investigation of crimes and
bringing perpetrators to justice, peaceful coexistence
and reconciliation among communities in Kosovo, in
our view, cannot be possible. We believe that is a
matter of critical importance — especially when the
UNMIK transition period is most likely ahead — that
the authority of an international presence, whether it be
the present or possibly a future one, is not undermined
by any unreasonable actions or provocations.
The role of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and other
international bodies and organizations in Kosovo is
still vital for and instrumental in the peace and stability
of the region and the outcome of the status process and
its implementation. We believe that the international
presence will also have to be sustained in Kosovo after
status determination.
We agree with Mr. Rücker that the
implementation of standards must remain an important
priority. We note with satisfaction the generally
positive trends and the commitment of the Government
led by Mr. Çeku to continue its efforts in that direction.

06-65731

It is of crucial importance to ensure that these efforts
are maintained and remain sustainable, with special
focus on the 13 priorities identified by the Contact
Group.
I would like to reiterate that standards
implementation is equally essential for securing the
multi-ethnic and democratic nature of Kosovo as well
as for its European perspective. The European Union is
expected to play a more visible and decisive role in the
next stage of the status process, so the more standards
Kosovo can meet today, the further it can go in the
future in terms of the integration processes, regardless
of the dynamic of the status process.
Multi-ethnicity in practice means that Kosovo is
also a homeland for Serbs. In this regard, we agree
with the Secretary-General that progress will be
achieved by demonstrating through actions, not words,
that everyone has a future in Kosovo. In our view, it is
the ultimate responsibility of the Kosovo Albanian
majority to demonstrate through the adoption of
adequate measures that it is ready to accept
responsibility for the future well-being and security of
Serbs and other ethnic minorities in Kosovo. The
Serbian community in Kosovo should feel that it is an
integral and welcome part of society as a whole and
that its social and economic status will be
acknowledged and honoured once the status
implementation process is under way.
On the other hand, we believe that the issue of
the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the Provisional
Institutions should be separated from the status
process. In this connection, we would also like to
reiterate the call on Belgrade and Pristina to allow and
encourage Kosovo Serbs to exercise their rights fully
through their participation in the Institutions. We
believe that will also positively contribute to the status
negotiation process.
In conclusion, we reiterate that we support the
process led by Mr. Ahtisaari and continue to believe it
is necessary to find a lasting and balanced settlement
as its outcome. It should be the highest priority and
imperative to seek a balanced settlement and
compromise from both sides through interactive talks
that would, at the end of the day, reflect the objective
concerns of all parties involved and strengthen regional
security and stability.
Finally, we would like to stress that, in any
outcome of the status definition process, Kosovars and

15

S/PV.5588

Serbs will have to live together, side by side. It is in
their vital interest to find the best and most sustainable
form of peaceful coexistence and cooperation that
reflects their rightful ambitions and concerns.
Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation also welcomes the representative of Serbia
and the Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions
in Kosovo.
In appointing Mr. Ahtisaari to lead the
negotiations on the status of Kosovo, the SecretaryGeneral, with the support of the Security Council and
international community, sought to establish a political
process that would eventually lead Serbs and Albanians
in Kosovo to live together within a multi-ethnic
society.
Aware of what is at stake here, given the stability
of the whole region, Congo associated itself with the
Contact Group’s appeal to complete negotiations by the
end of 2006. Today, in the light of the comments made
by the Secretary-General and with the additional
information provided by Mr. Rücker, it has to be noted
that we are at a crossroads after seven years of interim
administration and provisional status. Action without
delay appears to be an urgent necessity.
We await with great interest the submission of the
settlement proposal, which Mr. Ahtisaari had to defer
on 10 November in order to take into account the
parliamentary elections planned by Belgrade for
21 January. In the light of the situation described in the
Secretary-General’s report, it is important not to delay
this process any further as that would lead to obvious
risks, including the resurgence of violence carried out
by armed groups whose only objective is to exploit
potential frustrations.
At a time when we have every reason to believe
that we are close to the finish line, the Security Council
must express forcefully its condemnation of any
unilateral act or any threat or use of violence that could
undermine the political process that Mr. Ahtisaari has
led with much effort. We should also deplore the fact
that the Serb leaders in Kosovo have chosen to remain
on the sidelines of the political process by being absent
from the workings of the Provisional Institutions in
Kosovo. As stressed by the Secretary-General,
whatever the outcome of the settlement of Kosovo’s
future status, Serbs and Albanians must find common
solutions to the problems that they share, which arise

16

in relation to services that must be provided to all,
without distinction.
The report cites the limited progress in the talks,
caused by the apparently irreconcilable positions of the
two parties. We express once again our full confidence
in Mr. Ahtisaari and hope that he will be able to
propose a settlement that will meet the international
community’s expectations.
Apart from these meagre results, it is encouraging
to note the positive impact that the question of status
has had on the other phase of the political process: the
implementation of the standards. At the initiative of the
Government of Kosovo, supported by UNMIK —
which we commend for its tireless efforts — some
positive progress has been made in areas essential for
the
reconciliation
of
communities
and
the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society. That progress
concerns in particular the 13 priorities defined by
UNMIK and the Contact Group.
The establishment of pilot municipal units will
help to limit the deep division between Serbs and
Albanians in Kosovo and will eventually promote the
development that we all hope for: seeing Kosovo’s
Serbs and Albanians living together with respect for
their diversity and mindful of the protection of
minority rights.
So it is up to the parties and their various
communities to shoulder their responsibilities in this
final stage. Ultimately, whatever the political
settlement that is achieved, international support will
be necessary to ensure the viability of the process.
Mr. Orozco (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, like previous speakers, I wish to thank
Mr. Joachim Rücker, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for presenting the report on the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) between 15 August and
31 October 2006. I also thank Ms. Sanda RaskovicIvic, President of the Coordinating Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, for her
presentation. In addition, I welcome the presence of
Mr. Agim Çeku, Prime Minister of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/906),
which objectively describes the developments in the
Kosovo process during the period I have indicated,
presents us with important elements for consideration

06-65731

S/PV.5588

in the definition of Kosovo’s status. On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to highlight some positive
developments that have occurred on the ground.
Despite the difficulties that are still perceived, those
developments should be encouraged so as to provide
constructive support for the Kosovo process.
First, the effort made in 2006 by the Government
of Kosovo to implement the standards — particularly
the 13 priorities identified by the Contact Group — has
been commendable. As the Secretary-General’s report
indicates,
the
progress
made
in
standards
implementation strengthens Kosovo’s institutions and
helps lay the groundwork for future development.
It is also relevant that, in this most recent period,
some significant events have taken place in the
economic sphere. I am referring in particular to the
progress made in developing mining and the power
generation associated with it, in addition to the
rehabilitation of a number of power generation
facilities. The international investors’ conference for
Kosovo, held on 10 and 11 October, was also an
important step in attracting foreign investment.
As my delegations has stated on a number of
occasions, any political settlement that determines
Kosovo’s status will be viable only if long-term socioeconomic stability is achieved. In that connection, we
urge Kosovo’s economic actors to continue in the effort
to get its productive sectors working and to ensure
Kosovo’s effective integration into its regional
environment.
Furthermore, it cannot be denied that there are
still barriers in Kosovo that are difficult to overcome.
The process related to future status is a dominant factor
in political life, as stated by Mr. Rücker. The feeling of
uncertainty helps to create instability. The parties
continue to express opposing positions that leave little
room for negotiation. That situation does not help to
create an appropriate context for reconciling all social
sectors and improving the conditions for reaching a
final settlement.
The Secretary-General indicated in his report that
incidents of violence involving Kosovo Serbs have
continued. It is also worrisome that Serb participation
in the main political institutions continues to be
practically non-existent. Likewise, according to the
figures provided by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, while the number of

06-65731

minorities returning to Kosovo has remained constant,
it is still unsatisfactory.
The definition of Kosovo’s future status must be
inclusive and not exclude any of the sectors that make
up society. In other words, the building of a multiethnic society requires active participation by all
sectors involved. Without such a consensus, it will not
be possible to find a lasting solution, over and above
the legal identity this territory might adopt.
Once again, Peru wishes to express its support for
the political process aimed at finding a negotiated
solution to Kosovo’s status. In that context, we support
the work carried out by Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, to define a status that will
promote development and progress for all the people of
Kosovo and strengthen stability in the region as a
whole.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/906)
and his Special Representative, Mr. Rücker, for his
excellent briefing. I also welcome the presence of
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, and thank her for addressing the Council.
The question of Kosovo has now reached a
crucial stage. We have noted that, since the beginning
of this year, with the joint efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
some progress has been made in implementing the
standards. However, challenges remain in areas such as
security guarantees, the return of refugees and ethnic
harmony.
Given the situation on the ground in Kosovo, we
believe that there can be hope for Kosovo’s future only
if the momentum for standards implementation is
maintained and a breakthrough is achieved in
establishing a harmonious and multi-ethnic society. We
hope that the Provisional Institutions and their leaders
will, with UNMIK’s assistance, overcome the current
difficulties and implement the standards in a
comprehensive and effective manner. The other parties
concerned should also provide positive cooperation.
The future status process for Kosovo has been
under way for nearly a year. With the assistance of
Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
the Serbian Government and the Kosovo authorities

17

S/PV.5588

have engaged in contacts and carried out dialogues and
negotiations at various levels and in various places.
While some progress has been made, the parties
continue to hold opposing positions. Despite the great
difficulties facing this endeavour, China believes that it
is extremely important and that the efforts should
continue. That will help to push the future status
process in the right direction.
China is concerned about the individual incidents
of violence that have occurred recently in Kosovo. We
hope that both sides will exercise restraint and continue
their dialogue in a flexible, pragmatic and constructive
spirit in order to find a mutually acceptable solution.
We have also noted that Special Envoy Ahtisaari
has indicated that he will submit a conclusive report
early next year. We hope that his recommendations will
play a constructive role in resolving the question of
Kosovo’s future status.
The question of Kosovo is sensitive and
complicated; it has a direct bearing on peace and
stability in the Balkans and the neighbouring regions.
Whether the question of Kosovo can be appropriately
resolved is a source of concern to all. In resolving the
question of Kosovo, we need to listen to the views of
all parties, especially those of neighbouring countries.
We must be mindful of the possible impact that the
modalities of a settlement could have on neighbouring
regions. Any settlement must lead to a lasting
resolution of the question of Kosovo; it must not create
new turmoil or have a negative impact on the stability
of other regions.
China has always abided by the principle in
international law that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries must be respected.
The international community and the Security
Council should be impartial on the question of the
future status of Kosovo and encourage both sides to
seek a mutually acceptable plan through constructive
negotiations on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to be
brief. I have 10 points, so please forgive me if they
come across rather bluntly.
First, I would like to welcome Special
Representative Rücker, Prime Minister Çeku and
Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic. They are very welcome in
the Council.

18

Secondly, the United Kingdom condemns,
unreservedly, the violence in Kosovo and elsewhere in
the region. The perpetrators — be they Kosovo
Albanian, Kosovo Serb or of another ethnicity — must
be brought to justice. But I would caution against
concluding from this that the Kosovo authorities
themselves are guilty of that violence.
All sides should refrain from violence and respect
the rule of law and the Contact Group Guiding
Principles, which have been endorsed by the Council.
If violence happens once status is settled, there will be
consequences for Kosovo’s Euro-Atlantic integration.
Thirdly, it is clear from the contributions of the
Special Representative and members of the Council
that there has been progress on standards
implementation, and that is extremely welcome. The
Kosovo authorities and Mr. Rücker deserve our thanks
and our support for making further progress.
Fourthly, standards do not end with status
settlement. They are part of the integral framework for
European Union and NATO integration. Should there
be a breakdown post-settlement, there will be
consequences for that integration.
Fifthly, with regard to participation, it is
disappointing that, once again, members of the Council
are having to call on Belgrade to allow Kosovo Serbs
to take part constructively in negotiations about their
own future. Belgrade is not protecting the Kosovo
Serbs by not letting them participate. What it is
protecting is its own hard line, and members of the
Council have said today that they do not find that
acceptable. We have called on Serbia several times to
encourage the Kosovo Serbs to engage. It is extremely
disappointing that once again they continue to defy the
Council in this matter.
Sixthly, I would like to say that the United
Kingdom considers itself a friend of Serbia. We want
to help Serbia to integrate into Euro-Atlantic
institutions. We have recently joined with our NATO
colleagues and allies in welcoming Serbia and other
countries in the region into Partnership for Peace. It is
disappointing that the hand of friendship extended by
NATO and by countries like my own in bringing Serbia
into Partnership for Peace is not matched by a
reciprocal willingness on the part of Serbia to assume
its rightful place in Europe and to engage in goodneighbourly relations.

06-65731

S/PV.5588

If I may, Mr. President, I would like to refer to
the letter sent to you today by Prime Minister Çeku of
Kosovo, in which he says, “We do not seek to avoid
Serbia, we seek to meet them as neighbours in a stable
and mature partnership”. We call on Serbia to
reciprocate that. It is important to have a Europe that is
whole and free. We cannot do that without Serbia, but,
equally, we are not responsible for Serbia’s isolation,
which is being imposed by Belgrade.
As my seventh point, I very much welcome what
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic said about the rule of the law
governing Serbia’s actions. That is extremely welcome,
but it needs to be put into practice. In particular, we
call on Belgrade to transfer Mladic and Karadzic to the
Hague Tribunal. Those two men are responsible, and
have been indicted, for the massacre at Srebrenica of
7,000 Muslim men and boys. We also call on Belgrade
to stop encouraging the separatists in Republika Srpska
and to stop interfering in Bosnia’s internal affairs. The
Dayton Peace Agreement has established what Bosnia
is: a State with two entities, one of which is Republika
Srpska. There is no read across — nor will we let there
be any read across — between the settlement of
Kosovo’s status and that of other countries in the
region, including Bosnia.
A number of speakers today have raised the issue
of status. The important thing is that the Council must
back our Special Envoy, Martti Ahtisaari, whose
appointment by the Secretary-General we endorsed.
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic mentioned the Serbian Constitution
and the Serbian platform. We respect the right of the
Serb people to express their views. But in terms of the
settlement of Kosovo’s status, the Serb platform and
the Serb Constitution are sideshows. The only show in
town is the Ahtisaari status process and the Contact
Group’s January and July statements, with which the
United Nations, the EU, NATO and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as
members of the Contact Group, have associated
themselves. That is a substantive and substantial body
of States Members of the United Nations. It is an
important set of documents. We look to Belgrade to
stop its campaign of vilification of Mr. Ahtisaari. It
achieves nothing and only diminishes Serbia in the
eyes of the United Nations and its Member States.
My next point is to note that we have taken this
long to settle Kosovo’s status out of a wish to be able
to bring Belgrade along. But I think it is becoming
increasingly clear that Belgrade does not wish to

06-65731

engage with us and does not wish to engage with the
Status Envoy in settling the status. That is a pity, as
many members of the Council have said today. We
would far prefer a negotiated solution. But the Contact
Group has also laid down an alternative route, if that is
not possible.
Finally, on the nature of the status settlement
itself, it is not for me or anyone in the United Kingdom
to say what the status should be. As I have said, that is
for Mr. Ahtisaari to do. At the same time, I think that
we should all recognize that there is a growing
consensus on the part of many observers that any
settlement is likely to be based on some form of
independence for Kosovo, supervised by a robust
international civilian and military presence and with
cast-iron guarantees protecting the rights and security
of Kosovo’s minority communities. Such an outcome
would be consistent with the Contact Group Guiding
Principles and Contact Group ministerial statements,
echoed by many in the Council today, regarding a
settlement that is acceptable to the majority of people
in Kosovo. It is difficult to identify any sustainable
alternative options that provide a better basis for
developing Kosovo’s democratic future and wide
regional stability. And, of course, any settlement must
enshrine the standards that we have discussed today —
standards on which the international community rightly
remains focused, and which form the bedrock of any
country’s integration into Euro-Atlantic structures.
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I, like
others, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Rücker, for his useful briefing. I would
also like to thank the President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, for her statement,
and the Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government of Kosovo, Mr. Çeku, for his
presence.
I associate myself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.
We are pleased to note that the Provisional
Institutions have made significant efforts to improve
standards implementation since the previous report.
Denmark would like to welcome the commitment to
move forward shown by the Administration in Pristina,

19

S/PV.5588

especially on the 13 priority points identified by the
Contact Group. However, there are a number of areas
where further attention is needed, not least with regard
to the rule of law and freedom of movement.
Violence — whether or not ethnically motivated —
undermines reconciliation and threatens progress, and
we condemn the recent spate of violent incidents.
We welcome the concrete steps taken by the
Provisional Institutions to improve conditions for
Kosovo’s minorities. However, it is also clear that
these steps do not automatically improve relations
between the majority and the minorities. The
leadership of the Provisional Institutions needs to
create confidence among all of Kosovo’s ethnic groups.
That can be achieved only by reaching out and by
showing a genuine willingness to compromise.
We are very concerned about the steps taken by
the Kosovo Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo to
end contacts with the Provisional Institutions and set
up parallel structures. As the Secretary-General notes
in his report, by remaining outside the political process
in Kosovo, the Kosovo Serb leaders are doing a
disservice to their community. We thus urge Belgrade
to encourage the Kosovo Serb representatives to
participate constructively in the Provisional Institutions
in Pristina, not least in the municipal bodies.
We all hope for a sustainable solution to
Kosovo’s future. Non-cooperation, isolation and
entrenched positions will not lead to a better future.
Flexibility and compromise are prerequisites for a
sustainable solution, and coordinated and forwardlooking actions on the part of all actors will be
required. The primary beneficiaries will be all
Kosovars, regardless of ethnicity; the population of the
Republic of Serbia; and, indeed, all the peoples of the
western Balkans. Cooperation and participation is in
everyone’s best interest.
In that context, we would like to reiterate our full
support for the Status Envoy, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari. We
welcome his intention to present proposals for a
comprehensive status settlement to the parties after the
parliamentary elections in Serbia.
In our view, dragging out the process of resolving
the Kosovo status issue will not benefit regional
stability. The solution should meet the aspirations of
the majority of Kosovars and, at the same time, include
adequate minority protection and guarantees.

20

Denmark views the situation in Kosovo from a
regional perspective. We steadfastly support UNMIK
and KFOR. We look forward to the more peaceful and
prosperous future which the peoples of the region
deserve. That will entail close regional cooperation
towards the common integration of these truly
European countries into the Euro-Atlantic structures,
where they rightfully belong. However, the EuroAtlantic perspective depends on the implementation of
standards and a sustainable solution to Kosovo’s future
status.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Qatar.
I should like to welcome Mr. Rücker, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and to thank him for briefing the Council. We
commend him and all members of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for their efforts. I wish also to welcome Ms. RaskovicIvic.
The crisis in Kosovo has been going on for far
too long, as has the suffering of the peoples of that
territory. It is time to resolve that crisis and to find a
solution to all the problems resulting therefrom. It is
encouraging to witness the significant efforts that have
been made so far to that end. The United Nations has
played a central role in those efforts alongside other
parties.
Those efforts have begun to bear fruit. State
institutions in Kosovo have started to take shape and
are managing the territory’s affairs and serving its
people in an efficient and stable manner. However, the
territory continues to require a great deal of support
from the international community and the United
Nations in order to strengthen its institutions and
ensure stability and development.
Achieving long-term stability, however, will
require settling the status of the territory. In that
regard, the positions of both parties are still largely at
odds. But it is encouraging to see that dialogue is
continuing, which has helped to resolve numerous
technical, constitutional, legal and other issues.
One of the conditions for finding a permanent
settlement concerning the future of Kosovo involves
ensuring the effective participation by Kosovo
Albanians and Serbs in the Government and in all State

06-65731

S/PV.5588

and social activities, which, in turn, should be based on
a recognition of a multi-ethnic society. All segments of
society must take part in the dialogue on the future
status of the territory, as that would endow it with
legitimacy and sustainability. Both parties should
encourage such participation and refrain from any act
that would hinder or undermine it.
The efforts made to achieve progress and
implement the special standards for Kosovo and the 13
priority areas identified and submitted by the Contact
Group to the Kosovo Government are promising, but
those steps should be completed in order to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The level of return of refugees remains
unacceptably low, due to the economic situation, which
is still in need of improvement. The international
community must support that process. However, a
more important reason for the low number of returnees
is the uncertainty and ambiguity that prevail with
respect to the future status of Kosovo.
In closing, we commend the role of UNMIK, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Contact Group
for their efforts to strengthen stability, promote
development and determine the future status of the
territory of Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the pleasure to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway members of the European
Economic Area and Moldova align themselves with
this declaration.
Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Joachim Rücker, for his clear
presentation. I would like once again to underline the
European Union’s continued support for the Special
Representative, Mr. Rücker, in his efforts to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) and to prepare for the transition
between UNMIK and the future international presence

06-65731

in Kosovo once the status of Kosovo has been
determined.
As the Secretary-General notes, the status
negotiations and initial preparations for the end of
UNMIK’s mandate and for the transition period have
indeed characterized the past months. Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari has since the beginning of this year
actively pursued engagement with both Belgrade and
Pristina through direct talks and expert consultations in
such key areas as community rights, decentralization,
the protection of cultural and religious heritage, as well
as the economy.
Regarding the future status of Kosovo, Belgrade
and Pristina have, unfortunately, continued to express
diametrically opposed positions. As the SecretaryGeneral remarks in paragraph 2 of his report, these
talks have enabled the two sides “to engage in a
substantial exchange of views … without resulting,
however, in any major shifts of position”.
The EU continues to encourage both Belgrade
and Pristina to engage constructively in the status
process. However, the process should not be openended, and neither party should unilaterally block or
derail the process, for example, by resorting to
violence.
We fully share the view of the Secretary-General,
who noted with dismay that violent attacks continue to
be made by a few in an attempt to effect political
change. He also observed that the political process
cannot be dictated by the streets and that violence will
not be tolerated.
The EU continues to fully support the United
Nations Special Envoy, Martti Ahtisaari, and his
conduct of the political process to determine Kosovo’s
future status. We welcome his intention to present a
proposal for a comprehensive status settlement to the
parties after the parliamentary elections in Serbia that
will be held on 21 January.
We share the Secretary-General’s view of
generally positive developments in Kosovo. In its
annual progress reports for the Western Balkan
countries, and also for Kosovo, the Commission of the
European Union welcomes the progress in Kosovo in
the transfer of responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. At the same time, we
stress the crucial importance of further accelerated and

21

S/PV.5588

effective implementation of the standards, which are
equally essential for Kosovo’s European perspective.
More efforts are needed to create an
administrative environment that will ensure further
approximation of European standards. We also stress
the need for further efforts for full respect of the rule of
law and independence of the judicial system. The
issues of combating organized crime and corruption,
macroeconomic stability and the protection of all
communities living in Kosovo also need the special
attention of the Kosovo authorities.
The future status settlement will be a challenging
task, not only for Serbia and Kosovo, but also for the
whole international community. It will require
coordinated and forward-looking action from all actors
involved. However, the status settlement alone will not
solve Kosovo’s pressing economic and social
problems. Those challenges will remain and will need
to tackled with new vigour.
The future status settlement should safeguard a
future for all the citizens of Kosovo in a multi-ethnic
and democratic society and be conducive to economic
and social development.
The Western Balkan region, including Kosovo,
has been given a European perspective. The EU has a
major interest in a positive and clear outcome of the
status process. Its success will be essential, not only for
providing a clear perspective for the people in Kosovo,
but also for the overall stability of the region. In this
context, maintaining the European perspective of
Serbia is of great importance. Also, we would like to
make it clear that we see the question of Kosovo’s
status as sui generis. The outcome of the status process
will not set a precedent for other regions because its
current status is exceptional, being based on Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
We regret the fact that the Kosovo Serbs still do
not participate in the work of the central institutions in
Kosovo, despite the international community’s
repeated calls for them to do so. We once again urge
Belgrade to encourage Serbs in Kosovo to engage in
the work of the Kosovo institutions, where they can
most effectively advocate their own interests. It is
crucial to understand and to ensure that all
communities have a place in Kosovo, regardless of its
future status.

22

The EU continues its support for the Kosovo
institutions in their efforts to implement the reform
agenda. The EU is firmly committed to supporting
Kosovo’s political and economic development, and we
are preparing our future presence in Kosovo with other
international actors. It is essential that UNMIK stays
with full powers until that future presence is
established. Well-coordinated action among various
international organizations and assistance from other
donors are vital to ensure effective implementation of
the status settlement and the sustainable development
of Kosovo. The EU will assume its role in that regard.
A long-term commitment of the donor community
will be indispensable to ensure a stable and secure
Kosovo for all its citizens. A strong post-status
international presence would also be needed to support
the Kosovo institutions so as to ensure security and
stability, as well as to safeguard the multi-ethnic
character of the new Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): Allow me to
welcome you, Sir, as Security Council President for the
month of December.
I also welcome the presence of the President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, and
the Prime Minister of Kosovo, His Excellency Mr.
Agim Çeku, in this Chamber.
I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/906) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Joachim Rücker, for
his informative briefing.
I shall confine myself to several points of crucial
importance, as seen from the perspective of Ukraine.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights certain
progress in the implementation of standards, now
aligned with the European Partnership Action Plan.
While welcoming these positive developments, we
believe that, as a critical prerequisite for Kosovo’s
long-term unity and stability, the work needs to be
further continued and intensified.
The province’s leadership should make particular
efforts to ensure that Kosovo remains multi-ethnic and
democratic in nature, with respect for civil liberties and

06-65731

S/PV.5588

the rights of national and religious minorities. Further
attention is needed to solve the problems of
government decentralization and the protection of
minorities’ cultural and inheritance rights. It is also of
paramount importance that the Kosovo government
reaches out to the Serb population and makes them
partners in the ongoing transformation, and that
Belgrade encourages such endeavours.
The Secretary-General report underlines the
increasing tension in Kosovo as the negotiations on the
future status move forward. We are disturbed by the
fact that ethnically and politically motivated crimes
continued during the reporting period, some of which
being obvious attempts to pressure the international
actors. We therefore fully share the clear message in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
that
political
developments and timelines will not be dictated by the
streets and violence will not be tolerated.
As an active contributor to international and
regional peace and security, Ukraine will continue to
participate in the peaceful efforts of the international
community in Kosovo. We favour the conclusion of a
mutually acceptable compromise decision between
Belgrade and Pristina, under active international
mediation and in full compliance with relevant
Security Council decisions, including resolution 1244
(1999).
Ukraine strongly believes in the need to attain a
final settlement of the political, economic and security
situation in Kosovo through the creation of adequate
conditions for the return of the non-Albanian
population and through the guarantee of human rights,
including those of all ethnic groups.
My country cautions against any hasty or
unilateral steps that could destabilize the situation in
the region. We believe that current negotiations need to
be prolonged based on the recognized norms and
principles of international law. It is with particular
concern that we perceive declarations about the socalled universal nature or precedence of a Kosovo
settlement. Such approaches may pose the risk that
some
countries,
particularly
in
international
organizations, could use their influence in the future to
advance analogous scenarios in other regions with
frozen conflicts, above all within the post-Soviet space.
The international magnitude of the Kosovo issue,
as well as the unstable situation in the region, certainly
require a continued civil and security presence of the

06-65731

international community on the ground. At the same
time, Ukraine considers one possibility — the
European Union decision on the international mandate
over the territory of Kosovo for a certain period
time — to be a transitional measure.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rücker, for presenting a clear picture of the reality on
the ground in Kosovo. His continued steadfastness at
the helm of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), at this very critical stage
as one chapter comes to a close, has established a
proven record of keeping all stakeholders engaged in
the necessary transition to the forthcoming stage.
The Albanian Government will continue to
support efforts towards the goal of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. I take this opportunity to extend
our appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for
his hard work and commitment to finding a solution to
this matter. We also thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union for their continuing
dedication and commitment in Kosovo. The latter’s
ongoing resolve is an extremely important contribution
to the smooth and harmoniously coordinated transition
that will shape the basics of the post-status period.
I would also like to welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Çeku in the Security Council. We
congratulate him on the commitment he has shown
throughout this year to the implementation of
standards, and especially to the 13 priority points
identified by the Contact Group, as the UNMIK report
explicitly states. The implementation of the
programmes, by reaching out to all the people of
Kosovo, has strengthened Kosovo’s institutions and
helped build a future foundation for the hard work
ahead. We are confident that the established institutions
and those to come will continue to offer effective
governance in building a viable, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo for all its citizens.
I also welcome the presence of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic
as the representative of the Serbian delegation.
I thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
and express my delegation’s appreciation for that
realistic and substantive document.

23

S/PV.5588

We are pleased with the overall assessment that
further progress and significant achievements continue
to be the dominant rationale in Kosovo. The successful
implementation of standards; the institutional ability to
understand and to advance progress by reaching out to
all the people of Kosovo; the improvement of services
delivered; and a clear orientation towards democratic
principles and values are some of the elements
underlined in the report. It is to be welcomed and
encouraged that the standards programme has been
incorporated into and become an integral part of the
European Partnership Action Plan and that the
Government has already created structures and
concrete plans to implement it. This clearly reflects the
fact that, even at this critical stage, Kosovo is pursuing
the chosen path of institution-building and minority
accommodation.
It is also to be emphasized that the security
situation has not been adversely affected by the
ongoing future status process. We share the view that
this situation must not be taken for granted over an
unrealistically extended period of time and that it has
to be adapted accordingly as the evolving situation on
the ground in Kosovo dictates.
Keeping pace with the current political
momentum requires bold and determined action by all
parties and actors involved in the process. Further
backsliding after the important deadline of January
2007 may seriously jeopardize an orderly Kosovo
settlement and exhaust many bonds that have to date
kept the process a promising one in a good cause. We
are pleased that the need to deliver results sooner
rather than latter is commonly understood and widely
accepted by the Council and key Member States. Their
unity and level of certainty is an indispensable element
in delivering a result that will be acceptable to the
people of Kosovo.
We share the view explicitly stated in the report
that it is equally essential that Kosovo Serb leaders
participate fully in the political process in Kosovo.
Remaining outside of the process is a disservice to
their community. As the report so clearly states,
Belgrade authorities should respond to the coherent
policy of the international community by removing all
impediments to Kosovo Serb participation in Kosovo
institutions. Now is the right time to solve the issue
and not to try raising the stakes at the negotiating table.

24

At the same time, we appeal to the Kosovo
Albanians to redouble their efforts to ensure the
freedom and rights of minorities and to increase their
outreach to all communities. We hold the view that
Albanians and Serbs alike in Kosovo should leave their
past behind, engage in reconciliation, strengthen their
cooperation and look to their common future.
The Albanian Government continues to support
the substantive dialogue between the representatives of
the Albanians and the Serbs and calls upon both sides
to exhibit a realistic understanding. The dialogue has
started and will have to produce a result based upon the
reality on the ground in Kosovo. An understandable
exhaustion does not have to keep the necessary
outcome in limbo indefinitely. We are pleased with the
moderate progress on technical issues.
The political process to determine Kosovo’s final
status has objectively and by definition entered its final
stage. The success or lack thereof towards an orderly
political settlement will greatly depend on the
continued constructive approach of all parties and
actors involved. Albania will continue to play an active
role and offer a constructive approach. We continue to
hold the view that the status process should proceed
steadily and swiftly. Further delay or any artificial
status quo would prolong instability, uncertainty and
institutional paralysis and serve nobody’s interest, in or
out of region.
We continue to share the international support for
President Ahtisaari and his team. We reiterate our
strong support for the Contact Group’s guiding
principles that there should be no change of borders, no
partition of Kosovo, and no union with any other
country or part of any other country.
We support a realistic solution acceptable to the
people of Kosovo, fully grounded in the current reality
of that specific case. The solution should be clearly
defined in its political and legal aspects, and without
any ambiguity; otherwise, it would tend to undermine
the orderly process of reaching an acceptable status
and rehabilitation thereafter. The outcome should
contribute to ending the unpredictability and
uncertainty that stem from the current lack of status,
and strengthen the stability and security of Kosovo and
the entire region.
We stress our strong conviction that the most
realistic, pragmatic and just solution to this matter is
independence, with a supportive continuation of the

06-65731

S/PV.5588

civil and security presence of the international
community. In other words, it must include the
promotion and protection of Serbs’ and all other
minorities’ rights and their cultural and religious
heritage, and build a society in which all the people of
Kosovo can live in dignity and prosperity and without
fear.
We are encouraged that the Kosovo leadership,
civil society, media, other relevant institutions and the
broader community are demonstrating political and
social cohesion, growing unity and cooperation with
the international community in sharing responsibilities
for building such a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo, integrated into the Euro-Atlantic structures.
We are confident that independence will generate and
guarantee social and economic stability and security
for Kosovo and the whole region, and help to establish
a sustainable, multi-ethnic and democratic society
there. It will pave the way for the European
perspective. Albania shares the broader view that the
international military and civilian presence in Kosovo,
even after the determination of the final status, will be
essential to the success of all those endeavours.
In conclusion, let me assure this body that the
Albanian Government will continue to take a
constructive approach by actively playing its helpful
and moderating role in the region. We will continue to
be a reliable partner in full support of Mr. Ahtisaari and
his mission throughout the upcoming process and
beyond.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The President
of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija has asked for the floor again.
I now give the floor to Ms. Raskovic-Ivic.
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): I would like to thank
everybody for the many constructive proposals and
comments made during the discussion, which I
understood as expressing strong support for the
negotiating process. I would nevertheless like to make
a few clarifications.
On several occasions during the debate, I heard
reference to the argument regarding the uncertainty of
Kosovo Albanians as a reason for haste. I think that the
uncertainty argument is not a good one, because the
status and the situation that prevailed in Kosovo and
Metohija and in Serbia prior to 1999 will never again
prevail. That is especially true in the light of the future

06-65731

European prospects for the entire South-Eastern Balkan
region.
I would like to say a few words about the
participation of Serbs in the Institutions. First of all,
Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija do not have
confidence, because freedom of movement is not what
it should be and because there are still many attacks on
people as they move about and commute from place to
place.
There is also another issue involved, because
participation is a complex matter that is not solely
about confidence or security. There is no mechanism to
prevent out-voting. I must remind the Council that
when the Return Coalition was actively participating it
submitted 72 amendments. Only two were adopted, and
70 were rejected. Serbs from that Coalition therefore
always had the feeling that they were just there for
decoration. The participation of Serbs in Kosovo
should be meaningful. That is why we need a
mechanism to prevent out-voting. Such a mechanism
would be the best way to carry out negotiations,
especially in the working group on community rights.
Then, of course, representatives in Kosovo and
Metohija from the Serbian list are legal but they are not
legitimate. That is because, out of the 140,000 Serbs in
Kosovo and the 250,000 in Serbia and Montenegro that
have the right to vote in Kosovo, only 811 persons
voted.
I would also like to refer to the contention that
Kosovo is a sui generis case. From our point of
view — and not only as Serbs, for there are others who
share our feelings and views — the issue of Kosovo is,
by its very essence, a matter of precedent, not a sui
generis case.
With regard to the comments of Ms. Lintonen, I
agree with and welcome many of the things she said. I
also commit myself and the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija to
cooperate with the European Union on technical and all
other matters.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic for her comments.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rücker to reply to
comments and questions that have been raised.
Mr. Rücker: I am very grateful for the
understanding we have experienced in this round of

25

S/PV.5588

discussions on developments in Kosovo, as well as for
the recognition regarding the progress that has been
made in standards implementation, which I think is to
the credit not only of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) but, in
particular, the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment.
With regard to the status process, I do not
comment on the very substance of the status process.
But it is, in my view, our mandate to point out to the
Council the objective costs that are associated with the
continued lack of clarity on status. I hope that was
clear from my statement. In addition, it is our mandate
to facilitate the transition period: we do indeed have a
role with regard to the transition period, and we want
to bring that process to an orderly conclusion.
Many representatives mentioned incidents of
violence in Kosovo. Let me assure the Council that we
not only condemn violence wherever and in whatever
form it occurs in Kosovo, but we and our Institutions
see to it that the perpetrators are brought to justice.
With regard to the figures mentioned in
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic statement, they do not match our
close monitoring of the situation. We would be happy
to share the real figures on those incidents with
Belgrade and with the Council. However, as I have
said, every incident is one incident too many, and we
do bring perpetrators to justice. I would be happy to go
into detail as necessary.
With regard to the presentation made by my
Serbian colleague, I do not want to go into detail about
what was said about UNMIK going beyond its
mandate. However, perhaps I could address just one
point. UNMIK is certainly not seeking a State for
Albanians in Kosovo; and certainly UNMIK is working
for a democratic and, in any fashion, a multi-ethnic
Kosovo.
Statements dwelled on some of the issues in
standards implementation where further progress is
needed. I fully agree that there needs to be further
progress in a number of areas. But that progress
depends in part upon status — for example, in the

26

economy. How can an emerging economy like
Kosovo’s develop without access to international
lending or to borrowing, which is not possible until
there is a resolution of the status issue?
With regard to the question of returns, there also
we depend on status, because there is uncertainty and
we know that many potential returnees are waiting for
a decision on status.
Other issues have also been mentioned, such as
decentralization and protection of cultural heritage.
People are aware that Martti Ahtisaari has been
negotiating with the parties on how those problems
should be addressed and how there could be good
tangible solutions to them. With regard to the pilot
municipalities for decentralization, for example, people
are now waiting for the issuance of a status proposal by
the Special Envoy.
Other progress in standards implementation
clearly depends upon the participation of Kosovo Serbs
in the Institutions, as well as upon their recognition of
the Institutions. In that connection, I was very grateful
that so many speakers stressed the need for Kosovo
Serbs to actually take those steps. Only by
participating in the Institutions will they be able to
influence developments in Kosovo properly. It is very
important that this takes place, and I would again
appeal to Belgrade to make it happen. I think freedom
of movement is not an impeding factor for that.
Outvoting should also not be a decisive criterion. We
urge Kosovo Serbs to come to the Institutions and to
engage and to recognize the Institutions.
The situation would be better in many respects if
that were really to happen. For example, it is very good
that we now have movement toward payment to KEK
for electricity, which represents considerable progress.
Also, with regard to the telecommunication issue, it is
very clear that those providers that Sanda RaskovicIvic has mentioned have no license in Kosovo and have
not paid any taxes there. However, they are encouraged
to participate in the current tender for a second license
for mobile telephoning in Kosovo.

06-65731

S/PV.5588

All in all, I think confidence-building and
dialogue are key. I urge the Kosovo Serbs and the
minorities in general to take the hand being extended
by the PISG and their representatives. We will work
hard with this Council and under the direction of the
Secretary-General to come to a good conclusion of the
still-open question of Kosovo.

06-65731

The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank Mr. Rücker for those clarifications.
There are no other speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

27
