156

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

1. Notes the efforts made thus far by the SecretaryGeneral with a view to the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-Gener~l to cc_mtinue thosc
efforts and to prepare, in consultat10n w1th the competent bodies of the host country, the compctent organs
and institutions of the United Nations system and thc
regional commissions concern~~- a draft do_c~~1~nt describing the structure, compos1t1on, respons1b1ht~es ~nd
programme of thc Institute, as well _as the co-ordmation
of the activities of the Tnstitute w1th those of the organizations concerned, particular)y the Unit~d _Nations
Development Programme, the reg10nal comm1ss10ns and
the regional research centres for the adva1;-cement of
women, having regard to the recommcndat10n~ of the
Group of Experts set forth in the rcpor~ subm1tted ?Y
the Secretary-General to the Econmmc and Social
Council at its sixtieth scssion;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to ~he
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth sess1on
on the progress achieved towards the establi~h~ent. of
the Institute, including substantive and ~dmm~strative
preparations, and to submit to it for co~s1deratlon an~
adoption the draft document referrcú to m paragraph above.
l 05 th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/138.

lnteragency prograrnrne for the United
Nations Decade for W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 Deccmber 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peacc, to be devoted t? effectiv_e and
sustained national, regional and internat1onal act1on to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year 92 and related resolutions 9 H adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31 / 136 of 16
December 1976 it approvcd the Programme for the
United Nations Decadc for Women94 which focused on
the first half of the Decade, 1976-1980,
Noting that the joint interagency programme for the
integration of women in development, whose establishment was called for in paragraph 5 ( b) of General Assembly resolution 3520 (XXX), has become an interagency programme for the United Nations Decade for
Women based on the implementation of the World
Plan of Action, for the formulation of which the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs serves as focal point,
Noting also that this programme was drawn up in
July 1977 in the context of the conceptual framework
and the co-ordination of ongoing activities and planned
activities of the agencies concerned,
92 Report of the World Conference on the Internatimw/
Women's Year (United Nations publica,tion, Sales No.
E. 7 6.IV. 1 ) , cha p. II, sect. A.
93 /bid., chap. III.
94 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplcment No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

Notinr; further that this programme, which should
be brought up to date cvery two years, i~ currently the
subject of a study which is to be cons1~ered by. the
special interagency meeting on the Umted Nat,ons
Decade for Women to be held in July 1978 with a
view to preparing for thc World Confcrence of thc
United Nations Decade for Women,
l. Notes the measures already taken by the Secretary-General to implement the Programme for the
Unitcd Nations Decade for Women; 95
2. Emphasizes that constant and increasing efforts
must he madc at the national, regional and international lcvels to attain the objcctives of the Dccade;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral, in consultation
with all the interested agencies and organizations of the
Unitcd Nations to submit to the General Assembly at
its thirtv-third s~ssion, through thc Economic and Social
CounciÍ, thc study of the intcragency programmc accompanied by the observations formulated by the Council with regard to it;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit to Govcrnments every two years thc study of the
intcragcncy programme for the Decade;
5. Urges the interested agencies and organizations
of the United Nations system to identify and undertakc
as quickly as possible projects to be executed jointly.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 139.

Plerlµ;ing confereuee for the
Nations Decade for W ornen

United

TI//' General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/137 of 16 December
1976, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
convene during the thirty-second session of the General Assembly a pledging conference for contributions
to be made to the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women and to the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,
Noting with satisfaction the results of the first Pledging Conference for the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at the Headquarters of the United Nations
on 8 November 1977,
Convinced that the Programme for the United Nations Decade for Women,11<1 if it is to be fully effcctivc,
must be translated into the greatest possible number of
projccts and programmes at the national, regional and
interregional levels,
Also convinced that the speedy establishment of the
Jnternational Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women will contribute substantially
to thc attainment of thc research and training objectivcs
of the World Plan of Action for the Implcmentation of
thc Objectives of the International Women's Year,n 7
1. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
having convened the first Pledging Conference for thc
United Nations Dccade for Womcn;
nr. A/321175.
96 Official Rccords of the Economic ami Social Council,
Sixty-secoll(/ Scssion, Supp/emcnt No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.
97 Report of the World Conference on the Internationa/
Womc11'.1· Ycar (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.TV.l ), chap. 11, secl. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Expresses its warm thanks to those countries
which have already contributed, those which have
pledged contributions and those which have expressed
their intention of contributing to the Voluntary Fund
for the United Nations Decade for Women and/or to
the International Research and Training Institutc for the
Advancement of Women;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to convcne during the thirty-third session of the General Ass~mb~y a
second pledging conferencc for voluntary contnbutions
for thc purpose of financing:
(a) The Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women;
( b) The International Research and Training Institute for the Advanccment of Women;
4. Further requests the Secrctary-General to organize an information campaign with a view to stimulating the interest of Governments, organizations and individuals likely to contribute to the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Decade for Women and thc International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women.
105 th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/140.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in paragraph 20 of which it decided to convene at the mid-term of the United Nations Dccade
for Women a world conference to review and evaluate
the progress made in implementing the objectives of
the International Women's Year as recommended by
the World Conference of the International Women's
Year and, where necessary, to rcadjust existing programmes in thc light of new data and research available,
Recalling that the Eeonomic and Social Council, in
its resolution 1999 (LX) of 12 May 1966, requested
the Commission on thc Status of Women at its twentysixth session to consider different aspects of the preparatory work for the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women, including its agenda, and
also decided to consider at its sixty-fourth session, in
the spring of 1978, the preparatory work for the Conference,
Recalling also that, in accordance with the rcquest
of the Economic and Social Council, the Commission
on the Status of Women has considcred various aspects
of the material preparations and thc organization of the
Conference as well as the implications of the Conference for the programmc budgct, bcaring in mind a note
by the Secretary-Gcncral, 98
Recalling further that the Economic and Social Council, at its sixty-second session, adopted resolution 2062
(LXII) of 12 May 1976, in which it:
(a) Requested the Commission on thc Status of
Women at its twcnty-seventh session to givc thc highest
priority to the consideration of the prcparatory work
ns E/CN.6/600.

------------

157

for the World Conferencc of thc United Nations Decade
for Womcn,
( b)
Requestcd thc Secretary-General to prepare
for the considcration of thc Commission on the Status
of Wornen at its twenty-seventh session a report outlining a programme of concrete action for the second
half of the Decade,
(e)
Decided to establish, not later than Junc 1978,
a preparatory committce to make recommendations conccrning thc substantive and organizational arrangements
for thc Conference,
(d) Invited the regional commissions to consider
ways and means of contributing cffectively to the Confercncc,
Noting that preliminary exchanges of views on the
prcparatory work for the Conference have also taken
place in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination at the two special interagency meetings held in
Septcmber 1976 and July 1977, which were brought
to thc attention of the Commission on the Status of
Womcn at its twenty-sixth session and will be brought
to its attention at its twcnty-scventh session,
l. A ccepts the offer of the Government of Iran to
act as host to the World Conference of the United Nations Dccadc for Womcn;
2. Notes that the Confcrence will in principlc be
hcld at Teheran in May 1980 for a period of two weeks;
3. Decides that the first session of the Preparatory
Committee for the World Conference of thc United
Nations Decade for Women, to be convcned pursuant
to Economic and Social Council resolution 2062
(LXII), shall be held at the Hcadquarters of the United
N ations in June 197 8;
4. Notes the efforts made thus far by thc SecretaryGencral and the Commission on the Status of Women
with a view to undertaking the prcparatory work for the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to thc
General Asscmbly at its thirty-third scssion, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the work of thc
Prcparatory Committec during its first session.

105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/141.

Voluntarv Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision to cxtend the activities of thc
Voluntary Fund for thc International Women's Year,
establishcd by the Economic and Social Council in its
rcsolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, to cover thc
period of the United Nations Decade for Women,
l976 (O 1985,BD
Recalling also its rcsolution 31 /133 of 16 December 197 6 containing the critcria and arrangements for
the managcment of thc Voluntary Fund for thc United
Nations Decadc for Women,
:ii, 0(/icial Record.1· uf tlic General Assemb/y, Thirtieth Scssio11, S11¡,¡,lc111cnt No. 34 (A/10034), p. 100, items 75 and 76.
