S/2001/267

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 23 March 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 22 March
2001, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-30410 (E) 260301

*0130410*

S/2001/267

Annex
Letter dated 22 March 2001 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
Further to my letter of 8 March (see S/2001/214), I would like to inform you
about the decisions taken by the North Atlantic Council today regarding the further
controlled return of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces into additional
sectors of the Ground Safety Zone.
In particular, the Council endorsed the recommendation of our military
authorities that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces should be allowed
to return into sectors A and C (West) of the Ground Safety Zone, subject to the
agreement of the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the specific
conditions of the Commander of the Kosovo Force, on Saturday, 24 March 2001.
As to the controlled entry of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces
into sector D, the Council asked for military advice with a view to considering this
issue in the coming weeks. As regards sector B, the Council will make decisions at a
later stage, also on the basis of military advice to be received in due course.
I have written to the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Vojislav
Kostunica, the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Goran Svilanovic, and the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Nebojsa Covic, to inform them of the Council’s
decisions. In doing so, I recalled the expectations of the international community for
rapid progress by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian Governments on the
implementation of the political, economic and social confidence-building measures
set out in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian plan for the region,
independent of other progress in negotiations with the ethnic Albanian
representatives. I firmly believe that concrete steps to integrate the ethnic Albanian
population of the region into the political, economic and social structures of Serbia
will be a critical element of the success of the peaceful approach to solving the
region’s problems. The importance of such steps will increase even further in the
near future, particularly when the North Atlantic Council starts its consideration of
the controlled entry of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces into sector B.
Today’s decisions constitute another step in the determination of NATO to
contribute to the peaceful resolution of the problems in southern Serbia. In taking
these decisions, the Council welcomed the positive steps taken by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian authorities, including the return of Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces into sector C (East) of the Ground Safety Zone in
accordance with the notice of intent of the Commander of the Kosovo Force; their
agreement to a ceasefire which came into effect on 13 March; and the withdrawal of
heavy weapons from the area around Bujanovac in accordance with that agreement.
That said, other aspects of the return, such as the high-profile presence of
individuals who were involved in Kosovo in 1998-1999, caused some concern and
did not serve the purpose of building renewed confidence with the ethnic Albanian
community in the area.
The Council also welcomed the report of my personal representative,
Mr. Feith, that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian authorities have been
forthcoming in responding to calls to start a dialogue with ethnic Albanian

2

S/2001/267

representatives, as foreseen in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian plan for
the region. We hope that this dialogue will start on Friday, 23 March.
I will keep you informed of further decisions of the Council as they are taken. I
am content for you to make this letter available to members of the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

3
