S/PV.7907

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7907th meeting

Friday, 24 March 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft/Mr. Wilson. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Ms. Azoulay
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Minami
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and in
situations of armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-07834 (E)
*1707834*

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage
by terrorist groups and in situations of
armed conflict
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ms. Irina Bokova, Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and
Brigadier General Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander of
the Italian Carabinieri Command for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Vienna.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/242, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
2/22

24/03/2017

the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
tormer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2347 (2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on this important topic, as well my
United Nations colleagues Ms. Irina Bokova, Mr. Yury
Fedotov and Brigadier General Fabrizio Parrulli.
I would like to start by expressing my sincere
condolences to the loved ones of the victims of
Wednesday’s terrorist attack in London, as well as my
deep sympathy to the people and the Government of the
United Kingdom. We needed no reminder of the horror
of terrorism. But the London attack — like those in
Kabul, Baghdad, Maiduguri and so many other places
recently — must move us to strengthen international
counter-terrorism cooperation in line with international
human rights and humanitarian law standards.
In particular in armed conflict situations, today
terrorists are not only destroying lives but are also
visiting their horrific violence on historical sites
and objects. The deliberate destruction of cultural
heritage and the trafficking in items of great artistic,
religious or cultural significance target individuals
and communities on cultural and religious grounds.
The protection of heritage, then, is not only a cultural
issue, it is also a security and humanitarian imperative.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant exploit cultural sites to finance their activities
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

while strengthening their linkages with transnational
organized crime. They also destroy and traffic cultural
heritage to undermine the power of culture as a
bridge between generations and people of different
backgrounds and religions. Resolution 2347 (2017), just
adopted, aims to strengthen international cooperation
to deprive terrorists of funding, but also to protect
cultural heritage as a symbol of understanding and
respect for all religions, beliefs and civilizations.
Awareness of the essential importance of the
protection of cultural heritage is not new, but it has grown
considerably over the past several years. In establishing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali through
resolution 2100 (2013), the Security Council established
the link between the illicit trafficking of cultural
objects and the financing of terrorism. Resolution 2322
(2016) urged States to bolster cooperation to prevent
and combat trafficking in cultural property and related
offences that benefit or may benefit terrorist groups.
Meanwhile, during the fifth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the General
Assembly expressed concern, in resolution 70/291, that
terrorists may benefit from transnational organized
crime in some regions, including from the trafficking
of cultural property, and condemned the destruction of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups. In paragraph 3 of
resolution 68/127, the General Assembly deplored
“attacks on religious places and shrines and cultural
sites in violation of international law, in particular
human rights and humanitarian law”.
Moreover, there is already a strong international
legal and normative framework to address these crimes.
This is based on the United Nations Conventions against
Transnational Organized Crime and Corruption, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and the International Guidelines
for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and
other Related Offences.
Protecting cultural heritage requires us to make
every effort to implement this international legal and
normative framework and strengthen international
cooperation. It also demands a global criminal-justice
response that can prevent trafficking in cultural property
by disrupting organized criminal and terrorist networks,
including through anti-corruption and anti-moneylaundering action, and bringing perpetrators to justice.

S/PV.7907

We need to put a stronger focus on investigation, crossborder cooperation and exchange of information, and
on bringing in private and public sector partners,
including dealers and the tourism sector, to promote
supply-chain integrity and stop the illicit trade and sale
of cultural property.
The United Nations system, particularly through
the entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), is increasingly supporting
Member States’ efforts to address these threats through
advocacy and capacity-building assistance. For
example, the UNESCO and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime are already working together, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
other partners, to assist Member States in protecting
cultural heritage and countering the trafficking in
cultural property. As CTITF Chair, and in the light of
this debate and the resolution that was adopted today,
I will encourage the CTITF Inter-Agency Working
Group on Countering the Financing of Terrorism to
develop new projects to help Member States protect
their cultural heritage.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have demonstrated their determination to
further integrate the protection of cultural heritage in
their counter-terrorism work. With the support of United
Nations entities, Member States are strengthening their
legal frameworks and criminal justice systems and
enhancing their collaboration to prevent and respond
to terrorist attacks against their cultural heritage. I
believe we can, and must, do even more. Resolution
2347 (2017) provides a good basis to do just that. The
United Nations stands ready to do its part.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bokova.
Ms. Bokova: Allow me, first of all, to express
my deepest sympathy to the Government and the
people of the United Kingdom following the deadly
terrorist attack in London, which reminds us of our
responsibilities to fight extremism and terrorism.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to express my sincere emotion at the
adoption of historic resolution 2347 (2017), which
demonstrates a crucial recognition of the role of cultural
heritage in maintaining peace and security. Heritage is
our identity. As I look to the members of the Security
Council, I see images of the pyramids of Egypt, the

17-078343/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

Island of Gorée in Senegal, Mount Fuji in Japan, Red
Square in Moscow and Qhapaq Ñan in Bolivia and sites
in other countries of Latin America.
Cultural heritage tells the story of peoples in all
their diversity. It embodies the points of reference and
values that define our shared humanity and ensure the
cohesion of our societies. Some have given their lives
to defend it. As German poet Heinrich Heine wrote,
everywhere men burn books and culture, they end up
burning other men. History has too often proved that
to be true.
The deliberate destruction of heritage is a war
crime. It is also a tactic of war to accelerate the longterm degradation of societies, as part of a strategy
of cultural cleansing. That is why defending cultural
heritage is more than a cultural issue; it is a security
imperative that cannot be separated from the protection
of human lives.
Hidden behind the beauty of Palmyra is a story
of cultural exchange between Asia, Persia, Rome,
and the identity of the Syrian people. At the Shrine of
Jonah in Mosul we see the interaction among Judaism,
Christianity and Islam — a symbol of unity.
Cultural heritage demonstrates the existence of
cultural dialogue. It tells us our history and suggests a
shared future. Extremists know this, and that is why they
seek to destroy it. In adopting resolution 2199 (2015),
which prohibits trade in cultural property from Iraq
and Syria, the Security Council struck at the heart of
violent extremism through its financing, and entrusted
to UNESCO, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) the responsibility to
lead the fight against trafficking in antiquities. That
resolution has already led to significant results.
In a global movement launched by UNESCO,
approximately 50 States have already strengthened their
legislation and are sharing information to dismantle
networks and to facilitate restoration. UNESCO,
INTERPOL and UNODC are working like never before
with customs services, the private sector and museums
to bolser cooperation against drug trafficking. The
resolution just adopted represents a huge step forward,
which reflects a new vision of the links between peace
and heritage. I commend France and Italy and all the
other co-authors for this initiative.
Italy has created the world’s first special unit to
protect cultural heritage in emergency situations, led
4/22

24/03/2017

by the Italian Carabinieri under Commander Parrulli,
who I salute here today. France and the United Arab
Emirates have just launched a new fund, which already
has more than $75 million.
The UNESCO global strategy, adopted in 2015, is
based on a clear understanding of our responsibility
to coordinate international action. In our role as
custodian of international law on cultural heritage, we
are crafting common policies and standards through
the implementation of The Hague Convention of 1954
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, and
the 1972 World Heritage Convention.
As soon fighting ceased in Palmyra, Aleppo,
Nimrud and Ashur, UNESCO was on the ground to
take preliminary measures to secure sites and prevent
further damage. We have raised awareness among the
armed forces in Maly by distributing 8,000 heritage
passports, such as this one, so that each soldier knows
the location of sites and their cultural significance.
I commend the Security Council once again for
including the protection of cultural heritage in the
mandates of peacekeeping forces. Given that cultural
heritage is, as it were, on the front line of conflict, it
should also be at the forefront of peace.
UNESCO is working with the International
Criminal Court to end impunity for war crimes against
culture. Our cooperation has led to the conviction
of individuals responsible for the destruction of
Timbuktu’s mausoleums, which are standing once again
today after being rebuilt by UNESCO in an effort to
speed up reconciliation and strengthen cohesion — just
as we did 12 years ago in rebuilding the Mostar Bridge,
destroyed by the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
everywhere culture rises anew, people rise with it.
Weapons are not enough to defeat violent
extremism. Building peace requires culture as well, and
it requires education, prevention and the transmission
of heritage. That is the message — I hope — of this
historic resolution and its immense scope.
The President: I thank Ms. Bokova for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: At the outset, allow me to ask you,
Mr. President, to convey my heartfelt condolences to
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the British Government and the people of the United
Kingdom on the occasion of the terrorist attack in the
centre of London. Our sympathies are with the families
of the victims of this barbaric act.
The adoption today of resolution 2347 (2017) and
the Security Council’s continued commitment has
helped to keep the spotlight on the involvement of
terrorist groups and organized crime networks in the
destruction, looting, trafficking and sale of cultural
heritage. The need for action is more urgent than ever
in the face of the mass destruction of heritage sites in
Syria and Iraq and the seizure of thousands of objects
near the borders of those countries, which may represent
just the tip of the iceberg.
The destruction of landmarks — such as the
Buddhas of Bamiyan, the Roman monuments in Palmyra
and shrines and mosques in Tikrit and Mosul — are
reprehensible attempts to erase human history. But the
destruction and looting are also generating profits for
terrorists through trafficking, carried out in collusion
with organized crime groups. Those profits fund further
acts of terrorism and enable yet more destruction and
looting of cultural sites and archaeological treasures.
This crime cannot be allowed to continue unabated.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) has been working in close cooperation with
our partners at UNESCO, as well as with INTERPOL, the
World Customs Organization and others, to strengthen
national, regional and international responses. UNODC
is providing technical assistance and capacity-building
and facilitating international cooperation to prevent and
combat trafficking in cultural property. That includes
support to implement the International Guidelines for
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and other
Related Offences, adopted by the General Assembly
in 2014.
Our support to Member States has its firm
foundation in the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Those conventions enjoy near universal
membership. They are applicable to organized crime,
corruption and terrorism, and they provide the
framework the international community needs and can
use to prevent, criminalize, investigate and prosecute
trafficking in cultural property, as well as its use to

S/PV.7907

finance terrorist groups and to support return and
restitution. Those conventions, which apply at all times,
represent important foundations in peacebuilding and
post-conflict interventions. they are our best hope for
preventing and countering this crime and bringing
perpetrators to justice.
The full implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption is especially essential,
as trafficking relies on corrupt officials and dealers
to enable looted items to cross borders and be offered
for sale. This framework, alongside international
instruments developed under the auspices of UNESCO
and the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law, can help ensure that national legal
frameworks can deal with this crime; that investigative
agencies are set up and able to act; that law enforcement
and judicial officers have the training they need; that
sound border management, as well as customs and
anti-money-laundering controls, are in place; that
international cooperation is supported; and that public
and private actors, including museums, dealers and the
tourism sector, assume their responsibilities.
We have treaties. We have tools. We have guidelines.
And we have training materials. But we need to
operationalize commitments more effectively, and we
need Member States to provide more resources in the
spirit of shared responsibility. In response, UNODC is
seeking to shed more light on the dimensions of this
crime to help the international community better target
joint action.
We are pursuing funding for a project, in cooperation
with UNESCO and other partners, to undertake a
global study to, first, identify the main trafficking
routes, modus operandi, extent and patterns involved
and, secondly, to determine the critical criminal justice
challenges countries are facing and to provide tailored
assistance. I hope we can rely on members’ support.
UNODC’s experience and research expertise in
confronting transnational organized crime, corruption
and terrorism remain at the Council’s disposal to
stop criminals and terrorists from profiting from the
destruction and theft of our shared cultural heritage.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Comander Parrulli.
Mr. Parrulli: I thank the Security Council for
giving me an opportunity to speak on this important day.

17-078345/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Carabinieri Command for the Protection
of Cultural Heritage is the world’s first police unit
specializing in the protection of cultural heritage. Since
its foundation, in 1969, it has been on the front lines
in the fight against trafficking in cultural heritage.
To date, our investigations have led to the recovery of
almost 800,000 works of art and the seizure of more than
1 million archeological artefacts. We have investigated
approximately 35,000 people and detained more than
1,000. Those figures demonstrate the Carabinieri
corps steadfast commitment to defending the world’s
collective traditions and history.
More often than not, trafficking in cultural
property is a transnational crime, which requires
a transnational investigative approach. Objects are
stolen from one country, smuggled across the border,
or the borders, of another, and then sold illegally in
another country — perhaps ultimately finding a home
in yet another country. INTERPOL provides pivotal
international police cooperation, but that is not always
enough. The looting and smuggling of cultural property
is a complex crime that requires a specific focus and
unique expertise that goes beyond the usual toolkit of
police personnel. The only way to successfully protect
cultural heritage is through close inter-agency work
across borders.
In that context, the Carabinieri Command for the
Protection of Cultural Heritage serves as a model for
other countries when it comes to engaging international
cooperation at the judicial, law enforcement and
specialist levels. We strongly advocate the setting up
of specialized police units for the protection of cultural
heritage in every country.
In our search for cultural artefacts that have been
exported from Italy, we often end up helping other
countries track down and repatriate their own looted
properties. We have also deployed as part of international
cooperation missions, such as those to Nasiriya, Iraq,
from 2004 to 2005, pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003).

24/03/2017

information, best practices and lessons learned. Our
most powerful tool — the database of stolen cultural
artefacts — stores more than 1.2 million images and
files on stolen artefacts, as well as the more than
6 million pictures and descriptions of artworks covered
by our investigations. Originally the world’s largest
archive of stolen artefacts, it is now a powerful data
analysis tool for processing data entries and aiding
our investigations.
Our latest initiative, the “Unite4Heritage” Task
Force, made its successful debut in the aftermath
of the terrible series of earthquakes that struck Italy
in late 2016. The Task Force is a team of specialized
Carabinieri Command personnel who work alongside
civilian experts from the Ministry of Culture to
assess the risks and quantify the damage to cultural
heritage in crisis-affected areas and to devise the
necessary action plans, including providing training
courses for local staff, assisting in the safe removal
of transportable artefacts from endangered or looted
sites and strengthening the fight against looting and
trafficking in cultural property.
Together with UNESCO, we are now working
on a stand-by agreement to allow the deployment
of the Unite4Heritage Task Force overseas under the
United Nations flag. Meanwhile, we are liaising on a
bilateral basis with several countries, including, most,
recently Iraq. I just visited the UNESCO field office in
Baghdad to identify venues of cooperation to address
archaeological areas devastated and looted by Da’esh.
The Unite4Heritage campaign has raised awareness
of the threats to cultural heritage, mobilized players
beyond the cultural heritage communities and expanded
UNESCO’s efforts to coordinate technical work among
various specialized agencies and institutions.

The Carabinieri Command for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage also provides training, in Italy and
abroad, for judges and prosecutors, police officers,
customs officials and experts and practitioners from
culture ministries. We recently signed technical
arrangements with several national and international
stakeholders.

In the light of the experience, success and cuttingedge work of the Carabinieri Command for the
Protection of Cultural Heritage, I am honoured to be
here today to welcome the adoption of the historic
resolution 2347 (2017). We also welcome the spirit of
the resolution and its effective measures calling for
unified procedures, stronger ties between Member
States and police forces, broader definitions of crimes
against cultural heritage and stricter regulations on the
illegal trade of items with undocumented origins.

In order to improve international police cooperation
in the protection of cultural heritage, we share

The President: I thank Brigadier General Parrulli
for his briefing.

6/22

17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.
I call on the Minister of Culture and Communication
of France.
Ms. Azoulay (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) as a
historic step in our common fight to protect endangered
cultural heritage. We meet this morning in the Security
Council, in the heart of a global city that symbolizes
modernity — In the Shadow of No Towers, to borrow
from the work by Art Spiegelmann. But this morning,
given the subject of our meeting, we also are gathering
in the lost shadow of the Buddhas of Вamiyan, which
were ripped from our world and blown to smithereens,
whereupon their mute power to move and inspire was
lost. We are gathered in response to appeals for the
manuscripts and mausoleums of Timbuktu, the stone
colossi and the statues of the human-headed bulls
from Mesopotamia.
Deliberate attacks on human cultural heritage are
rooted in a desire to obliterate memory, reject the past
and strip history of its meaning and lessons. It is the
same destructive desire that targets the living bodies
of women, men and children, but also the stone and
clay of our heritage treasures held in museums. It is
the same macabre desire, the same willingness to break
what might have existed in the past in order to snuff
out the hope of a future. We owe those people — the
women and men — respect for their past. We must pass
on their history to our children and to our children’s
children, because that history is part of the common
heritage of humankind. We must stand with all of those
who, sometimes at the cost of their own lives, seek to
salvage those treasures of humankind from the abyss.
The international community would thus be
supporting what Léon Blum rightly called the
“conscience of the United Nations”, namely, UNESCO.
I wish to pay tribute to UNESCO’s essential role in the
protection of heritage and the promotion of cultural
diversity as an instrument of peace and the moral
conscience of humankind to remind us all that culture
links people to their history and their regions. Thanks
to UNESCO, States have committed themselves
by adopting texts useful for the preservation of our
common heritage. UNESCO’s global mandate is more
relevant than ever in a world where its fundamental
values are often in jeopardy.

S/PV.7907

I also welcome the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, which
play a key role in preventing trafficking in cultural
property by promoting judicial cooperation and raising
awareness among States on issues that are still often
misunderstood. I would also like to commend the
presence this morning in the Security Council of the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and of
the Director-General of UNESCO, as well as to thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for his briefing.
I would also like to thank the British presidency,
without whose efforts the joint invitation of France
and Italy would never have seen the light of day. Allow
me to express once again France’s solidarity with our
British friends who were attacked in the very birthplace
of democracy, which is their Parliament.
The protection of heritage is a matter of civilization
and an ethical issue that unites us all by way of our
diverse affiliations. However, it is also a security issue,
because illicit trafficking in looted cultural property
during conflicts finances terrorist networks and is a
factor in the development of armed conflicts themselves.
Armed groups, in particular terrorist organizations, are
strengthened by revenue derived from trafficking in
cultural heritage. Stolen cultural objects in a country
where war is waging then serve to perpetuate and
intensify said conflict. Even after conflict, when peace
is restored, heritage continues to play a major role in
restoring peace as a symbol of resilience and unity
for peoples whose blood has been shed. For all of the
reasons I mentioned, the international community must
take steps to act. This is a human imperative, a just
cause and a key component of peace.
At this groundbreaking meeting this morning,
the international community is taking action by way
of the Security Council, which, for the first time,
has adopted a comprehensive resolution devoted
exclusively to the protection of at-risk heritage in
armed conflict. This organ, whose responsibility is to
ensure the maintenance of peace and security, is now
fully equipped to deal with this particular issue through
the text submitted by France and Italy. Of course, this
issue has featured in other resolutions adopted by the
Council in the past, but those provisions were limited
and focused on specific areas, especially in the context
of the fight against terrorism. For example, resolution
1267 (1999) calls for respect for Afghanistan’s cultural
and historical heritage, while resolution 2199 (2015)

17-078347/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

condemns the destruction of cultural heritage in Iraq
and Syria — especially by Da’esh and the Al-Nusra
Front — and urges Member States to take appropriate
measures to prevent the trafficking of cultural property
from Iraq and Syria.
The urgency of the issue has led the Council today
to underscore the importance of those resolutions and
to become more broadly seized of the issue. In that
regard, the Council can count on the contribution of the
43 States that met in December 2016 at the Abu Dhabi
International Conference on Safeguarding Endangered
Cultural Heritage, organized by France and the United
Arab Emirates, which I would like to commend for
its decisive commitment. In their outcome document,
those countries called on the Security Council to
support the achievement of two main goals identified
by the conference, namely, establishing an international
fund for the protection of at-risk cultural heritage and
creating a network of safe-havens.
Today’s unanimous resolution is both comprehensive
and balanced. It reflects the international community’s
full determination at the highest level. I am proud to
have presented it along with my Italian colleague.
The resolution addresses the issue of at-risk
heritage in situations of armed conflict by for the first
time dealing with all the threats — destruction, theft
and trafficking — without geographical limitation
and regardless of whether or not those acts are carried
out by listed terrorist groups or other armed groups.
It explicitly links the financing of terrorist groups
with trafficking in cultural property and strengthens
the operational tools put in place to deal with this
issue in previous Security Council resolutions. It also
better encapsulates the link between terrorist groups
and organized crime. It makes mention of the main
outcomes of the Abu Dhabi Conference with regard
to international law. And it strengthens cooperation
among the relevant agencies and bodies dealing with
this issue, without duplicating or replacing their work,
while also encouraging States to cooperate further and
to take operational and substantive measures. Finally,
it calls on the Member States to ratify the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict and its Protocols, as
France has done, having just joined the United Kingdom
as the first permanent member of the Security Council
to ratify the 1999 Second Protocol. As part of this
mobilization effort and, above all, its cooperation on
this issue, France intends to continue to play its full
8/22

24/03/2017

part, in particular by providing $30 million for the fund
announced at the Abu Dhabi Conference, which already
has more than $75 million in its coffers.
To believe that the modern era can be based on
forgetting the past is a dangerous path to take. This new
age can come about only by building on the shoulders of
the giants who preceded us. Today we need to preserve
the integrity of the “great book” of humanity, as referred
to by Victor Hugo in Notre-Dame de Paris. He talked
about heritage as the “great book of humanity, the key
expression of what it means to be human”. Of course,
heritage is a living organism, one transformed through
the ages. But the passage of time will determine what
must endure in history, not the destructive passions
of men.
This resolution calls us collectively to wisdom and
to respect the passage of time, of history. Working for
the cause of peace means preventing the destruction
of cultural heritage in a murderous attempt to rewrite
history. And it means preventing the heritage of peoples
from being hijacked to finance violence and crime
against their own history. That is the meaning of the
historic resolution that we just adopted this morning.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): Our generation faces
unprecedented attacks against and destruction of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups in situations of
armed conflict. This is not only an attack against the
past, but also against our collective future. It affects
people’s identity and hampers post-conflict recovery
and peacebuilding. It undermines values such as
tolerance, respect and inclusivity. It deprives minority
groups of their roots. It fuels conflicts.
The destruction of cultural heritage by terrorist
groups and in situations of armed conflict can amount
to a war crime or a crime against humanity. Together
with the unprecedented scale of organized looting and
illicit trafficking in cultural objects, such acts provide
a source of income for terrorist groups, support their
recruitment efforts and strengthen their operational
capability to organize and carry out attacks.
For those reasons, and for the sake of our history, the
protection of cultural heritage is a long-standing pillar
of Italian foreign policy, and Italy is at the forefront
of international efforts to safeguard and protect
cultural heritage — including thanks to the specialized
Carabinieri unit. We are also a staunch supporter
of UNESCO and the outstanding commitments of
Director-General Bukova. We promoted the adoption
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of a resolution on culture in conflict areas and support
the implementation of the “Unite4Heritage” Campaign,
including through our national Task Force, as we just
heard from General Parrulli.
As the current Chair of the Group of Seven (G-7),
at the end of March we will host the first-ever meeting
of G-7 Ministers of Culture. As partners of the global
coalition against Da’esh, we co-Chair, along with the
United States and Saudi Arabia, the counter-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant finance group, whose
work includes promoting the swift implementation of
resolution 2199 (2015) to prevent terrorist groups in
Iraq and Syria from benefiting from trading in oil,
antiquities and hostages. We also chair its subgroup
on illegal trafficking in cultural property. Among
the major bilateral projects in which we are engaged,
allow me to mention our successful cooperation with
the Government of Iraq on safeguarding its immense
cultural patrimony.
As a Security Council candidate, we made cultural
heritage an overarching theme. Together with Jordan,
UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and INTERPOL, we organized a series of
seminars aimed at raising awareness and considering
improved responses. As a Security Council member, we
are convinced that this organ should pay more attention
to the protection of cultural heritage, in the belief that
the Council and the international community can, and
should, unite around this issue.
For those reasons, and thanks to Ms. Azoulay,
France and Italy promoted this briefing and proposed
a Security Council resolution specifically dedicated
to the issue. I thank all the members of the Security
Council for the constructive engagement that led to the
adoption of the historic resolution 2347 (2017), as well
as to the United Kingdom presidency for scheduling
the meeting in its programme of work. I also wish to
acknowledge all the Member States that co-sponsored
the text.
The destruction of cultural heritage by terrorist
groups and organized criminal networks is a reality,
and this resolution addresses it with clear language
and concrete operational measures. But this issue has
a broader relevance in the maintenance of international
peace and security, one that goes beyond attacks by
terrorist groups. Today the Council is sending a clear
sign of commitment and an important response to the
destruction of cultural patrimony during crises and

S/PV.7907

conflict. The resolution is a balanced instrument that
addresses both preventive initiatives and measures
devoted to countering illegal excavation and the looting
of, and trafficking in, cultural heritage at the domestic
and international levels.
States are encouraged to adopt appropriate
measures, in line with their national systems and with
international frameworks and standards. Harmonized
legislation and coordinated operational solutions are
indispensable to provide an effective response. The
Security Council is committing itself and the dedicated
United Nations bodies to assist Member States and to
strengthen all forms of cooperation. We are confident
that this effort will contribute to preventing and
countering actions that destroy and damage cultural
heritage and that provide important financial support
to criminal and terrorist groups.
Integrating the cultural dimension into the
prevention and settlement of conflicts is not only a
moral obligation, it is also a political and security
imperative. Raising awareness and mobilizing
international efforts are necessary, but not sufficient.
Bringing to justice perpetrators of crimes against
cultural heritage is also crucial, including to prevent
future attacks, as highlighted by the historic judgment
of the International Criminal Court last September
in the case of The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al
Mahdi relating to the destruction of cultural heritage
in Timbuktu.
All over the world the cultural heritage passed
down from previous centuries represents a message of
tolerance, cultural understanding, religious harmony
and respect. Totalitarian elements want to destroy the
remarkable historical patrimony of our humanity. With
this historic resolution we reaffirm the basic values of
our civilizations.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the briefers
for their statements, above all Mr. Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs. In particular,
I would like to single out not just the statement, but
also the leadership shown by Ms. Irina Bokova,
Director-General of UNESCO. I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Brigadier General
Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander of the Italian Carabinieri
Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage, for
their briefings.

17-078349/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

Bolivia also welcomes the initiative presented
today by the delegations of Italy and France. Resolution
2347 (2017), adopted today, is a call to the international
community and to the various United Nations agencies
to effectively protect cultural artefacts and heritage
in places where there is armed conflict, especially
where terrorist groups are operating, who not just seek
to undermine the rights of millions of people but are
also trying to obliterate the shared culturalheritage of
humankind to finance their vile acts.
We categorically condemn the looting, trafficking,
smuggling and the like of cultural property carried out
by non-State actors and terrorist groups, particularly
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, to the detriment of sovereign
nations and peoples. We urge the international
community to collaborate closely and make all
necessary efforts to prevent acts of that nature. We
also emphatically condemn the destruction of historic
sites and assets as a strategy for denying the cultural
and historic roots of nations and peoples through terror
and intimidation. We once again reject all terrorist
acts as unjustifiable crimes, regardless of motivation,
place, time or perpetrators. We reaffirm the need for
all States to combat that phenomenon by all means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
other obligations under international law.
We also believe it is essential to keep in mind
that one of the reasons we are facing the smuggling,
trafficking, looting and destruction of valuable historic
cultural property today, not only in the Middle East
but also in other parts of the world is due, in part, to
the destruction of State infrastructure and inadequate
security forces or authorities to prevent the commission
of such acts. It is important, in our view, to identify the
causes of that phenomenon, which has been occurring
primarily in the Middle East. We would probably not
be gathered here to tackle this difficult matter had it
not been for the interventionist policies and invasions
of recent years that led to the emergence and rise of
terrorist groups that the international community is
now facing.
We note that the Council has already expressed its
concern over resolution 2347 (2017), adopted today,
noting that the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and other individuals, groups, businesses and entities
associated with Al-Qaida, are generating income by
participating directly or indirectly in the looting and
smuggling of cultural property from archaeological
sites, museums, libraries, archives and other locations
10/22

24/03/2017

in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic — which is
being used to finance their recruitment and to bolster
their operational capability to plan and carry out
terrorist attacks.
The adoption of measures to combat that
phenomenon notwithstanding, the general lack of
effective control mechanisms in the international
community has allowed ISIS and Al-Qaida to continue
financing their murky operations via the looting,
smuggling and sale of cultural property. That generated
vast economic benefits, without which terrorist groups
would not have been able to finance their criminal
activities. The reduction or evasion of controls through
tax havens, used by organized crime to legitimize its
finances, only serves to undermine our efforts. We must
rigorously investigate whether those terrorist groups
have access to or are actually utilizing tax havens for
those ends.
We wish to stress that the enforcement of today’s
resolution should focus on restoring historic sites and
cultural property to the state they were in before the
conflicts. It should also seek to neutralize explosive
ordnances and demine those areas, as in the case of
Palmyra, Syria.
We also note that General Assembly resolution
69/196 strongly urges Member States to apply
international guidelines on crime prevention and
criminal justice responses to the trafficking of cultural
property and related crimes. In that connection, we
call on all Member States to strengthen international
cooperation and adopt joint measures to recover
trafficked, looted, stolen or smuggled cultural property
and, critically, to ensure its restoration and return to its
place of origin.
While every case is different, many of the museums
that now exhibit historic cultural property from other
countries in their galleries, were also acquired through
invasion, looting and other illegal means. Consequently,
we are calling for enhanced policies for the restoration
and return of that property, in a way that is consistent
with instruments that have been approved by the
United Nations.
Finally, we wish to express the special and specific
importance of protecting cultural property in areas
under foreign occupation, and stress UNESCO’s key
role in that crucial matter.
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the presidency
of the United Kingdom for highlighting the importance
of protecting cultural heritage as an imperative for
humankind. We also convey our appreciation to the
co-facilitators, France and Italy, for their efforts on
resolution 2347 (2017), just adopted, which we were
pleased to co-sponsor. We also welcome the briefings of
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, UNESCO DirectorGeneral Bokova, Mr. Fedotov and General Parrulli.
We are witnessing the greatest threat to cultural
heritage since the Second World War. Today, more than
55 cultural heritage sites are in danger of destruction in
armed conflicts — 21 of them located in the Middle East
and Northern Africa, in particular Egypt, Iraq, Palestine,
Yemen, Libya and Syria. That unprecedented scale of
attack constitutes cultural cleansing. Kazakhstan, as a
member of the World Heritage Committee, welcomes
the international community’s efforts and initiatives
to protect those sites. We co-sponsored the decision
of the 199th session of UNESCO Executive Board,
adopted last April, on UNESCO’s role in safeguarding
and preserving Palmyra and other Syria World
Heritage sites.
My delegation would like to make the following
recommendation on the matter. We call on Member
States and other stakeholders to fully implement the
recommendations of global forums, inter alia, the
Donors Conference on Safeguarding Endangered
Cultural Heritage, held this week in Paris; the
International Cultural Conference, held in Milan in
mid-2015; the 4th International Cultural Forum, held in
Saint Petersburg in December 2015.
Join the International Alliance for the Protection
of Heritage in Conflict Areas, spearheaded by France
and the United Arab Emirates. Ratify and implement
the relevant international treaties, conventions and
other instruments, in addition to Security Council
and UNESCO resolutions in that area. Provide
trainings to prevent the illicit trafficking of cultural
property. Support UNESCO’s Heritage Emergency
Fund and Unite4Heritage global campaign. Strengthen
UNESCO’s Global Coalition for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage, as the Director-General’s agenda for
action on the matter and for the promotion of cultural
pluralism. Introduce strict measures to prevent the
legal removal of cultural heritage from archaeological
sites being stolen from museums, trafficked and sold
to private collections by terrorist groups. Such plunder
has become a lucrative source of terrorist financing,

S/PV.7907

replacing the diminishing income from oil resources.
Ensure greater vigilance of all sources of financing,
including money laundering and diverse markets, such
as auction houses and the Internet — through which
Da’esh runs nearly $100 million annually.
Utilize the INTERPOL database of stolen works of
art and establish special police units for that purpose.
The resolution of stolen cultural property is mandated
under international law, so enhancing the effectiveness
of procedures in domestic courts is critical. All should
work closely with INTERPOL, the World Customs
Organization, UNESCO and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime — which should suggest key
actions to ensure the protection of cultural heritage.
Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to the protection
of cultural heritage as a fundamental tool of preventive
diplomacy to support the development of peaceful
societies, strengthen sustainable development and
suppress terrorist financing.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are most grateful
to the delegations of France and Italy for raising the
subject of protection of cultural heritage in armed
conflicts. Events of recent history pushed that issue
into the spotlight of the international community. We
fully share the main idea of resolution 2347 (2017),
adopted today — to prevent the destruction, trafficking,
looting and smuggling of cultural property during
armed conflicts.
How many of the Seven Wonders of the World is
it possible to see preserved today? Some of them were
lost to natural disasters, and others vanished because of
human behaviour. The importance of the issue that we
are discussing today was very succinctly articulated by
François Bugnion, a renowned expert on international
humanitarian law from the International Committee of
the Red Cross. He said:
“Close your eyes and imagine Paris without
Notre Dame... Giza without the pyramids... Peking
without the Forbidden City, New York without the
Statue of Liberty, Moscow without Red Square and
Saint Basil’s Cathedral”.
The international community has a special responsibility
to safeguard objects of cultural heritage that represent
our nations’ identities and have long become an integral
part of humankind’s history.
During the time of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
Emer de Vattel, the principle of making the distinction

17-0783411/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

between military and civilian property, as well as that
of respecting sites and places of worship and cultural
significance, became one of the foundational elements
of customary international humanitarian law. Since
then, the international community has developed a
wide framework of rules and procedures to protect
cultural property from harm. The core elements of
the respective regime are the Second Protocol to the
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict and the Additional
Protocols of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
However, cultural property continues to be the object
of destruction, looting and trafficking. In the aftermath
of recent conflicts in Europe, Central Asia, the Middle
East and Africa, the numerous barbaric acts committed
against our very civilization still loom fresh in our mind.
Regrettably, the topic of today’s discussion is also
relevant to the situation in my own country as parts
of its cultural heritage are being destroyed, looted,
illicitly excavated and subsequently trafficked out of
Ukraine — including, in particular, to the Russian
Federation — all of which has resulted from the
attempted annexation of Crimea and Russia’s military
intervention in Donbas.

24/03/2017

numerous reports of the Secretary-General, UNESCO
and other relevant United Nations agencies, it has
become a widespread practice, thereby improving the
ability of those groups to continue to commit terrorist
acts. It is high time to take decisive actions to break
that vicious cycle. That is why resolution 2347 (2017)
is so important.
We commend the activities of UNESCO as a key
player in the area of the protection and recovery of
cultural heritage worldwide. Ukraine fully supports the
Unite for Heritage campaign, as well as the draft action
plan on the implementation Strategy for Reinforcing
UNESC’s Action for the Protection of Culture and the
Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in the Event of Armed
Conflict. We thank Director-General Bokova for her
personal commitment and dedication.
We hope that today’s resolution will reinforce
bilateral, subregional and regional cooperation in
support of the respective efforts of UNESCO, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL,
the World Customs Organization and other relevant
international entities to protect cultural property, which
constitutes our common treasure.

Yet States are not the only perpetrators of crimes
related to cultural property. There is a growing trend
of such offences being committed by non-State actors,
including criminal and armed and terrorist groups.
Striking examples of the deliberate and systematic
destruction of our common heritage by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and their affiliates have been witnessed by the entire
international community. As a result of such cultural
genocide, future generations are robbed of the
opportunity to admire the beauty of, inter alia, the
temples in Palmyra and the sculptures in Al-Raqqa in
Syria; the ancient cities of Nimrud and Hatra, as well as
the renowned historic mosques and libraries of Mosul
in Iraq; the Sufi shrines outside of Tripoli in Libya;
the unique architecture of Timbuktu in Mali; and the
statues of the Buddha carved into the Bamiyan cliffs
in Afghanistan.

We would like to point out several important
elements of resolution 2347 (2017), the first of which
concerns the primary responsibility of States to protect
their cultural property. Failure to achieve that goal
is the result not of a lack of existing international
instruments, but rather of States’ will to abide by their
commitments and obligations.

In targeting cultural heritage, terrorists not
only draw attention to their activities and intimidate
Governments, as well as the public. They also attempt
to rewrite history and erase entire chapters from the
collective memory of people. Moreover, they actively
traffick in cultural property that is illicitly excavated
or looted to fund their atrocities. As confirmed by

Fourthly, there is the matter of bringing to justice
the perpetrators of crimes related to cultural property.
In that regard, we welcome the respective efforts of all
national and international jurisdictions and call for close
cooperation between law enforcement and customs
agencies in investigations, prosecutions, seizures
and confiscations, as well as the return, restitution or

12/22

Secondly, there is the initiative to establish
in-country safe zones for the preservation of moveable
cultural property threatened by conflicts.
Thirdly, establishing inventories of cultural
property and other items of historical, cultural and
religious importance that have been illegally transferred
from areas of armed conflict, notably from territories
under foreign occupation, would be particularly useful
for ensuring their future safe return to their countries
of origin.

17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

repatriation of trafficked cultural property. We commend
in particular the recent decision of the International
Criminal Court that, for the first time, convicted a
war criminal for intentionally directing attacks against
religious buildings and historic monuments.
Last but not least, the proposed report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017) should provide us with an opportunity to
comprehensively examine the problem and assess its
gravity and scale based on information provided by
Member States to develop concrete recommendations
and durable solutions.
We are ready to contribute to that process.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the United Kingdom
presidency for putting this item on the agenda and the
briefers for their contributions here and the work that
they do in their respective organizations with regard to
this very important issue.
The destruction, looting and trafficking of cultural
heritage not only inflict damage on the places and the
peoples in the affected areas, but also untold damage
is wrought on the understanding of our common
history and shared humanity. The end result is that the
knowledge, beauty and diversity of our world are all
diminished for everyone. The destruction of the ancient
city of Palmyra, the mausoleums and manuscripts of
Timbuktu and the mosques of Mosul, among others, are
wanton and needless acts of vandalism. Such iconoclasm
has been seen before in all parts of the globe, yet the
most recent wave is all the more cynical as it is often
a front for the looting of artefacts for sale on the black
market and for garnering publicity for those carrying
out those barbarous actions.
Our primary concern, of course, in situations of
conflict must be the protection of the life and dignity of
civilians whose lives are destroyed because of war and
instability. We must also look towards the post-conflict
phase and how to rebuild peaceful societies based on
trust and mutual understanding. In that regard, the
destruction and disappearance of culture heritage
can have profound and unanticipated consequences
by obliterating unique historical and cultural values
essential to providing us with an understanding of our
past, present and future. The fact that armed groups
and, in particular, terrorist groups in ongoing conflicts
finance their activity through the illegal trafficking of
cultural property is of great concern. The sheer number
of illicitly trafficked cultural objects confiscated in

S/PV.7907

countries neighbouring ongoing conflicts in 2016 alone
is a clear illustration of the extent of the problem.
The destruction, looting and trafficking of culture
heritage in situations of armed conflict are not a new
phenomenon. The protection of cultural property in
armed conflict is firmly rooted in the Second Protocol
to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and
customary international humanitarian law wherein
under certain circumstances the intentional destruction
of such cultural heritage may amount to war crimes.
States therefore have a duty to investigate attacks
against cultural property and bring perpetrators to
justice. With that in mind, we welcome the recent
judgment by the International Criminal Court in the Al
Mahdi case. Moreover, UNESCO has agreed a range
of conventions related to those issues, which together
with the Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime, provide important tools to address them. Our
common measures against terrorism, including against
the financing of terrorism through the illicit trade of
cultural property, also play an important role.
Sweden is in the process of adhering to the
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and we encourage others to do the same.
We also support the ongoing work of the Council of
Europe in that area. We have taken a number of actions
to implement resolution 2199 (2015), which condemns
trade in cultural property from Syria and Iraq, such
as setting up a national coordination function across
relevant Government agencies. We have also reinforced
national police capacity in the field of cultural
heritage and launched a public awareness-raising
campaign in line with UNESCO’s global Unite for
Heritage campaign.
We underline UNESCO’s leading role in the
protection of cultural heritage. We support the Strategy
for Reinforcing UNESCO’s Action in the Protection
of Culture and the Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in
the Event of Armed Conflict, and we look forward to
the action plan to implement it. UNESCO, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL,
the World Customs Organization and States, as well
as various institutions and individuals, contribute in
valuable ways to preventing the destruction of and
illicit trade in cultural heritage. It is essential that their
actions support and complement each other.

17-0783413/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
2347 (2017), introduced by France and Italy, which
we were pleased to co-sponsor. The resolution is
an important step forward in the fight against the
destruction, looting and trafficking of cultural
heritage in conflict situations. We further commend
the initiative taken by France and the United Arab
Emirates to create safe havens for cultural objects, and
we are studying with close interest ways in which that
and other initiatives may complement each other.
A holistic approach will bring new perspectives.
Sweden looks forward to the report of the SecretaryGeneral as we look into how the Security Council
can continue to address that important issue. Our
cultural heritage is integral to our shared humanity.
Its destruction in any part of the world leaves us all
poorer. We owe it to our future generations to do
everything within our power to protect our common
cultural heritage.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I too
wish to thank Ms. Bokova, Mr. Feltman, Mr. Fedotov
and Brigadier General Parrulli for their enlightening
briefing this morning.
My delegation congratulates the French and Italian
delegations for their initiative leading to the adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), which Uruguay co-sponsored.
We consider it to be a useful tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
On previous occasions, Uruguay has expressed
its principled position rejecting all forms of terrorism
and armed conflict and supporting any initiative aimed
first and foremost at protecting people, as well as
those goods that form part of a nation’s heritage and
cultural tapestry. International cooperation is crucial to
preventing the traffic in cultural works or objects and
the use of such criminal activity to finance terrorism.
Uruguay deplores the destruction of cultural
heritage, particularly involving religious sites and the
pillaging and smuggling of goods out of archeological
sites, carried out in situations of armed conflict by
terrorist groups. We acknowledge that UNESCO
should play a leading role in the protection of cultural
heritage and draw attention to the Unite for Heritage
initiative, which seeks to create a world movement
of young people raising their voices to safeguard
threatened cultural heritage, which should be preserved
as a common goods. We would also point to the key
role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs
14/22

24/03/2017

and Crime and INTERPOL in the prevention of all
trafficking in cultural goods.
The establishment of a network of safe havens, as
referred to in resolution 2347 (2017), should meet the
needs and requirements of the affected countries, in
accordance with domestic legislation and applicable
international conventions. Priority must be accorded to
preserving cultural goods in the event of conflict in the
territory of the affected country, only when the option
of foreign safe havens is not available.
In such cases, UNESCO could provide coordination
assistance between the affected State and the safe
haven. Such coordination could include establishing
agreements on modalities for the restitution of cultural
works and heritage and, upon request, technical
support and cooperation in transferring and preserving
such goods. The second preambular paragraph of the
UNESCO constitution establishes that “since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that
the defences of peace must be constructed”.
Cultural heritage is one of the ways in which we
can truly forge peace among nations. In the light of
the new threats to States, including terrorism, we
must continue to harmonize joint efforts to protect our
cultural heritage, which is the symbol of the collective
human identity and links us to our history. It is our duty
to pass it on to succeeding generations.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Council for having convened this
morning’s important meeting. Similar thanks go
to France and to Italy for having raised this very
important subject at the level of the Security Council.
We also wish to thank all of our briefers this morning
for their interventions. In particular, we deeply thank
Ms. Bokova for all that she has done and her ongoing
efforts in her role as Director-General of UNESCO.
UNESCO is the world’s conscience, particularly
regarding the preservation of the cultural heritage of
all States.
The safeguarding and protection of cultural
heritage from all destructive acts, including trafficking
and exploitation for terrorist purposes, is an extremely
sensitive subject, because it involves sites, monuments,
museums and other tangible goods that are directly
linked to the history and very identity of peoples and
nations. Cultural heritage is therefore no less important
in terms of value than land or even honour — as an
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

intangible concept — for the peoples and States that
own such heritage, or other custodians thereof.
Egypt enjoys a precious and rich cultural heritage
that is appreciated, known and respected by all. We
are therefore highly familiar with the importance and
sensitivity of the issue. We need to safeguard our cultural
heritage from destruction and trafficking, whether
on the part of terrorist groups or in circumstances of
armed conflict. As I have said, our cultural heritage is
precious, respected, known and appreciated by all, and
we are particularly sensitive to the importance of this
issue, given our geographical positon on a continent and
in a region where the majority of global and cultural
heritage is to be found.
Against that backdrop and in the light of the
importance and sensitivity of the issue of protecting
cultural heritage, the Egyptian delegation reiterated
in the negotiations of resolution 2347 (2017), which
was adopted today, the importance of including in
the resolution a number of principles and restrictions,
without which our delegation would not have been able
to vote in its favour. I would like to draw attention
to the key principles and restrictions to which I have
just referred.
First, we reaffirm that the key role is to be played
by each individual State in the protection of its own
cultural heritage. Efforts to protect cultural heritage
during armed conflict must respect the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and be pursued
strictly in line with international law. The importance
of respecting a State’s sovereignty is also key, as is
respect for the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States.
We also reiterate that the protection of cultural
heritage, including through the establishment of a
network of safe havens, can be undertaken only with
the support of the State custodian of that cultural
heritage. Safe havens should be established only on
its territory. Egypt rejects any interference, present or
future, in the internal affairs of a State on the pretext
of protecting cultural heritage. We reject the transfer of
a State’s cultural heritage out of its territory under the
pretext of conserving it in safe havens. We have only
to look at our own cultural heritage and that of other
countries. That heritage is exhibited in the museums
of third countries, which had seized that heritage and
refuse to date to restore them to their States.

S/PV.7907

Secondly, it is crucial that UNESCO, as an agency
that specializes in the topic of cultural heritage,
continue to provide assistance to countries, at their
request, so that they may be in a position to protect
their cultural heritage. Furthermore, it is essential that
the Security Council only deal with cultural heritage in
situations where there is a threat to international peace
and security, international counter-terrorism activities
or an international conflict that figures on the agenda
of the Council.
Thirdly, it is important States take the necessary
measures to forestall and prevent illicit trafficking in
cultural goods, particularly in areas of conflict, and
specifically that committed by terrorist groups.
Fourthly, it is essential that States draft lists of
cultural goods that have been transferred illegally
during armed conflict and that, in that regard, they
coordinate with United Nations bodies and relevant
international entities in order to ensure the safe
restitution of those goods.
Fifthly, we must affirm the possibility of including
among the tasks of peacekeeping organizations the
provision of support to concerned States, at their
request, for the protection of their cultural heritage
from destruction, looting or other similar crimes.
Moreover, the Egyptian delegation worked for
the inclusion in the resolution a reference to the need
to protect cultural goods and heritage in areas under
foreign occupation. Unfortunately, objections of a
political nature to our proposal meant that we were
unable to include that key idea in the resolution.
Lastly, Egypt welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2347 (2017), in particular because the
protection of cultural heritage is a noble objective.
However, we wish to underscore, as we have done
in past meetings, that it remains crucial for States to
implement Security Council resolutions, including that
just adopted. As such, we expect States to implement
their commitments, in compliance with that resolution,
and particularly in compliance with the principles and
restrictions contained therein. We will not allow such
provisions to be flouted.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank all the briefers for their participation
in this meeting and for their valuable contributions to
today’s discussion.

17-0783415/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our delegation fully shares concerns over the
unprecedented damage done to cultural heritage by
supporters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups
operating in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other conflict zones.
We believe that stamping out barbaric terrorism should
be the specific goal of the international community in
this sphere. Proceeds from the trade in cultural heritage
remain one of the main sources of ISIS financing.

24/03/2017

Over the past two years, the Council has made
significant progress in developing instruments to
combat the financing of terrorism. Resolutions 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015), prepared with the very active
participation of our own delegation, touched on the
issue of cultural heritage. At Russia’s request, changes
were made to the universal Financial Action Task Force
standards on combating financing of terrorism, in
line with those Security Council resolutions, which is
welcomed in resolution 2347 (2017), adopted today.

the demonstration of their inhumane, futile ideology,
and a place of torture and crime. Palmyra is literally
sown with mines and unexploded ordinance, preventing
a genuine assessment of the destruction and attempts
at restoration. Russia is already working to address
this task, and those efforts would be helped by the
creation of an international coalition on the demining
of Syrian territory. We urge all partners involved in
maintaining historical heritage to set aside their wellknown differences and to do their part in a common
undertaking, which will require, inter alia, significant
financial investment. It is vitally important that today
the Council has called on Member States, United Nations
specialized agencies and other international structures
to provide assistance in demining places of cultural
heritage. We expect to see the active involvement of the
United Nations Secretariat, UNESCO and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in such
efforts in Palmyra.

However, the international community has
not yet been able to fully cut off ISIS financing.
In those circumstances, further work is needed
to create a system that fully rules out any kind of
economic cooperation with terrorists and establishes
a comprehensive embargo on trade with ISIS. In the
resolution just adopted, provisions are included, inter
alia, on sanctions against persons and entities that aid
and abet the trade in cultural heritage. We again call
on all States to immediately submit to the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, any information that they have on sources of
funding for terrorists, including evidence of acquisition
of artefacts from territory under the control of ISIS and
Jabhat Al-Nusra.

A leading role in the preservation og cultural
heritage is played by UNESCO. We support the Strategy
for Reinforcing UNESCO’s Action for the Protection of
Culture and the Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in the
Event of Armed Conflict. In developing this document
at the fourth Saint Petersburg Cultural Forum, we
adopted a declaration on the protection of culture in
armed conflict zones. It is necessary to pull together
and forge coordination among the various international
initiatives on protecting cultural heritage, thereby
ensuring full effectiveness, including through a proper
division of labour. For example, we need to avoid a
situation whereby the international fund to safeguard
endangered cultural heritage in areas of armed
conflict, as announced in Abu Dhabi, would duplicate
or even compete with the work of the UNESCO World
Heritage Fund.

Urgent measures are needed to maintain for future
generations the priceless treasure of culture in areas
where terrorists and radicals are active. This issue
is perhaps most pressing in Syria. The symbol of the
trials and tribulations of the long-suffering people of
that country was the ancient city of Palmyra, a jewel
of human civilization. That city, which was seized and
destroyed by terrorists, has now been liberated. It is our
duty to help restore and give that monument back to the
Syrians and the entire world.

Once again, the scale of illegal trade in cultural
heritage is testament to the links between terrorists and
organized crime groups. The resolution just adopted
again addresses this problem by building on the
relevant provisions of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2195
(2014). It also reflects important elements from General
Assembly resolution 69/281 with regard to preventing
illegal trade in cultural heritage. We support the
strengthening and active use of the scientific analytical
capacities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in this sphere, including the provision
of specialized technical assistance to States. We note

The first step in that regard must be erasing the
footprints of those who turned Palmyra into an arena for
16/22

17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7907

the contribution of UNODC in combating crimes
against cultural heritage.

to provide constructive support and fully respect the
national ownership of all cultural heritage.

Once again, we wish to reiterate Russia’s
commitment to combating international terrorism and
our willingness to develop specialized cooperation
with all interested parties in combating the destruction
of and illegal trade in cultural heritage.

Secondly, efforts to combat terrorism need to be
intensified. Terrorism has become the main threat
to cultural heritage in conflict areas. Resolution
2347 (2017), which was just adopted by the Council,
provides a framework for cooperation in preventing
terrorist groups from destroying cultural heritage
and smuggling or trafficking in cultural heritage for
terrorist financing. All countries should effectively
implement the resolution and maximize the role of the
relevant Council mechanisms and build an information
network against the destruction and smuggling of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups and resolutely
crack down on terrorist activities to destroy, smuggle
and traffic cultural heritage.

In accordance with tradition, I must say a few
words following the statement delivered by the
Ukranian delegation. It showed that Ukraine used
this discussion in the Council of a noble task — the
protection of cultural heritage — just as it has always
used discussions on any topic in a multilateral setting
to continue its information propaganda war against
Russia. This is a source of grave concern and we shall
not respond to the inappropriate remarks they made.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening by the United Kingdom of this
meeting on the protection against the destruction and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Director­
General Bokova, Executive Director Fedotov and
Brigadier General Parrulli for their briefings.
As we speak, in some parts of the world, ongoing
armed conflicts and rampant terrorist activities not only
seriously jeopardize the lives and properties in affected
countries, but also add invaluable cultural heritage as a
target of attacks and as a source of terrorist financing
through smuggling and trafficking, thereby causing
heavy losses to human civilization. The international
community needs to scale up its support for countries
in conflict areas and cut off the channels for terrorist
groups smuggling and trafficking in cultural heritage
in a joint effort to protect cultural heritage against harm
caused by conflict.
First, efforts need to be scaled up to support States
in situations of conflict in building up their national
capacity for protection. Countries in conflict areas
need to focus more attention on the protection of
their cultural heritage, formulate relevant protection
policies, establish early warning mechanisms, join
relevant international cooperation frameworks and
continuously enhance capacity-building for the
protection of cultural heritage in armed conflict.
The international community, while respecting the
sovereignty of the countries in conflict areas, needs

Thirdly, international cooperation should be
further strengthened. All countries should strengthen
cooperation in the field of cultural heritage protection
and cooperate in information-sharing and law
enforcement cooperation in the fight against the
destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups and in situations of armed conflict.
The United Nations, the Security Council and the other
specialized agencies, such as UNESCO and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, should leverage
their respective professional advantage and strengthen
their coordination in accordance with the division
of labour to form an international synergy for the
protection of cultural heritage in conflict areas.
China has been actively supporting and
participating in international cooperation on
endangered cultural heritage and will continue to work
with the international community to make a positive
contribution to the prevention of the destruction and
trafficking in cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States thanks the Governments of France and Italy
for taking the initiative to rally the international
community to protect our world’s common heritage
from being used to further armed conflicts.
Over the past two decades, we have seen damage
to and destruction of our shared cultural heritage on
an unprecedented scale. Those engaged in conflict and
terror deliberately destroy cultural property to create
fear, undermine Governments and cause animosity
among different groups within a society. The wanton

17-0783417/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

devastation by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Al-Qaida and others in Iraq and Syria, by the
Taliban in Afghanistan, and by other groups elsewhere
has taken a devastating toll not only on human lives, but
also on our common cultural heritage. This destruction
tears at the very fabric of our societies.
The policy of the United States Government
is clear. The unlawful destruction or trafficking of
cultural heritage is deplorable. We unequivocally
oppose it and we will take all feasible steps to halt,
limit and discourage it. The United States seeks to
hold accountable those who engage in the illegal trade
of cultural property and the perpetrators of deliberate
cultural heritage destruction.
Enhanced international law enforcement cooperation
to counter these destructive and destabilizing activities
is already showing results. For example, the United
States shared information with our international
partners about the activities of the deceased Abu
Sayyaf, a former high-ranking ISIS official who was
responsible for financing the group’s terrorist activities,
including through the illicit sale of antiquities. Growing
international coordination and cooperation among law
enforcement and other agencies enabled the United
States to take direct action in order to seek the recovery
of these items.
We believe that there are no one-size-fits-all
strategies for cultural heritage preservation in armed
conflict. Complex situations around the world warrant
a variety of responses. Many States have demonstrated
the ability to safeguard their cultural treasures in
conflict zones during times of crisis. It is a longstanding United States policy to preserve cultural
heritage in situ whenever possible, thereby avoiding
the need to remove cultural property from its country
of origin.
The United States looks forward to strengthened
international cooperation and to finding new channels
of cooperation for the protection and preservation of
cultural heritage in armed conflicts in order to preserve
this priceless inheritance for future generations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) on the protection of
cultural heritage in the event of armed conflicts and we
appreciate the efforts of France and Italy in facilitating
the negotiations on the resolution as co-pen holders.
I also wish to thank the presidency for making all
this possible.
18/22

24/03/2017

In light of the increasing intentional attacks on
cultural heritage by armed groups and terrorists, the
adoption of this resolution represents a very important
step in addressing a problem, which calls for a far more
strengthened international cooperation. The resolution
indeed has clear added value for it complements existing
international legal instruments in the protection of
cultural heritage.
We express appreciation to all the briefers: UnderSecretary-General Feltman, Director-General Bokova,
Executive Director Fedotov and Brigadier General
Parrulli for sharing their perspectives on the topic
of our discussion. I want in particular to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to DirectorGeneral Bokova for the major and critical contribution
she has been making to ensure that UNESCO succeeds
in carrying out its mandate. We are indeed grateful for
this is a historical period when so much is going on to
undermine our common humankind.
UNESCO is the custodian of that shared heritage.
We have all witnessed in recent years armed groups and
terrorists actively engaging in the looting, theft, pillage
and destruction of cultural heritage as a war tactic and
means of terrorizing the civilian population. They have
also been involved in the illicit trade of cultural property
to finance and support their activities and fuel conflict.
International law makes it an obligation to safeguard
and respect cultural heritage in the context of armed
conflict. That includes taking all necessary preventive
measures to protect cultural heritage in peacetime,
refraining from attacking it and prohibiting any form
of its pillage or destruction. It is in that context that the
role of the Security Council could be both important
and relevant. The primary responsibility of the Security
Council in ensuring international peace and security
demands that it not remain indifferent when armed
groups and terrorists target the collective heritage of
humankind that is symbolic of our common humanity.
International law provides special protection for
cultural heritage, as well as civilian property. As such,
States are required to take all the necessary measures
within the framework of their criminal legislation
to prosecute and criminalize individuals, groups or
entities responsible for such crimes. Special care must
be taken in military operations, including by United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to avoid damaging
cultural heritage. The Security Council should further
strengthen its work to ensure compliance with the
obligation on the part of States to prohibit, prevent and
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

stop to any form of theft, pillage or misappropriation
of cultural property in the context of armed conflict by
armed groups and terrorists. In that regard, the role of
Security Council Committees on counter-terrorism will
be critical. Though they are narrow in scope compared
to the resolution that we have adopted today, ensuring
the full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015) and
2322 (2016), will also be significant.
Such efforts could be complemented by initiatives
and cooperation among Member States in various
United Nations forums. For instance, Ethiopia, in
collaboration with other countries, joined an initiative
to bring the issue of cultural heritage to the attention
of the Human Rights Council, which resulted in the
adoption of the action-oriented resolution 33/20, which
we will continue to follow closely. Such efforts could
be further complemented by bilateral, regional and
international cooperation among States, including
in the context of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, UNESCO, INTERPOL and other relevant
international and regional frameworks. The Council
might also consider mandating United Nations
peacekeeping missions so as to protect cultural heritage
from being attacked by armed groups and terrorists,
based on the experience gleaned from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and where such mandates are deemed
necessary and feasible.
Finally, as home to eight cultural World Heritage
Sites, Ethiopia attaches great importance to the
protection and preservation of cultural heritage. We have
indeed been shocked and dismayed by the destruction
of cultural heritage in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, Mali
and other parts of the world by armed groups and
terrorists, which is an affront to all humankind. Our
briefers have highlighted that last point in a very vivid
and palpable manner. We therefore earnestly hope that
the resolution that we have unanimously adopted today
will contribute to safeguarding cultural heritage and
countering the illicit trafficking of cultural property in
the context of armed conflict.
It was a great opportunity for us to be able to
co-sponsor resolution 2347 (2017).
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to join others in thanking the briefers — Mr. Feltman,
Ms. Bokova, Mr. Fedotov and Brigadier General
Parrulli — for their insight on this important topic. I

S/PV.7907

welcome the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) and
commend the leadership of Italy and France in that
regard. The resolution is a significant step forward on
this subject leading to concrete actions.
We are witnessing tragic instances in which cultural
heritage is targeted to be deliberately destroyed, looted
and smuggled by terrorist groups for the purpose of
achieving or advancing their nefarious goals. Japan
shares the widespread concern about the situation
and strongly condemns those acts. The international
community should promptly and collectively respond to
that challenge, and I would like to state several insights
that Japan emphasizes in that regard.
First, the universalization of the international
frameworks to protect cultural heritage is crucial.
Japan is a State party to the Second Protocol to the
Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
the Operational Guidelines for the Implementation
of the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property of 1970, and other
related conventions. Under those legal frameworks,
Japan introduced various domestic measures to prevent
the illicit trafficking of cultural heritage. I would like
to call on other States that are not yet party to those
conventions to join us in our efforts.
Secondly, we should support the meaningful
activities of UNESCO in the area. Accordingly,
Japan established the Japanese Funds-in-trust for the
Preservation of World Cultural Heritage, and we have
thus far contributed $68 million to that fund. Through
UNESCO, we have supported many projects in conflict
areas, including Afghanistan, Cambodia and Iraq.
Furthermore, I would like to underline the importance
of the documentation and archiving of data related
to cultural heritage. That would help minimize the
potential damage by terrorist groups as well as facilitate
criminal justice procedures.
Moreover, we should focus on capacity-building
efforts. It is vital to foster human resources in targeted
countries for the protection and restoration of cultural
heritage. Training in such areas as theft prevention,
early warning and the relocation of cultural heritage
in armed conflict must be carried out for the sake
of preparedness. Sharing best practices and lessons
learned among intelligence organizations such as
UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and

17-0783419/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

Crime and INTERPOL is particularly relevant in
that respect. I am convinced that implementing such
measures would contribute to preventing terrorist
groups from achieving their goals.
Japan has been actively engaged in international
cooperation since the early post-war period. The
Japanese people understand how cultural heritage
enriches our minds and lives through teaching us about
our past. To steal or destroy cultural heritage is to steal
or destroy our past and future. It is therefore clear that
such actions seriously undermine international peace
and stability.
Japan stands ready to continue working together
with the other Member States and international
organizations to preventing such atrocities.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Conference on Safeguarding Endangered Cultural
Heritage, held in Abu Dhabi from 2 to 3 December
2016 on a joint initiative of France and the United Arab
Emirates, has already allowed us to broaden the scope
of our reflection on the crucial importance concerning
the protection of cultural heritage in areas of conflict.
It is a major challenge for which the international
community — beginning with the Security
Council — must quickly find a rapid and coordinated
response. I would therefore like to enthusiastically
commend France and Italy for their leadership with
regard to that initiative, as well as you, Sir, for having
organized this meeting allowing us to follow up.
I would also like to thank the following briefers for
their respective quality briefings: Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Ms. Irina
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; and Brigadier General
Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander of the Italian Carabinieri
Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage.
I believe that, on a similar tack, this would be
an appropriate juncture to pay tribute to the often
anonymous but numerous and important actors who
work tirelessly around the world for the protection and
preservation of the cultural heritage of peoples. In that
regard, I pay particular tribute to UNESCO.
Humankind has been scarred by the massive
and brutal destruction perpetrated by terrorists in
Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq or Libya, as well as in Mali,
where we have witnessed, powerless and alarmed, the
20/22

24/03/2017

destruction of tombs and precious manuscripts that
are often hundreds of years old. I recall that Senegal
actively contributed to the important Saint Petersburg
Declaration of June 2012, condemning the destruction
of the aforementioned tombs.
The spread of armed conflict throughout the world,
exacerbated by the violent extremism advocated by
terrorist groups, whose calling card is the destruction
or looting and trafficking of cultural heritage, is an
aggravating factor of the threat to world heritage. We
must therefore take the physical and symbolic dimension
into account in the international community’s efforts
to adopt new strategies to respond to the destructive
and even nihilist fury of terrorist groups. We therefore
think it important to begin to compile the most precise
inventory possible of cultural goods and objects
of architectural, historical, cultural and religious
importance that have been illegally moved, removed
or transferred from trafficked out of conflict zones.
We must be able to trace such objects, in cooperation
with the relevant international institutions, United
Nations agencies and international stakeholders, such
as museums and even private collectors, with a view to
repatriating stolen goods.
Paragraph 4 of resolution 2347 (2017), just adopted,
is key in its stipulation that
“unlawful attacks against sites and buildings
dedicated to religion, education, art, science
or charitable purposes, or historic monuments
may constitute, under certain circumstances and
pursuant to international law a war crime and
that perpetrators of such attacks must be brought
to justice”.
The Senegalese delegation welcomes the recent
decision of the International Criminal Court of
27 September 2016, which for the first time in the
history of humankind identifies the destruction of a
religious and cultural heritage site as a crime of war
and condemns the perpetrators of such atrocious acts
to an exemplary sentence of nine years. That sets an
important international legal precedent.
The protection of cultural heritage is first and
foremost the responsibility of the State custodian. The
United Nations and other relevant bodies must provide
requesting Governments with the support and assistance
they need to establish national protection mechanisms.
We also welcome the announcement made at the Abu
Dhabi conference that a global fund would be set up to
17-07834

24/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

protect endangered cultural heritage, complementary
to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Fund.
It is also essential for States to strengthen bilateral,
subregional and regional cooperation through joint
initiatives, particularly in the framework of relevant
UNESCO programmes.
Those who have spoken before me have described
as historic the strong and unanimous message that
we have sent through the adoption of resolution 2347
(2017). The resolution strengthens and expands the
scope of similar, existing international instruments,
including resolution 2199 (2015), the 1954 Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, and
the 1972 Convention concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage, not to mention
the relevant provisions introduced by the Security
Council into peackeeping mandates, such as those for
operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Mali.
Resolution 2347 (2017) offers a good road map
and calls for more proactive global mobilization and
multiform and multistakeholder cooperation. For all
of those reasons, the delegation of Senegal supproted
the adoption of the resolution in co-sponsoring it and
voting in its favour.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin by thanking our briefers this morning,
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2347
(2017) and paying tribute to France and to Italy for
bringing this issue to the Council.
Today, all our briefers and all members of the
Council have really brought home the sheer scale of the
problem that we face. Whether in Timbuktu, Palmyra
or Bamiyan, this is an issue that goes beyond statues,
beyond artefacts and beyond museums. What we are
witnessing is a systematic and corrosive assault on
history, religion and the very fabric of identity. What
we are witnessing is, in many cases, war crimes.
This is not just wanton pillaging and vandalism; this
is a matter of international peace and security. Stolen
statues in Syrian and Iraq do not just line the pockets
of opportunists and looters; they provide a source of
revenue for Da’esh. And in the region, the destruction
of religious and cultural sites is about more than just
bricks and mortar. Sectarian division can be fuelled by

S/PV.7907

pickaxes and sledgehammers, just as it can be by bullets
and by guns.
So let us respond to this cultural destruction with
the same intensity and the same unity of purpose as
we do to any other threat to international peace and
security. Though this resolution today, we have taken
a step forward in doing so. The unanimous adoption
of the resolution shows the strength of our resolve
and of our condemnation of such actions. It shows
our commitment and determination to act against
perpetrators so that we can combat terrorism, prevent
conflict and protect vulnerable communities.
But as with so many issues before the Council,
implementation is now needed. The United Kingdom
will do its utmost to do so. That is why we have
established a $30-million cultural programme fund
to support projects that help to foster, safeguard and
promote cultural heritage in countries affected by
conflict. These projects are helping complete the
new museum in Basra, helping to protect heritage
and traditional crafts skills in Kabul, and supporting
advanced archaeological techniques and technology for
achaeologists across the Middle East and North Africa.
It is an effort furthered by the British Museum, which is
training Iraqi heritage sector workers so that they have
the skills needed to assess and record the condition of
their heritage sites and carry out rescue archaeology,
as required.
It is already bearing fruit. A participant in the
training has been appointed by the Iraqi state board
to lead the assessment of the site of Nimrud, recently
released from Da’esh control, and another participant is
looking forward to returning to Mosul Museum soon.
But it is not enough to train civilians. It is often the
brave men and women of the armed forces who are at
the front line of the threat against cultural heritage.
That is why the United Kingdom last year set up a
cultural property protection unit so that respect for
cultural property is further integrated into the training
and operations of our armed forces. This includes
respecting domestic and international law, as well as
the obligations of the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and its protocols, which we will ratify shortly.
The action we take as a Council or as Member
States will count for little unless we show that there are
real consequences for those who carry out these acts. To
truly rid the world of this scourge, we need to deter and

17-0783421/22

S/PV.7907

Maintenance of international peace and security

punish as well as prevent. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi was

24/03/2017

the first person convicted by the International Criminal

choose to attack cultural heritage — a warning that the
Council must ensure is heeded.

Court for attacking protected sites, but he cannot be the

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

last. If we are to deter others from following his path, we

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

need to see more convictions and more consequences.
His story should serve as a warning to all those who

22/22

The meeting rose at noon.

17-07834
