S/2006/125

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 February 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 23 February 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 16 February
2006 (see annex), which I received from the Secretary-General of the Council of the
European Union, Javier Solana, conveying the annual report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-25313 (E) 010306

*0625313*

S/2006/125

Annex
Letter dated 16 February 2006 from the Secretary-General
of the Council of the European Union addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period
from 1 January to 31 December 2005. I propose to provide the Security Council
with a written update on the progress of the Mission. I should be grateful if you
would transmit this report to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2006/125

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative
for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union on the activities of the European
Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005
Introduction
1.
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) is the first operation undertaken
under the European Security and Defence Policy. It was initiated with a three-year
mandate starting on 1 January 2003 as a follow-on mission to the United Nations
International Police Task Force.
2.
This report is the fifth update by the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
to the Security Council on the activities of the Mission and covers the period from
1 January to 31 December 2005.

Methodology and staffing
Methodology
3.
The four strategic priorities of the Mission until 31 December 2005 were
institution- and capacity-building at management level; to combat organized crime
and corruption; to develop financial viability and sustainability; and to promote
police independence and accountability. Also in 2005, the Mission continued to
develop and implement its seven core programmes. Their emphasis has been to
support key areas of expertise and capability necessary to elevate policing in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to best European practices, in particular free from inappropriate
political interference. The programmes were developed in partnership with the local
police, the European Commission, other international stakeholders and bilateral
donors. The Mission remains committed to the principle of local ownership,
facilitated through the Police Steering Board, which consists of representatives from
all elements of the local police services, mentored by EUPM. The Police Steering
Board has acted as the final arbiter on the design and introduction of the different
projects that make up the seven core programmes.
Staffing
4.
At the end of the last reporting period, EUPM numbered 801 staff (410
seconded police officers, 61 international civilians and 330 national staff). Towards
the end of 2005, the Mission gradually reduced staffing levels, in anticipation of a
refocused mandate (as from 1 January 2006). All 25 European Union member
States, together with nine non-EU contributing States, participated in the Mission in
2005.

3

S/2006/125

Achievements during the reporting period
1.

Institution- and capacity-building
Ministry of Security
5.
The Ministry of Security has responsibility for the political oversight and
direction of the State-level police agencies (State Investigation and Protection
Agency, State Border Service, Interpol). During the last year, the Ministry took
possession of additional office capacity and established internal departments
covering all of its areas of responsibility. EUPM monitored and advised on the
whole process. The Ministry is now also asserting its role in the gathering and
dissemination of information on international cooperation. In July, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers accepted a Strategic Agreement with Europol
presented by the Ministry of Security. The agreement should facilitate the
cooperation of EU members and Bosnia and Herzegovina in preventing and
combating international crime and is to be seen as the first stage in the sharing of
intelligence effectively to combat organized crime.
6.
In 2005, the Council of Ministers decided to establish a Ministerial Council for
Cooperation on Police Matters. Originally established as the Ministerial
Consultative Meeting on Police Matters, the new body has started to work on
improving coordination and cooperation between police agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and adopting decisions and instructions that will be binding for the
Police Steering Board. The Minister of Security chaired the first meeting of the
Ministerial Council in December 2005. The Council has a limited mandate that will
not last longer than the establishment of a final mechanism for cooperation under
the aegis of the ongoing police reform process.
7.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Immigration Law came into effect in August
2005. The Ministry of Security plans to take over the financing of the Immigration
Service from spring 2006. Entities and cantons will play the recruited inspectors for
the first few months, until the Service is properly established. The Ministry agreed
with representatives of the entity and cantonal Ministries of the Interior on the
transfer of staff and handover of equipment and office space to the Service. A
temporary detention centre for illegal immigrants will be fully funded by the
Ministry of Security. The European Commission and the International Organization
for Migration indicated that they would provide financial support for the detention
centre.
8.
Following a proposal of the Ministry of Security, the Council of Ministers
decided, on 22 December 2005, to propose to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to start procedures for the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
police in the United Nations Mission in the Sudan. This follows a previous Bosnia
and Herzegovina contribution to the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor and the present engagement in the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
State Investigation and Protection Agency
9.
Considerable progress has been made in setting up the State Investigation and
Protection Agency (SIPA), conceived as the main agency in the fight against major
and organized crime. The Agency impressively stepped up recruitment efforts

4

S/2006/125

during the year. Parallel to this, an internal SIPA working group — advised by
EUPM — reviewed various books of rules on internal organization and continued to
review the structure of the different departments, their responsibilities and the way
they work with each other. In August, SIPA announced vacancies for more than 250
officers. EUPM closely monitored and advised on the selection and recruitment
process. With the assistance of EUPM, the Agency made important progress in
developing its human resources strategy. Successful recruitment gave a considerable
boost to staffing and capacity levels.
10. Besides the three established regional offices (Sarajevo, Banja Luka, Mostar)
the Council of Ministers decided in December 2005 that the fourth SIPA regional
centre would be located in Tuzla, thus removing one of the last obstacles to the
development of the SIPA regional centre structure. By the end of 2005, the decision
on the final location of the SIPA headquarters was on the agenda of the Council of
Ministers.
11. In July, the SIPA Financial Intelligence Department, seven months after its
inception, was officially invited to become a member of the Egmont Group, a
worldwide network of law enforcement agencies that shares intelligence on moneylaundering. EUPM supported SIPA membership and the Egmont Group’s invitation
to Bosnia and Herzegovina is a clear signal that the Agency’s continued
development is being recognized internationally.
State Border Service
12. The structure of the State Border Service (SBS), including command, rank and
organizational aspects, has been brought in line with the other State-level agencies
and the procedures and powers given to police officers on the border are now clearer
and more effective. EUPM has helped to secure management training for senior
officers and has mentored them in how to apply this knowledge. There has been a
concerted effort on the part of EUPM and SBS to advance project implementation in
order to improve the effectiveness of the Service. This has resulted in an
improvement in management culture and operational effectiveness.
13. EUPM actively worked to overcome the issue of the failure by the Council of
Ministers to appoint a Director for the Service, as this affected the implementation
of the Mission’s projects and was detrimental to development of the agency by
Bosnia and Herzegovina. A resolution was achieved in September, when the High
Representative intervened and appointed Vinko Dumancic as SBS Director, in line
with the law. EUPM publicly made clear its involvement in scrutinizing the
appointment process and its support for the High Representative’s decision. The
appointment immediately generated positive changes in the workings of the State
Border Service.
14. In September, the head of the European Commission delegation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Michael Humphries, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister of
Security, Barisa Colak, signed a memorandum of understanding on European
Commission funding for the construction of the new SBS headquarters near
Sarajevo airport. The European Union will provide €2.9 million for the construction
project, which is expected to take 27 months to complete. The cornerstone of the
new headquarters building was laid on 25 November 2005.

5

S/2006/125

15. Despite the positive developments hundreds of kilometres of the State border
remain not fully secure, owing to a lack of staff and equipment and the
inaccessibility of the terrain. This hinders efforts to fight smuggling and human
trafficking. The possible solutions to reduce illegal border crossings have been
identified. They include the installation of physical barriers, as well as better
cooperation and exchange of information with neighbouring States and the
introduction of modern means of surveillance. EUPM is supporting efforts of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities in this direction.
2.

Fight against organized crime and corruption
16. Key issues in the fight against organized crime, such as the development of the
State Investigation and Protection Agency and the other State-level agencies, have
already been discussed under institution- and capacity-building. In addition, certain
technical developments represent major achievements in this area.
The national intelligence model
17. A nationwide intelligence system has been introduced and during 2005 EUPM
supported efforts to make the system more effective, in particular by ensuring that it
operates across all entities and police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This has
been a delicate issue, owing to a lack of trust between some police officers in
different locations. However, during 2005 police have started to submit information
and regular intelligence meetings are being held in all areas. The intelligence flow is
beginning to work effectively between locations and agencies at all levels, including
between the entities.
18. Various projects at entity and State level have helped to contribute to an
improvement in the culture of intelligence gathering and dissemination, including
the Crime Hotline, which, since its handover to SIPA in spring 2005, is receiving on
average 150 calls from members of the public each day.
19. Intelligence has started to be available online through the use of information
technology systems. The effective gathering and use of criminal intelligence is
recognized by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities as one of the most crucial
tools in any modern police.
National coordination by the State Investigation and Protection Agency
20. Early in October 2005, the SIPA Director, Sredoje Novic, organized a meeting
between the heads of all Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies to
discuss organized crime in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the promotion of cooperation
and arrangements for future activity. All participants agreed on the need for better
procedures to exchange and store confidential information to prevent unauthorized
disclosure. They also agreed to approach EUPM, EUFOR and the Office of the High
Representative with a request for all information these agencies have on organized
crime. Such meetings are now held every month at the level of Directors and Chiefs
of Criminal Investigation Departments.
Operation “Safe Place”
21. The South-Eastern Cooperation Initiative (SECI) Regional Centre operation
“Safe Place”, focusing on combating the smuggling and illegal possession of small

6

S/2006/125

arms and ammunition across 12 member countries, ended on 31 August 2005. The
final report noted that most Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies
participated in the operation, and Bosnia and Herzegovina achieved the best results
of all the participating countries as far as seizures of weapons are concerned.
Throughout 2005 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to provide
information on illegal weapons. The Regional Centre, in a letter to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Minister of Security, praised the efforts of the law enforcement
agencies. The SECI operation has been carried under full Bosnia and Herzegovina
ownership. In parallel EUFOR and local police also cooperated in regular “Harvest”
weapons collection operations. EUPM has continued to encourage and to monitor
weapons collection activities by local police.
3.

Financial viability and sustainability of the local police
Police budget
22. To help achieve financial viability and sustainability of the local police, EUPM
has made progress in developing local capacity regarding salary scales, budget
planning for organizational units, revising maintenance costs of premises,
rationalization of the use of police equipment, control over inventories and payrolls,
and general budget implementation and management. Staff at the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska Ministries of the Interior were
trained in handling budgets at a local level, in particular in matching operational
planning and budget management. Progress in this area will enable the Public
Security Centres in the Republika Srpska and the Police Administration in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry to operate using improved fiscal
methodology in 2007.
23. EUPM is seeing the first encouraging results of the implementation of its
austerity financial action plan for the Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement
agencies. The savings and unspent funds foreseen in the Action Plan were
earmarked to renovate run-down premises in many locations, change costly
electrical heating systems and renew the vehicle fleet through the auctioning of
older vehicles. However, these achievements call for careful reflection. The project
demonstrates that improving the capital investment budget lines can only be
achieved through fostering a streamlined savings plan combined with a policy of
internal transfers between budget lines. More savings are expected from the
procurement of standardized police equipment. A EUPM programme working group
helped to elaborate a list of equipment, which the Police Steering Board later
approved, and is now awaiting approval by the Ministerial Council for Cooperation
on Police Matters.
24. The State Investigation and Protection Agency managed to get the approval of
the Ministry of Finance and Treasury for the transfer of KM 6 million from the
salary budget for capital expenditures. The assessment and support of EUPM was
crucial, allowing SIPA to alleviate the budget shortfall in capital expenditure and the
lack of equipment that goes with this. The funds were used to purchase weapons,
uniforms, vehicles and other specific equipment for the new Special Support Unit.
The Unit was set up in September 2005 to provide police tactical support capacity to
other SIPA units, and has since been involved in a number of operations.

7

S/2006/125

25. Finally the book of rules on salaries of police officials of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was adopted and entered into force on 1 January 2006. Police salaries
are now linked to rank and not to position held. This will be a model for the future
regulation of salaries as agreed under the ongoing police restructuring process.
4.

The development of police independence and accountability
26. Also in 2005, EUPM continued to monitor meetings and decisions of the
Independent Selection and Review Boards. Cantonal Police Commissioners’
assessments were also reviewed.
27. The appointment of Directors of SBS and SIPA in the autumn, followed by the
appointment of other senior managers, helped to unblock a number of issues
affecting developments in independence and accountability in these law
enforcement agencies, most notably in SBS where the new leadership oversaw
decisions to finalize the drafting of a new book of rules.
28. The adoption and acceptance by the Republika Srpska National Assembly of
the three EU basic principles on 5 October, namely (i) all legislative and budgetary
competences for all police matters must be vested at the State level; (ii) there must
be no political interference with operational policing; and (iii) functional local
police areas must be determined by technical policing criteria where operational
command is exercised at the local level, was an important step towards this strategic
priority and will advance the process of police restructuring (see below).

Other key contributions of the Mission
Police restructuring
29. Upon the request of the Chairman of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of
Ministers, the High Representative/European Union Special Representative
established a Police Restructuring Commission in July 2004, which included the
EUPM Head of Mission. The Commission was tasked to produce recommendations
to establish a single and effective police structure under the oversight of a ministry
or ministries in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers.
30. Political representatives of the Republika Srpska resisted some key elements,
which prevented the full report of the Police Restructuring Commission being
agreed upon by all members. Therefore, the Chairman of the Commission, Wilfred
Martens, presented a report to the High Representative/European Union Special
Representative in January 2005. In response, the European Commission reiterated
its three key principles for reform mentioned above (para. 28).
31. Following a EUPM/Office of the High Representative public information
campaign on the report of the Police Restructuring Commission, political
consultations started in April 2005. Political party negotiations however did not
reach agreement, culminating in the decision of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly to reject any restructuring model where local police organization would
cross the Inter-Entity Boundary Line.
32. After months of deadlock and pressure by the international community, the
Republika Srpska National Assembly in October 2005 adopted the Agreement on
Restructuring of Police, thus removing one of the last obstacles for Bosnia and

8

S/2006/125

Herzegovina to start negotiations with the European Union on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. In the period following the agreement, EUPM and the
Office of the High Representative/European Union Special Representative
developed a framework for the establishment of the Directorate for Implementation
of Police Restructuring. As from January 2006, the EUPM Head of Mission,
Brigadier General Vincenzo Coppola, will be a member of the Directorate’s steering
board with a casting vote, serving as the representative of the European Union and
the international community. A technical executive body will ensure preparation of a
phased implementation plan by the end of September 2006.
Security arrangements for Srebrenica commemorations
33. EUPM monitored and advised on the preparation and implementation of
security measures, witnessing well-organized and coordinated policing by the
Republika Srpska police, together with the Federation Police, SIPA, SBS, the
Ministry of Security and the Office of the State Prosecutor, which provided a safe
and secure environment for the commemoration activities from 8 to 11 July 2005.
EUPM coordinated closely with EUFOR, which provided contingency security.
Cooperation with other international actors and European Union coordination in
Bosnia and Herzegovina
34. The work of the European Union Police Mission involves close cooperation
with international partners, particularly the Office of the High Representative/
European Union Special Representative. Close cooperation is maintained with
OSCE, UNHCR, the International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance
Program and others.
35. Within the European Union, the Mission coordinates closely with the
European Commission. In September, the European Union Special Representative,
EUPM and EUFOR agreed on principles aimed at strengthening and increasing
trilateral cooperation and coordination and at further clarifying and delineating the
respective roles and tasks of EUFOR, EUPM and the European Union Special
Representative.
36. Consequently, EUPM began to take a more proactive approach and took the
lead in coordinating policing aspects of efforts under the European Security and
Defence Policy in the fight against organized crime in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
EUFOR has also begun further to coordinate and align its anti-organized-crime
operations with EUPM.
Returnee forums
37. Ensuring the sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons, and in
particular their security, continues to be a priority for the international community
and domestic authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The matter is addressed by
EUPM, notably under the community-policing project, alongside the support for
specific returnee forums. The EUPM returnee forum initiative has helped to bridge
the gap in the communication between citizens, the police, the judiciary and local
authorities.

9

S/2006/125

Police certification
38. On 25 October, the European Commission for Democracy through Law (the
“Venice Commission”) rendered its opinion on a possible solution to the issue of
decertification of police officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, concluding that the
International Police Task Force, while implementing the vetting procedure of local
police officers, failed to provide the relevant police officers with a public,
adversarial, impartial and independent examination of their rights. The review
mechanism appeared to be abortive for the larger part. The Venice Commission
therefore recommends that the United Nations carries out a review process of the
decisions that deny certification and that have been challenged before domestic
authorities after the end of 2002.
The refocused mandate
39. By a Joint Action of 24 November 2005, the Council decided that EUPM
(established initially from 2003-2005) shall be continued from 1 January 2006 to
31 December 2007 in a refocused manner. EUPM, under the guidance and
coordination of the European Union Special Representative and as part of the
broader rule of law approach in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region, will aim,
through mentoring, monitoring and inspecting, to establish in Bosnia and
Herzegovina a sustainable, professional and multi-ethnic police service operating in
accordance with the best European and international standards. The police service
should operate in accordance with commitments made as part of the stabilization
and association process with the European Union, in particular with regard to the
fight against organized crime and to police reform. EUPM will operate in line with
the general objectives of annex 11 to the Dayton/Paris Agreement and its objectives
will be supported by European Community instruments. Under the direction of the
European Union Special Representative, EUPM will take the lead in the
coordination of policing aspects of efforts under the European Security and Defence
Policy in the fight against organized crime. It will assist local authorities in planning
and conducting major and organized crime investigations. Brigadier General
Vincenzo Coppola from Italy was appointed Head of Mission/Police Commissioner
as from January 2006. He took over from Commissioner Kevin Carty (Ireland) who
was Head of Mission from March 2004 until December 2005.

10
