S/2010/325

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 14 June 2010 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Afghanistan from 21 to 24 June 2010. The mission will
be led by Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan of Turkey.
As previously and duly mandated by the Security Council, the mission will
conclude in Istanbul on 24 June, where the Government of Turkey will take over as
the host of the informal Security Council retreat on peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The retreat is expected to benefit greatly also from the insights and
experiences that the participants will have gained during the Council’s mission to
Afghanistan.
The members of the Council have agreed to the attached terms of reference for
the mission (see annex). The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting (Austria)
Ambassador Mirsada Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
First Secretary Christiano Sávio Barros Figueirôa (Brazil)
Ambassador Wang Min (China )
Ambassador Gérard Araud (France)
Ambassador Emanuel Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon)
Ambassador Yukio Takasu (Japan)
Ambassador Nawaf Salam (Lebanon)
Ambassador Claude Heller (Mexico)
Ambassador Raff Bukun-Olu Wole Onemola (Nigeria)
Ambassador Alexander A. Pankin (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan (Turkey)
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom)
Ambassador Susan E. Rice (United States)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Claude Heller
President of the Security Council

10-41588 (E) 220610

*1041588*

S/2010/325

Annex
Security Council mission to Afghanistan, June 2010
Led by Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan (Turkey)
Terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s continued support for the Government and
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy and assume their rightful place in
the community of nations.
2.
To review the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of the international community, including through capacity-building
initiatives, in addressing the interconnected challenges in the areas of security,
governance, rule of law, human rights, women’s rights and the empowerment of
women, the protection of children affected by armed conflict, economic and social
development, regional cooperation and counter-narcotics.
3.
To assess the status of implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1806 (2008), 1868 (2009) and 1917 (2010), as
well as of mutual pledges and commitments made by the participants to the London
and Istanbul conferences held in 2010, and looking ahead to the Kabul conference.
4.
To underline the central and impartial role that the United Nations continues to
play in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan by leading the civilian efforts
of the international community and to express strong support for the ongoing efforts
of the Secretary-General, including regarding staff security, and of his new Special
Representative for Afghanistan, to reiterate the priorities set out by the Security
Council in its resolution 1917 (2010) and to display solidarity with the women and
men of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
5.
To review the implementation of the key coordinating role assigned to
UNAMA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General by the Security
Council in its resolution 1917 (2010), taking into account the need for a
comprehensive approach and the principle of reinforcing the transition towards
Afghan ownership and leadership.
6.
To review efforts by the Afghan authorities, in support of an Afghan-led
development and stabilization process with the assistance of the international
community, to address the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan posed
by the Taliban/Al-Qaida, illegal armed groups, criminals and those involved in the
narcotics trade and in the diversion of chemical precursors.
7.
To reaffirm the importance of the effective implementation of measures and
application of the procedures introduced by the Security Council in its resolutions
1267 (1999), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) and other relevant resolutions, and to
express support for the cooperation of the Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA
with the relevant Security Council sanctions committee.
8.
To review the humanitarian and development situation in the country,
including the efforts to increase the proportion of development aid delivered
through the Government of Afghanistan and the role of the provincial reconstruction
teams, taking into account the development priorities of Afghanistan.

2

10-41588

S/2010/325

9.
To assess the cooperation, coordination and mutual support between UNAMA
and the International Security Assistance Force, including on humanitarian and
human rights issues and in supporting the electoral process in accordance with their
respective mandates.
10. To assess the preparation of legislative elections to be held later in 2010, as
well as their credibility, safety and security.
11. To reaffirm the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation and
dialogue as an effective means to promote governance, security and development in
Afghanistan.

10-41588

3
