UNITED NATIONS

th

MEETING:

29 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2339) , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) . , . . . .

I

S/PV .2339

c

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Sllpplernents of the Oflkial litx~ds
qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisiorls uJ’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2339th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 29 March 1982, at 3.30 P.m.
President:

Mr. Charles M. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America).

fresenr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda12339)

1,

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/14913)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Grenada, India, Iran, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Mozambique,
Nigeria,
Seychelles and Yugoslavia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Krishntrn (India), Mr. Rcljaie-Kho~Nssani
(Iran), Mr. Srithirath
(Lao Peopk&s Dernouati~
Republic), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique),
Mr. MaitarnaSule (Nigeria),
Ms. Gonthier
(SeycheNes) and
Mr. Kornatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

was called to ordes at 4.20 pm.

1. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I wish to inform members of the Security Council that the President of the Security Council regrettably finds it impossible to attend this meeting. In view
of the desire as expressed in consultations this morning
to proceed this afternoon with a meeting on the item
before us, I shall preside over this meeting of the
Council.

4. Mr. OZORES TYPALDOS
(Panama) (interpretation fi~t)m Spanish): My delegation is pleased to
congratulate Mrs, Kirkpatrick,
President of the Council for the month of March, on the diligent manner in
which she has been carrying out her tasks, which has
been of great benefit to the Council’s work.

Adoption of the agenda
5. The delegation of Panama also wishes to express
its sincere gratitude to Sir Anthony Parsons for the
excellent work he did while he was President during
the month of February.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913)

6. Taking part last year in the general debate at the
thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly,’
the
President of the Republic of Panama, Mr. Aristides
Royo, devoted special attention to the situation in
Central America, emphasizing the seriousness of the
crisis and warning of the danger that the crisis would
worsen if negotiated political solutions to put an end to
conflict in the region were not urgently found,

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2335th and
2337th mertings],
I invite the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives
of Angola, Argentina, Cuba, Honduras, Mexico and Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. Unfortunately,
definite progress on the path
towards solutions has not been made, and we find ourselves today faced with an exacerbation of tensions
and a growing deterioration
in the political climate of
the region, which may endanger international
peace
ahd security.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. D’Escoto
Bsockntann (Nicaragua) took a place at the Corrncil
fable; Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Rota (Argcntina), Mr. Rotr Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Caries (Honduras),
kf’~. MurZoz Leedo (Mexico) and Mm. Ngrrym Ngoc
1

8. Panama, which is linked to the peoples of Central
America by geographical, historical and cultural ties,
but especially by unflinching brotherhood, regards the
critical situation they are undergoing as though it were
its own, and expresses its readiness to make a constructive contribution
to the solution of the problems
of the region, which are also our own.

“The key to the solution of the immense problems
that overwhelm the large majority of the countries
of the third world lies in the fact that true peace is
indivisible
from social justice. Wherever there is
want, disease, ignorance
and unemployment,
wherever there is hopelessness, there wil1 be violence in one form or another: the violence of hunger,
uncertainty,
homelessness, the violence of privileges and the violence of those who uphold them
by refusing to make the necessary changes and,
finally, the violent rebellion of the wretched and the
forgotten who can no longer wait forever for peaceful change.“4

9. We have listened with great interest to the statement by the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of
National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra [2335th rnecfing],
as well as
to the statement of the representative of the United
States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick
[ihid.]. My delegation
firmly believes that as a starting point it is essential
to have the strictest adherence to and observance of
the fundamental
norms of internationai
coexistence
embodied in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and further developed by the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, when it
adopted the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security” and the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nati0ns.j

14. My delegation continues to believe that conflicts
and regional tensions can still be solved by means of
an ensemble of negotiations and political commitments that would avoid a greater degree of confrontation, the scope and consequences of which would be
disastrous for the region, the continent and the world.
15. In this connection, my Government expresses its
support for the peace initiatives proposed by the GOVernment of Mexico, which we believe offer a vaIuable
starting-point
whose further development would permit movement towards solutions that would be encouraging and constructive for detente, peace and devel.opment in the region.

10. In this connection, we attach special importance
to the right of peoples to self-determination,
to full
respect for the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, to sovereign equality among States,
to non-interference
in the internal affairs of other
States, to the non-use or threat of use of force in international relations, to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the right of every people to determine
and freely promote its political, economic, social and
cultural system. Today more than ever before that
set of principles acquires the force of a categorical
imperative that all States are obliged to heed in the
interests of peace.

16. We have also taken note, with great interest, of
the peace proposal made last week by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Honduras [S//&/Y,
nnnc~x]. That
proposal and the five-point proposal by the Government of Nicaragua [S//489/] confirm our conviction
that there is a common desire to find peaceful solutions to Central American conflicts.
17. We are aware that the attainment of just and
lasting solutions requires a clear political will on the
part of the parties, expressed through a continuous
and systematic negotiating process in which the spirit
of compromise must replace mutual recrimination and
constructive
dialogue must replace verbal belligerence.

11. In the view of my delegation, Central American
problems are not implants from the East-West confrontation, nor can they be resolved in such a context or through meddling with the poles of that dichotomy. We consider it artificial and facile to ascribe the
social and political crisis in Central America today to
foreign influences or infiltration,
in an effort to dis. regard or conceal its true, deep causes, peculiar to
each country, which have to do with dramatic imbalances and social injustices and the situation of poverty
and oppression endured by its peoples.

18. In our view, there is only this choice: confrontation or negotiation. In principle and in practice, Panama
rejects confrontation
as a means of solution, and it
therefore does not subscribe to the policies of force,
threats or blockades, or any other form of coercion
or direct, indirect or covert intervention in Central
America or anywhere else in the world.

12. It is precisely the struggle of the peoples of Central America to change those circumstances of exploitation and serfdom and to win social justice, human
dignity, freedom and democracy that is the characteristic feature of the process of change in Central
America.

19. We unequivocally stand for political negotiation.
We remain convinced that negotiated political sobtions for the differences between Nicaragua and the
United States entail no risks for the national security
or real fundamental
interests of the United States.
To the contrary, pursuing a policy of confrontation
or attempting
to impose a specific formula by force
or from outside entails serious risks for the security
and the interests of the United States as well as of all
the countries of the region.

13. Referring to this question in his statement to
the General Assembly of 30 September
1981, the
President of the Republic of Panama pointed out that:
2

20. On previous occasions, the Government
of
Panama has outlined some points that, in its view,
should be taken into account in the conclusion of an
agreement between the States of Central America and
the Caribbean, regardless of their differences, with a
view to bringing about detente and regional stability.
In certains aspects, they are the same as some recent
proposals, but we feel it appropriate to reiterate them
once again.
21. There must be established a system of agreements for detente among the nations of Central America and the Caribbean, by means of specific and multilateral
commitments
to non-intervention
in the
internal affairs of each of them and respect for the selfdetermination
of each country’s internal system. That
entails, by means of specific and various measures,
respecting the territorial borders between the countries and their respective sovereignties and not contributing in any way to the destabilization of the region
or the internal system of any of its components or
permitting
territory to be used for the launching of
destabilizing
actions against other countries, for arms
trafficking or the training or transit of combatants.
22, It is essential to negotiate a military and political non-aggression and non-interference system with
the participation
of all Central American countries
without exception, as a basis for halting the arms
buiidup in the region and initiating an agreed process
of general disarmament.
A corollary must be the
reduction of their respective military budgets SO that
those resources may be channelled towards the solution of the pressing social problems and the economic
development of each of the countries and of the region
as a whole.
23. The solution of the structural causes of conflicts
requires that every Central American country guarantee the existence of a democratic, pluralistic and
multi-party
system, This implies periodically holding
popular elections in order to guarantee the free and
certain participation of all social and political sectors,
and the enforcement of the results, Another condition is the effective existence of human rights and
political and social rights,
24. Panama believes that the further development of
these ideas should in due time lead us to a major initiative. In this regard, Panama proposes the holding of
a conference for Central American peace, security
and co-operation which would be attended by all the
Heads of State and Government of Central America
and the heads of Central American armies. That initiative should culminate in a multilateral
system of
detente, neutrality, peace, co-operation and development. In keeping with its commitment
to amphictyonic beliefs, Panama offers itself as the venue of
that historic conclave. Holding such a meeting would
be in the best Central American traditions as forged
by the fathers of our country.

25. Further steps towards the attainment of these
initiatives
are needed, given the worrying news of
proposals to recommend the emplacement of foreign
troops in some Central American countries and air
and naval bases in others. To this we should add the
recent carrying out of military manoeuvres in the Gulf
of Mexico by forces belonging to an extra-hemispheric military pact.
26. Of particular concern to Panama is news of the
alleged use of bases within the Panama Canal Zone
to support, execute and co-ordinate actions against
other countries of the region.
27. In this regard, Panama has repeatedly stated that
the use of defence sites within the Panama Canal Zone
must be limited to protecting and defending the interoceanic waterway, in keeping with the letter and spirit
of the Panama Canal Treaties.S Therefore, Panama
wishes to point out that using the territory of the
Panama Canal Zone for purposes and activities different from those agreed upon would entail a violation
of the Torrijos-Carter
treaties, as well as of the regime
of neutrality of the Panama Canal, and would call for
clear condemnation
by the Government
and the
people of Panama.
28. My delegation has no doubt that it is up to the
Council to uphold the primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. The Council must exercise this authority and play its constructive role. This is another opportunity for the Council
to do so. It must contribute to ensuring that the United
States and Nicaragua find a solution to their disputes
by peaceful means. We are certain that the path of
reason and dialectics has not been exhausted. The
parties must make progress towards that end with
flexibility
and mutual respect. The higher interests
of peace demand that.
29. With the right which comes from having been
part of the struggle of the people of Nicaragua and the
right which comes from our traditional
friendship
with the United States, we call upon both to enter
into an open and respectful dialogue leading to a negotiated political settlement of their differences. We
invite them both to take the road of conciliation and
understanding
which, although difficult, will always
be the best.
30. As recently stated by the President of the Republic of Panama: “With valour and with persistent determination, men will not only face the storm but emerge
from it with pride and self-respect.”
31. Mr, de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
(interpretation
jiwn French): Since this is the first
time I have spoken at an official meeting of the Council this month, may I request you, Sir, to convey to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
my congratulations
on her assumption of the presidency, Since this debate began, we
have become familiar with her qualities, and I am sure

that the Council will successfully
under her enlightened guidance.

conclude

wards which the efforts of the international community should be directed not only in Central America
but also elsewhere in the world, are the very purposes
of the United Nations as stated in Article I of the
Charter.

its work

32. I should also like to say how much we valued the
presidency of Sir Anthony Parsons during February.
His universally
recognized competence
and diplomacy, which my delegation has had occasion to appreciate on a number of occasions in the past, made it
possible for the Council fully to discharge its duties.

40. Thus, for example, the French Government
published on 28 August 1981, jointly with Mexico, a
declaration on El Salvador [S/14659, anncjx] and, also
together with Mexico, co-sponsored resolution 361155
on the situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador, adopted on 16 December
1981 by the General Assembly. Now as then, the
restoration of peace and the forging of democracy in
that country necessarily presuppose the participation
of all its representative forces.

33. I have listened with great attention to all previous speakers in the present debate, in particular
Commander
Daniel Ortega, the Co-ordinator
of the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua, who came here to set forth the reasons which
prompted his Government
to call for the convening
of the Security Council.

41. My Government
is aware of the seriousness of
the situation in Central America and considers that
it is by negotiation, by refraining from the use of force
and by the reduction of military forces in that region,
as well as by external economic assistance and structural reforms, that tension can be reduced. That is why
the French Government fully subscribed to the peace
proposals which were presented on 21 February by
President L6pez Portillo. Similarly, President Mitterrand felt that the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which
‘was put forth on 25 February before the Organization of American States (OAS) by President Reagan,
was along the right lines.

34, I have also studied with great interest the arguments advanced by Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
the distinguished representative of the United States.
35. I should like to take advantage of the presence
here of the representative of the Governing Junta of
Nicaragua to tel1 him how much sympathy was aroused
in France by the courageous struggle of his peopIe
to throw off the Somoza dictatorship and my country’s awareness of the sacrifices this cost them.
36. The situation in Central America is too serious
for those countries attached to peace, particularly
ours, not to be concerned about the most appropriate
way of ensuring tranquillity
and strengthening democracy in that part of the world.

42. The situation remains disquieting; that the Council should have been seized of it is fully warranted,
43. In my delegation’s opinion, the Council could
call upon the Secretary-General
to follow develop
ments in the area, investigate the charges made by
both Nicaragua and the United States and report back
to the Council within a fixed deadline of either two
or three weeks.

37. It is thus that we understand the anxiety felt by
a number of American States, including the United
States itself.
38. We also understand the fear that Nicaragua, as
well as other countries in the region, may have regarding their national independence
and territorial
integrity.
Every country has an absolute right to
peace and security, and it is to preserve this right that
the Council should bend its efforts.

44. My delegation is firmly convinced that the serious
problems prevailing in Central America can be solved
only if the political will to do so is shared by all States
and all parties concerned, without any external interference, in a spirit of international
co-operation and
respect for everyone’s independence.

39. France, which is the sincere friend of all countries in that area and which has particularly excellent
relations both with the United States and with Cuba,
cannot claim to speak for either the peoples or the
Governments directly concerned in attempting to find
a solution to problems which everyone has agreed are
complex. This does not prevent us from stating our
point of view, from being active and from supporting
the efforts being made in this area in order to solve
the problems that have arisen there. My country is
always prepared to involve itself in joint efforts to
help maintain international
peace and security, to
respect for the principle of the self-determination
of
peoples, to the solution of international economic and
social problems, and to respect for democracy and
human rights. These aspirations or these goals, to-

45. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian): The
Soviet Union supported Nicaragua’s request to the
Council in connection with the tense situation existing
in Central America. We fully appreciate and indeed
share the legitimate concern of the Government of
Nicaragua in view of the ongoing acts of aggression
which create a threat to the independence and SOVereignty of the countries in that part of the world.
46. The Soviet delegation, like everyone in this
room, listened very closely to the very cogent and
weighty statement made by the Co-ordinator of the
Governing
Junta of Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
4

Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra. We fully agree with his
just and well-developed
argumentation,
which convincingly demonstrated the justification
of the Government of Nicaragua’s request to the Security Council, a body which bears the main responsibility
for
maintaining
international peace and security.

purely of the internal purview of sovereign States has
become a habit with certain Governments?
51. The processes going on in Central America and
in the Caribbean are extremely complex, The peoples
of that region have for a long time now been waging
a stubborn struggle for their political, economic and
social liberation,
for the elimination
of semi-feudal
regimes qnd the domination of oligarchies. A struggle
is being waged for a life of dignity, for bread and for
land. The peoples are attempting to bring just land
reforms into effect. Unfortunately,
the situation in
Central America has been complicated by the intervention of the United States in the internal affairs of
the sovereign countries of that region. An eloquent
example of this is precisely the situation which has
arisen around Nicaragua. The situation in the Caribbean and in Central America has been clearly exacerbated because of the intention of the United States to
undertake practical action to carry out the threats
which are continually being uttered against Nicaragua
by Washington under various pretexts.

47. The numerous facts which he adduced attesting
to the action undertaken by the United States against
Nicaragua are evidence of the presence of a direct
threat to the independence and sovereignty of that
country. With the connivance of the American authorities, there are military training camps in Florida
operating
for Nicaraguan
counterrevolutionaries
who have frequently carried out armed incursions into
the territory of Nicaragua. Similar camps are to be
found in Honduras, where the former Somozists are
arming themselves to the teeth and are being equipped
with the direct participation
and assistance of the
United States. Washington has set up air and naval
bases on the territory of Honduras. United States
warships are cruising off the coasts of Nicaragua.
Nicaragua
airspace has frequently been violated by
American reconnaissance planes. All these and many
other facts, as adduced in the statement of Mr. Daniel
Ortega, provide incontrovertible
evidence that armed
intervention
is being prepared against Nicaragua.

52. The aggressive and interventionist
poiicy of the
United States against Nicaragua is part and parcel of
its overall policy of increasing international
tension
and escalating threats against independent States in
various parts of the world. This American policy is
senseless and extremely dangerous for peace.

48.
At the same time, something else should be
noted. The Nicaraguan people are justifiably concerned about the provocations
which have been
organized against them. Nevertheless, the statement
by the Co-ordinator of the Nicaraguan Junta contained
a number of constructive and positive elements. He
stated quite unambiguously
his readiness to seek a
poIjt.ical settlement to the dangerous situation in Central America.

53. In connection .with the item under consideration,
the Soviet Government
would like to express the
hope that the United States Administration
will, in
the final analysis, realize that the reliable way to
bring about and further develop relations between
States is not through stepping up tension and making
the situation deteriorate as a result of thoughtless
actions with regard to a number of countries, including
Nicaragua, but rather through respecting sovereignty
and removing discord, where it exists, by peaceful
means.

49. We have also listened to two statements made
by the representative of the United States [2335th rind
2337tlz mehzgs].
Neither of those statements essentially made any attempt to rebut the facts, which
indicate broad and overt intervention on the part of
the United States in the affairs of Nicaragua. Furthermore, the representative of the United States even
confirmed
the fact that Nicaraguan airspace has been
violated.
True, by a strange logic these overflights
were described as if they were some sort of natural
phenomenon,
or something practically consecrated
by international
law. One does not need a great deal
of imagination
to realize how the Government of the
United
States would react if such overflights were to
be carried out by Nicaraguans over the territory of the
United States.

54. The General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the USSR, President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union,
Mr, Brezhnev, referring to the deteriorating situation
in the Caribbean and in Central America, made the
following statement on 9 March:
“We are deeply convinced that here as well, the
way to peace and security is to be found not by one
State imposing its will on another, but rather by
actual respect for the right of every people to build
its life in the way it sees fit. This, as we see it, is
precisely the purpose of the peaceful and constructive proposals recently made by the Government of
Nicaragua.

50.
One further point deserves to be made. In the
Nicaraguan
statement, there was nothing pertaining
to the internal affairs of the United States. The representative
of the United States, however, devoted
a considerable
part of her statements to thoughts
about the purely internal affairs of Nicaragua. Does
that not indicate that interference in affairs which are

“That is also the purpose of certain ideas put
forward by the President of Mexico, who expressed
anxiety at the present situation in that part of the
world. We fully understand that the leaderships of
5

Cuba and Nicaragua have seen in these ideas an
attempt to ease tension in Central America. This
would also help to serve the cause of universal
peace. The Soviet Union favours such an outcome.”
55. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Gromyko,
in his talk with the Ambassador of Mexico on 15 March, once again expressed
support for the peaceful initiatives put forward by the
President of Mexico.
56. The Soviet delegation supports the appeal made
in the statement by the Co-ordinator of the Governing
Junta of National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
Mr. Daniel Ortega, to the Security Council to express
its clear-cut support for a peaceful settlement to the
problems of Central America and the Caribbean, its
rejection of the threat or the use of force and its condemnation of any intervention in the affairs of Central
American States.
57. Mr.
AMEGA
(Togo)
(interpretdon
from
Fwzc~~): Mr. President, since I am speaking during
the period when Mrs. Kirkpatrick
is presiding over the
work of the Council, it is a pleasure for me to convey
to her the warmest congratulations
of my delegation
on her assumption of the presidency and on the skill
with which she is conducting our proceedings. Could
it be otherwise? Her impressive intellectual powers as
a university professor together with the humanism
that characterizes her have allowed her quickly to
grasp the usage and customs of diplomatic
life and
have made of her the talented and worthy representative of a country with which my country maintains
good relations of friendship and co-operation.
58. My congratulations
are also addressed to Sir
Anthony Parsons, who left his .imprint as a skilled
diplomat on the Council last month, when he served as
its President.
59. Speaking for the first time before the Council
last January, I stressed my country’s determination
fully to assume its responsibilities
as a member of
the Council.
Those responsibilities
proceed from
those conferred upon this body by the Charter of the
United Nations, and the most important of them is
the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Thus, my delegation could not remain silent about the
complaint by Nicaragua concerning the situation in
Central America-a
situation which contains the seed
of a possible conflagration.
60. In that region of the world, each of the States
involved in the conflict claims to be right. The various
protagonists offer on all sides increasingly conclusive
and convincing proofs concerning the ill will of one
or the other in connection with living in peace with
its neighbour.
Unfortunately,
those proofs are all
hotbeds of tension, factors which unequivocally
threaten the tranquillity
of the region. There have been
reports of acts of violence, of torture, of murder, of

the suppression of fundamental freedoms and, in particular, of threats of aggression.
61. For that reason Togo is concerned, and my
delegation would like to recall that violence elevated
to the point of a system to govern relations among
nations constitutes a serious danger to peace. All
peoples, everywhere, should be free to express their
political choice without any foreign interference.
62, Togo, a country deeply attached to peace and
freedom, believes that relations between States should
be based on respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of each State and on principles
of non-interference,
good neighbourliness,
nonrecourse to force and the peaceful settlement of disputes by means of negotiation-principles
contained
in the Charter to protect the inalienable rights of all
peoples. All States, whether they be large or small,
rich or poor, and whatever their political regime, by
signing the Charter or adhering to it, freely committed
themselves to respecting and defending those principles.
63. That is why Togo joins its voice to those of all
other nations that love peace and respect the principles of the Charter to ask the Council to invite the
parties concerned to search for a negotiated solution
to the situation obtaining in that region of Latin America. As has been rightly stated by General Gnassingbi
Eyadema, President of the Republic of Togo:
“The people of Togo ardently wishes peace and
progress for itself and for all the nations. That peace
must be real and must contribute to the effective
emancipation
of our different nations. That is why,
faced with the disarray in our world which threatens the international
equilibrium,
Togo has always
advocated recourse to fraternal dialogue and permanent consultation in seeking in peace just solutions for the tragic conflicts shaking our world,
which every day result in the loss of human life.”
It is to such dialogue, to such consultation, that I call
upon the parties involved in the complaint brought
by Nicaragua to resort.
64. In that connection, various provisions appear in
the Charter. Thus, in Chapter VI, entitled “Pacific
settlement of disputes”, Article 33 stresses:
“The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international
peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort
to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other
peaceful means of their own choice.”
As one can see, paragraph I of Article 33 of the Charter
opens the way for recourse to regional agencies or
arrangements as a framework for dialogue.

Indeed, Chapter VIII
paragraph 2, states:

of the Charter,

in Article 52,

70. I should also like to express our gratitude to
Sir Anthony Parsons for the skilful manner in which
he conducted the Council’s work during the month of
February.

“The Members of the United Nations entering
into such arrangements or constituting such agencies shall make every effort to achieve pacific
settlement of local disputes through such regional
arrangements or by such regional agencies before
referring them to the Security Council.”

71. The reason the Council is meeting today is the
serious increase of tension in Central America, threatening peace and stability in that region and, consequently, in the world at large. I do not consider it
necessary to describe in detail the situation which led
the Government
of Nicaragua justifiably
to request
the urgent convening of the Council, since preceding
speakers have already done so in a very comprehensive manner.

65. One cannot be unaware of the existence of the
OAS, of which almost all States of the region concerned are members. Those States can therefore apply
Article 52, paragraph 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. The parties must say whether their dispute
has already been the object of settlement efforts within
the OAS. If that is the case, the Council must take
the necessary steps to bring the parties to apply the
provisions of Article 33. If that is not the case, it will
be up to the Council, in accordance with Article 52,
paragraph 3, to encourage examination of the situation by the OAS.

72. We all listened with particular
interest and
attention to the address by Commander Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of
National
Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
which concluded in a convincing and moving appeal for peace
in Central America. I take this opportunity to express
to the heroic Nicaraguan people Poland’s admiration
for their determined efforts to rid their country of the
legacy left by the oppressive dictatorship of Somoza
and by his neo-colonialist
sponsors, a legacy of economic underdevelopment,
poverty, illiteracy,
unemployment and social injustice.

66. In the framework of Article 52, paragraph 2, we
should, however, ask ourselves about the local character of the situation in that region of Central America, bearing in mind the interests and the countries
involved there. Paragraph 4 of Article 52 states that
Article 52 in no way impairs the application of Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter. Now Article 34 of the
Charter leaves open the possibility of the Council’s
investigating
any dispute or any situation which might
bring about disagreement between nations or give rise
to a dispute, in order to determine whether the continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and
security. And Article 35, paragraph 1 states that any
Member of the United Nations may bring any dispute,
or any situation of the nature referred to in Article 34,
to the attention of the Security Council.

73. While my country is located far away from
Central America, we cannot remain indifferent to
threats to peace and international
security, wherever
they may occur. I should like to stress the following
points in that context.
74. First, there is evident tension in the relations
between the United States and Nicaragua,
affecting
the security of Central America and of the Caribbean
Basin. The causes of this crisis have been spelled out
in detail by Commander
Ortega Saavedra. From a
flood of high-level pronouncements
by a number of
United States officials and a large-scale propaganda
campaign against Nicaragua, it escalated to include
such dangerous actions as violations of Nicaragua’s
airspace and acts of sabotage. Likewise, we cannot
remain indifferent to the mass media reports of paramilitary forces being recruited, trained and used in
sabotage raids against various important
targets in
Nicaragua, with the short-term objective of disrupting
the economy and with the ultimate goal of overthrowing the revolutionary
popular Government
in
Managua.

67. Such is the situation before the Council. TWO
options are therefore available to the Council in finding
a solution to the question brought before it by Nicaragua. My delegation hopes that the Council will
act in accordance with its responsibilities.
68. In conclusion,
my delegation calls upon all
States to observe the principles of the Charter more
strictly.
In order to safeguard their independence,
their sovereignty and their freedoms, which are continuously threatened, all States must pool their efforts
on behalf of peace. Only in those circumstances will
their peoples be able to develop fully, with freedom
and dignity, and attain the happiness to which they
aspire,

75. Secondly, we wish to observe that the causes
of the civil war in El Salvador and, in a broader context, the tensions and upheavals in some other countries of the region are deeply rooted in internal issues,
such as economic
backwardness,
extreme social
inequalities caused by narrow oligarchies, poverty and
unemployment.
These factors, nevertheless, did not
arrest the striving of peoples for the affirmation of
their independence
and national identity. We abhor
the suffering and massacres of innocent people in El

69. Mr. WYZNER
(Poland): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to congratulate Mrs. Kirkpatrick on
her assumption of the high office of President of the
Council.
We hope that under her guidance the Council will be able to achieve concrete and positive results
in its work during the current month.
7

80. There exists a vast array of bilateral and multilateral mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and it is for the States concerned to choose
one from among them by a common accord.

Salvador, entangled in a devastating civil war, and we
share the belief expressed by a number of speakers
that a just solution to the problems facing that country must be found by its people themselves through
negotiations with the patriotic forces and without outside interference.

81. It is in that spirit that we have supported the
initiative of the President of Mexico, Mr, Jo& L6pez
Portillo, who has offered the good offices of his country in the search for peaceful coexistence, the strengthening of the principle of good neighbourliness among
States and the enhancing of the security of all the
countries of the Caribbean Basin. Likewise, we welcome the willingness to negotiate with the Government of the United States expressed by the Governments of Nicaragua and Cuba, which was mentioned
among the nine points set out in the address of Commander Ortega Saavedra [2335th meeting, pnrtrs. 75
8-Y]. We are convinced that those nine points constitute a realistic and constructive starting-point
for a
peace-making process in the region.

‘76. Thirdly, we disagree with the tendency to see
events in Central America as a result of-imaginaryCuban, Nicaraguan or other influences, We belong to
those who, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico, Mr. Jorge Castaiieda, wrote in an article
published in The New York Times of 10 March 1982,
“[assess] the situation, not as an ideological tug-ofwar between East and West, but as a popular struggle
for bread and justice.”
77. The steady increase of tensions in the region of
Central America constitutes a clear threat to international peace and security. The unchecked continuation of that situation, which could escalate into a fullfledged armed conflagration,
would seriously affect
the normal conduct of internationat relations, already
endangered as they are by mounting pressure and
confrontationist
policies. We therefore deem Nicaragua’s request of 19 March [S/149/3] for the convening of the Council to be fully justified. The Council should consider the question with all the attention
its gravity calls for.

82. A pronouncement
by the Council for decisive
action along those lines, coupled with its reaffirmation
of the principles of non-use of force and non-intervention, would undoubtedly contribute in a tangible and
meaningful
way to the discharge by the Council of
its primary responsibilities in the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in Central America and
the Caribbean Basin in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

78, There is no sensible alternative to a peaceful
solution of the crisis in the region, taking full account
of the changes that have taken place there as well
as of the legitimate aspirations of the nations of Central America and the Caribbean. All those nations
should be allowed to enjoy fully their sovereign right
to determine
their political,
social and economic
systems without any external interference, as set out,
inter NI~N, in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 31/91 of 14 December 1976, entitled “Non-interference in the internal affairs of States.”

83. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
84. Mr. SRITHIRATH
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interprctrrtion
jbrn French): I presented
my credentials two weeks ago. My first official act in
the United Nations is to speak today in defence of the
cause of the people of Nicaragua, once oppressed and
humiliated,
but today free, independent and worthy
of respect. Indeed, it is a signal honour for the entire
Lao people and for me to perform this highly humanitarian act.

79. The most elaborate and up-to-date presentation
of that concept can be found in the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility
of Intervention
and Interference
in
the Internal Affairs of States, adopted by the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session of 9 December
1981. It solemnly declares, inter’ alia, that

85. Laos and Nicaragua
are geographically
far
apart, but our two peoples are closely linked by the
same oppressive colonial past, the same desire to live
in peace and the same aspirations to freedom and independence. By their resolute self-sacrificing revolutionary struggle against colonialism and neo-colonialism, the Lao people and the Nicaraguan people, like
the peoples of Cuba, Grenada, Viet Nam, Kampuchea,
Afghanistan,
Mozambique,
Angola, Ethiopia and SO
on, have one by one achieved genuine independence,
thus toppling
the entire colonial and neo-colonial
system like a house of cards. The time when powerful imperialism
could willy-nilly lord it over the weak
and poor countries is a thing of the past, because it
is the people itself which forges history.

“No State or group of States has the right to
intervene or interfere in any form or for any reason
whatsoever in the internal and external affairs of
other States”.6
In further elaborating on the basic meaning of this
fundamental
norm of international
law, the Declaration unequivocally
stipulates:
“The duty of a State to refrain from armed intervention, subversion,
military
occupation
or any
other form of intervention
and interference, overt
or covert, directed at another State or group of
States . . +‘r,7

86. However, the imperialists have not yet given up
their attempts at interference and aggression against
8

our countries and other peace-loving countries under
the pretext of defending the so-called “free world”
or of counteracting the so-called “communist threat”.
That is why quite recently, moved by an upsurge of
desperation, they have been doing everything in their
power to recover their lost positions. Thus, we have
witnessed with grave concern the dangerous deterioration of the situation in Central America and the Caribbean, which has been brought about by the imperialist policy of the Reagan Administration
designed,
on the one band, to stem the revolutionary current
and, on the other, to maintain that area which has
been dubbed the “private property of the United
States” under its sphere of exclusive influence, where
it can play the part of international policeman-a
role
which has already long been outlawed by all peoples
wedded to peace and national independence.

92.

And now it is precisely the existence of this
which explains the fact that in the United
States there are camps to train mercenaries and counterrevolutionaries
and that there has been an increase
of subversive activities within Nicaragua.
Furthermore, a day does not pass without United States Government officials making libellous statements about
so-called “foreign military installations”
in Nicaragua
and about respect for freedom or democracy in Nicaragua, and statements threatening interference and
aggression against the people and the Government of
Nicaragua. These practices, which have now become
customary and traditional for the United States and are
intended to prepare international
and United States
public opinion, are quite properly to be interpreted as
a precursor of imminent intervention
and aggression
on a large scale by the United States and its allies
against the peoples of Nicaragua and other progressive
countries in the area. The Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries has on frequent occasions expressed its
serious concern at this explosive situation, which poses
a constant and serious threat to peace and security
in the region and in the world.
/eitmoti\~

87. Thus, to achieve its sinister ends, Washington
has actively bent its efforts to destabilizing the GOVernments of the countries in the region that have come
out in favour of the full exercise of their right to selfdetermination
and national independence, so as to
topple them and replace them by compliant Governments. Hence, we have recently and unhappily witnessed various preparations
and acts of military
training, both in the United States itself and in the
territory of their faithful allies. Those measures have
been accompanied by slanderous propaganda orchestrated by the most conservative United States mass
media. It is to those designs that the peoples of Nicaragua, EI Salvador and other countries of the region
are being subjected. In order to give courage and life
to the reactionary forces which are gradually decomposing, they do not balk at overtly interfering in the
internal affairs of those countries. The most notorious
instance of this is El Salvador, where the purpose is
to try and stifle once and for all the legitimate aspirations of its people to independence,
freedom and
dignity.

93. This warlike posture of the United States Administration towards the people of Nicaragua and other
countries in Central America and the Caribbean
seriously jeopardizes the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations and is an overt violation
of the principles of non-intervention,
non-interference, and non-use or threat of force in international
relations. This violation is all the more serious and
reprehensible in that it has been committed
by the
United States, a permanent member of the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility
under
the Charter of helping to preserve international peace
and security. But the present attitude of that country
has done nothing to help restore peace in that region;
on the contrary, it has brought about a situation of
constant tension, thus posing a serious threat to international peace and security.

88. Let us not forget that the aerial bombings by the
United
States against the territory of Laos from
United States bases located in that area, in 1964, were
explained away by what the United States ‘called the
‘*existence
of Vietnamese troops” or “the communist threat”.

94. In the face of this serious and imminent danger,
it is only right and proper that the Council take up this
vital matter as a matter of urgency, in accordance with
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Under its mandate, the Council
is in fact the only body that possesses the necessary
authority to find a peaceful solution to a conflict of
international
dimensions, In this connection, my delegation fully supports the initiative taken by the Government of Nicaragua in requesting the urgent convening of the Council to take up this matter, and we
welcome the unconditional
readin.ess expressed by that
Government to co-operate fruitfully with the Council
and with all parties concerned so that together they
may find a political solution to the crisis which has so
severely beset Nicaragua, Central America and the
Caribbean. These wise proposals bear ample witness
to the heartfelt desire of the Nicaraguan people to live
in peace and good neighbourliness.

89. Let us not forget that to unleash the air war
against North Viet Nam in 1965 the United States used
as a pretext what it called the “provocations of Vietnamese motor-boats against United States torpedo
vessels in international waters”.
90. Let us not forget that the United States landing
in Cuba in 1962 was explained by the so-called “Cuban
threat against the security of the United States”.
91. And there are many other examples. All this is
the Icitmotiv of all the arguments advanced to justify
United States intervention and aggression against any
Country.
9

b

95. My delegation hopes that the United States is
motivated by the same political will and is prepared
to co-operate sincerely with all countries concerned
in that region in order to bring about a peaceful settlement of this extremely serious issue. Furthermore, if
the United States Administration
is genuinely anxious
to find a remedy to this disquieting situation, as it has
often stated it is, it should immediately
put an end to
its policy of interference and aggression against the
countries of Central America and the Caribbean and,
in the name of peace in that area, should undertake
serious negotiations
with the Government
of Nicaragua and give a positive response to the constructive
proposals submitted
by the President of Mexico,
Mr. Jose Lopez Portillo, with the aim of solving by
means of a negotiated
settlement the fundamental
problems ofcentral America and the Caribbean. These
proposals, which are a fitting basis for a political solution of the problems of this region, have won widespread support among all peace- and justice-loving
peoples of the world, including the people of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

aragua for bringing this question before the Council
for consideration. It is our sincere hope and belief that
the members of this body will deal with this delicate
issue in such a manner that the gloomy atmosphere
threatening security and peace in certain parts of our
world will be defused once again.
100. Having listened with careful interest to the statement made to the Council by Mr. Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of
National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, we believe that
no one in the Council can fail to grasp the essence of
the problem. We all know that lately Central America
and the Caribbean zone has been one of the most
critical foci of tension. It is a zone where the aggressiveness of imperialism
has been sharpened in a vain
attempt to change the march of history of the people
of the region. We witness there a direct confrontation
between the forces of peace and democracy and the
forces of those who are defending the perpetuation of
oppression, repression and exploitation of peoples.
101. The people of Nicaragua, for too long the victims of various manoeuvres and aggressive acts
planned by the imperialists with the aim of impeding
social changes that are now taking place in the country, have been denied the free choosing of their own
destiny. Now that they are engaged in the arduous task
of reacquiring their human dignity and rebuilding their
economy, which was devastated in the years of the
Somoza dictatorship,
it is shameful to witness the
negative reaction of those forces which claim to be
champions of democracy and profess justice around
the world.

96. In concluding,
my delegation
would like to
reaffirm that the people and Government of the Lao
People’s Democratic
Republic feel deep solidarity
with and have unshakable support for the just cause
of the people and Government of Nicaragua, as well
as their efforts at national reconstruction
and their
resolve to defend the impressive
achievements
of
their revolution. The Council, for its part, should take
the necessary steps to remove al these threats of
direct or indirect aggression and seek to safeguard the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Nicaragua as well as of the other countries in the
region. Furthermore,
it should reaffirm the duty of
States to refrain from causing tension and levelling
threats of intervention
or aggression against other
States to the detriment of both regional and international peace and security.

102. The new United States Administration
is trying
to smash the triumph of the people through threats
and economic aggression, even going to the extent of
financing and training dissidents with the aim of destabilizing the Government of Nicaragua.

97. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique.
I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement,

103. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, in condemning these acts of violation, intends to remain
consistent with the key principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

98. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique):
My delegation came
here today to add its voice to those of the noble nations
throughout the world that have promptly and resolutely condemned the constant premeditated
acts of
provocation and violation of airspace and territorial
integrity of the sovereign and independent nation of
Nicaragua. These are in violation of the fundamental
principles of international
law and the sacred principles of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, of
which Nicaragua is a member, The violation of these
principles cannot in any way be conducive to good
relations between nations-a
basic element for mutual
understanding
and co-operation among neighbouring
people and nations.

104. For us in southern Africa in general and in
Mozambique
in particular, this is not a new phenomenon In our own region, we live in a similar situation.
The South African minority racist regime is encouraged and revitalized by imperialists to intervene in the
neighbouring countries where the advocates of imperialism and colonialism
look upon our freedom and
liberty to choose our own destinies as an affront to
their scheme to perpetrate slavery and apartheid in the
area. Encouraged by its supporters, the illegal rCgime
of South Africa continues to challenge the international community
through its occupation of Namibia
and by constantly launching armed aggression against
some of the front-line States and other States of the
region-as
was the case with Seychelles.

99. The People’s Republic of Mozambique wishes to
express its appreciation
to the Government
of NicIO

105. The same situation can be observed in the
Middle East, where the aggressiveness of the Zionist
kgime of Israel is a constant threat to the sovereign
Arab States. South Africa’s racist regime and Israel
are pursuing the same objective of destabilizing their
respective regions with the intention of depriving the
people there of all forms of development.

114. The People’s Republic of Mozambique
would
like to express here its firm and unequivocal support
for and solidarity with the Government
and people
of Nicaragua.
115. The people of Nicaragua, like our own people
and the other peoples of the world, want peace, cooperation and harmony, and continuously
struggle
to achieve the goal of progress for the whole of mankind.

106, The People’s Republic of Mozambique
considers that the United States Administration
should
put an end to its threats against Nicaragua as well as
against the other countries of Central America and
stop supporting the South African racist regime. This
action would help safeguard international peace and
security,

116. As long as the national sovereignty of States
is threatened within southern Africa or elsewhere in
the world, the cry of my people and Government will
continue to be “A llrta contimcu”.

107. The Government
of Nicaragua
has stated
publicly four basic elements in the seeking of peaceful solutions to the tense situation in Central America.
They can be found in the annex to the document circulated under the symbol S/14908 of 17 March.

117. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
118. Mr. MAITAMA-SULE
(Nigeria): It is a great
honour for my country to be invited by the Council
to speak at this meeting, For me it is also a personal
honour and an occasion of special significance, this
being my first statement in any debate in the Council.

108.

The People’s Republic of Mozambique
feels
States Government should accept the
goodwill of the Governments of Nicaragua and Mexico
and others and engage in serious talks to find an adequate solution to whatever misunderstanding
exists in
the region.
that the United

109, We feel that the United States must respect the
right of a people to choose its own social, economic
and political system of development, At this stage of
the twentieth century, we think that any State should
be scrupulous enough not to repeat the mistakes of
the era of colonialism.

119. Having said that, I would request you, Sir, to
pass my congratulations on to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
on her
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. The way she has handled the deliberations of
the Council since the beginning of the month, a month
in which matters of conflicting interest and importance have emerged, is impressive. She has none the
less carried out her responsibilities
with great tact and
diplomacy.

110. We of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
for one, would like to see the Government of the
United States stand on the side of justice in the cases
of Central America, South America, the Middle East
and southern Africa.

120. During February, we witnnc d the greatest art
British, when her
of diplomacy, characteristic of
predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons, was President.
I should like to place on record my great appreciation
of the manner in which he handled the job.
121. I have no doubt that under the leadership of
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
the Council will in this particular case
arrive at a reasonable and realistic decision that will
give the Council credibility in the international
community .

I I I.

The People’s Republic of Mozambique believes
that at its present series of meetings the Council will
take adequate measures to find the right means to overcome the conflict and lead to a constructive and positive dialogue. In so doing, it will concur with the appeal
made by the people of Nicaragua through its highest
representative.

122, Mr. President, I thank you and the other members of the Council for permitting
me to make this
statement on behalf of Nigeria on the situation in
Nicaragua.

I i 2. The People’s Republic of Mozambique supports
the proposals made by the President of Mexico,
Mr. Jose L6pez Portillo, and considers them an important base for the beginning of negotiations.

123. I must say emphatically
that in seeking permission to contribute to the debate it was not Nigeria’s
intention to apportion blame or to condemn one side
or the other. What is needed now is not recrimination, which can only exacerbate tensions, but a concerted effort within and outside the Council to get the
United States and Nicaragua to resolve their dispute
through dialogue. The situation which has been created
by the dispute between Nicaragua and the United

1 13. We of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
in reaffirming our total compliance with the principles
of the Charter, will, as in the past, continue to contribute in the best possible way we can to the search
for a just solution to the serious problems that confront the world today.
11

States has spilled over to the whole of Central America. Peace and security in that vital region of the world
now seems to be in serious danger of being actively
undermined.

129.

LING Qing (China) (interpretofion j?otn
On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish
first of all to congratulate Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick on
her assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month, I also wish to express our appreciation
to Sir Anthony Parsons, representative of the United
Kingdom, for the talent and ski!! with which he discharged his duties as President for the month of February.

124. In the last couple of weeks, Mexico has worked
actively and fervently to mediate between the two
sides. Its efforts deserve the highest commendation,
and it is my hope that peace will be given a chance to
succeed in Central America.

130. We have listened very attentively to the address
made by Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinator of
the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of
Nicaragua,
and the statements made by representatives of various countries. The Chinese delegation
wishes briefly to state its position with regard to the
current situation in Central America.

325. Now, what are the elements of a durable peace
in Central America? The first basic condition is that
the use of force in the present dispute must be abjured
by all the parties concerned. Similarly there must be
no attempt to secure a settlement through threats to
use force or an invasion of Nicaragua. The second
element of a durable settlement is a commitment
by
both sides to engage in direct talks with the objective
of securing a negotiated settlement. It should be noted
that Nicaragua has made a public declaration that it
is ready for direct talks with the United States. A similar declaration
from Washington
would be most
welcome indeed. The third element necessary to
bring much-needed
peace to the region is a multilateral commitment
by a!! the States of the region to
a basic policy of non-interference
in one another’s
internal affairs.

13 1. First, the turbulence and tension now prevailing
in Central America have caused wide concern in the
international
community.
The Chinese Government
and people too are deeply concerned with the developments in that region,
132. Secondly, over a long period of time the Central
American peoples have waged unremitting and arduous
struggles to defend their national independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, free themselves
from external interference,
control and exploitation, achieve social justice and progress, develop their
national economy and improve their livelihood. Under
the leadership of the Sandinist National Liberation
Front, the people of Nicaragua waged a heroic and
dauntless struggle and finally succeeded in overthrowing the Somoza dictatorship rule in 1979. This is
a victory for the Nicaraguan people, whose just struggle has won the sympathy and respect of the Chinese
people and peoples of various countries in the world.

126. It is my conviction that the primary cause of
much tension throughout the world today is the mistaken notion of some Powers that through the use or
threat of use of force they can control events in international relations, and thereby force weak or small
States to develop only along a predetermined
line or
to act in a manner considered to be beneficial to the
imagined interests or security of the big Powers. Yet,
as recent events have shown, the concept of power and
the application of force have become outdated in international relations. Military power is no longer the sole
determinant of relations among States. There are other
important elements of a non-military
character that
determine how States relate to one another. Many
developing countries are no longer willing passively
to accept the dictates of the big Powers. They crave
for themselves the same freedom to determine their
own destinies as the big Powers enjoy. It is therefore
essential that this simple fact be recognized and
accepted as a basic element in international
relations
today.

133. Thirdly, in the interest of alleviating and removing tension in Central America and the Caribbean
area, President Lopez Portillo of Mexico recently put
forward a constructive proposal. This initiative on the
part of Mexico has received serious attention from the
international
community and is welcomed by a!! parties concerned. During the meetings in the last few
days, it has been correctly pointed out by representatives from some non-aligned countries that there are
profound internal and external factors behind the
Central American problem and that it is imperative,
for the elimination
of tension in the Central American region, strictly to abide by the principles stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, the established norms guiding international
relations and, in
particular, the principles of respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of a!! countries, non-interference and non-aggression, non-use or
threat of use of force and negotiated settlement of
disputes between States. They have also made the
just demand that the super-Powers not bring the Central American question into the orbit of their rivalry.
They ardently hope that a negotiated settlement to the

127. Nicaragua must enjoy this freedom to develop
along the lines and in the direction it has chosen for
itself, It is the people of Nicaragua that must determine its destiny, and not outsiders.
i

Mr.

Chirzesc):

128. It is not necessary to approve of Nicaragua’s
internal policies in order to concede to it the freedom
to decide its own future for itself. Nicaragua must have
the freedom which others claim for themselves.
Nothing less than that-and
this applies to a!! the countries of Central America-will
bring peace to the
region.
12

140. As a consequence,
this series of meetings
assumes greater significance. Our collective responsibilities are all the more ponderous because millions
of people, in primitive
agricultural
communities
as
well as in industrialized
societies, are looking towards
the United Nations, and especially the Security Council, as the ultimate guarantors of peace.

present disputes can be found. We maintain that these
propositions and demands from the non-aligned countries are reasonable and their proposals positive; they
should therefore be considered and treated in all
seriousness.
134. Fourthly,
the Chinese delegation deems it
necessary to stress that in order to ease and remove
tension in the Central American region it is of paramount importance to eliminate all interference from
outside, The independence,
sovereignty and territoriaI integrity of all the countries in Central America
should be respected, and the questions concerning
the Central American countries should be settled by
the peoples of that region. We are firmly opposed to
all forms of intervention in the affairs of the Central
American countries, wherever they may come from
and under whatever pretext. Only when intervention
of various descriptions, aggression, the threat of use
of force and infiltrations
are halted and eliminated
can the turbulence in Central America be relaxed.

141. The People’s Revolutionary
Government
of
Grenada does not view this series of meetings as an
opportunity to impugn Governments and peoples, but
rather as a historic vehicle for reaching a common
understanding.
We see these meetings of the Council
as critical and opportune-not
for the purpose of
writing additional chapters in the book of hate, but
rather for recommencing
the noble task of writing
fresh chapters for peace, understanding
and cooperation.
142. I speak in the name of a Government and people whose faith in the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations is deathless. We are
steadfast in the belief that peace is attainable. We are
convinced,
however, that there can be no peace
without justice. Peace and justice have as an indispensable prerequisite
the unconditional
acceptance
of ideological
pluralism and respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Peace will forever be an illusion, a dream, if confrontational
politics and cold-war
sloganeering
supplant dialogue
and rational
and
mature judgement.
No one is entitled to dictate to
another, and we resent the attitude on the part of some
who sermonize about their acceptance of ideological
pluralism and the right to self-determination
while at
the same time attempting
to isolate, victimize and
destabilize those with whom they disagree. There
can be no peace when the powerful seek to foist their
will upon the weak, There will be no peace if we allow
ourselves to believe that the revolutionary
processes
unfolding
in Central America and the Caribbean
originate somewhere else.

J35. Fifthly, with regard to the differences and disputes between the Central American States, we hold
that as these countries all belong to the third world,
there is no conflict of fundamental interests among
them. We hope and also believe that the countries
concerned will be able to solve their differences and
disputes through consultations and negotiations, free
from outside interference and in accordance with the
norms guiding relations between States, as stipulated
in the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular the principles of mutual respect of sovereignty and
territorial
integrity
and non-interference
in each
other’s internal affairs.
136. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Grenada. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
137. Mr. TAYLOR
(Grenada): In the first place,
I want to ask you, Sir, to convey to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
my delegation’s
appreciation for having so kindly
granted our request to address the Council on the
very urgent question before it. I would also ask you
to convey our congratulations to her on her assumption of the presidency for the month of March.
138. I also wish to put on record our gratitude to
Sir Anthony Parsons for his effective guidance of the
affairs of the Council during the month of February.

143, The people of Central America and the Caribbean need peace, We, the sons and daughters of
Bolivar, Marti, Sandino and Fedbn, who for centuries
have been pawns on the diplomatic
chessboards of
insensitive outsiders, make this legitimate
demand:
that we be given the chance to become the masters
and mistresses of our own destinies. Our people do not
possess the means to glorify and romanticize war. To
us, war is not the logical extension of politics. War
spells death and destruction.

139. The Council is deliberating
on the question
before us at a time when the threat of war is greater
in several parts of the world than at any period since
the Second World War. This very unpleasant and
intimidating
reality has very grave implications
for
nations large and small, rich and poor. In the Central
American and Caribbean regions, the threat of war is
especially excruciating, since we the peoples of that
region have been subjected to some of the most barbarous tyrannies that have beset the world.

144. The Nicaraguan people-and,
indeed, all people of conscience in Central America and the Caribbean region-are
incapable of making war, Centuries
of domination and oppression have left them famished
and emaciated.
A people so brutalized abhor war:
a people so victimized do not have any zeal for war;
a people so desirous of changing the realities of hunger, disease, malnutrition
and all the other attendant
manifestations
of underdevelopment
and backwardness are incapable of starting a war.
13

145. My delegation listened attentively to the comprehensive and illuminating
presentation made before
this body on behalf of the Nicaraguan people and all
the peace-loving people of our hemisphere by Comandante Daniel Ortega Saavedra. We were deeply
touched by his eloquence and honesty because we in
Grenada know no people in our region who understand more fully the pathos of war than the heroic
people of Nicaragua. We are therefore honoured to
add our voice to the appeal made by Cornandante
Ortega that

The next speaker on my list
149. The PRESIDENT:
is the representative of Seychelles. I invite her to take
a place at the Council table and to make her statement.
150. Ms. GONTHIER
(Seychelles): Mr. President,
please convey to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
that through our
respective appointments
as heads of missions, the
Republic of Seychelles and the United States of America share a common recognition of the ability of women
to serve in important diplomatic posts.
I5 I. I should also like to congratulate the representative of the United Kingdom on having served as
President of the Council last month. The United Kingdom has been most supportive of the Republic of
Seychelles during its time of need.

“the Security Council . . . issue an explicit pronouncement, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations regarding the obligation to seek by peaceful
means a solution to the problems of the Central
American region and the Caribbean, and , , . call.
on the Council to reject all acts of force or threats
and to repudiate any direct, indirect or covert intervention in Central America.”
[Ibid., pa,-</. 87.1

152. The matter at present being deliberated upon
by the Council is most disquieting to the Government of Seychelles. Indeed, information
we have
received from various sources, including a wide crosssection of the international
news media, does make
us apprehensive about the possibility of a foreign military intervention in Nicaragua, not excluding recourse
to mercenaries,

146. I also avail myself of this opportunity to salute
the historic initiatives taken by the Governments of
France and Mexico in efforts to bring peace to our
region. The People’s Revolutionary
Government
of
Grenada has publicly endorsed the France-Mexican
initiatives for a negotiated political settlement in El
Salvador [S//46.59, cnne.u]. The Government of Grenada has announced its support of the framework for
peace unveiled at Managua on 21 February by the
President of Mexico. Our gratitude to the President
of France and the President of Mexico is eternal.

153. In fact, it was no doubt the reality of such military confrontation
in the region that led the French
and Mexican Governments to state in their joint declaration of October 1981 their categorical opposition
to such a reckless course of action.
154. The threat of foreign military intervention in
the Central American region, and even in the Caribbean, deeply preoccupies the people and Government
of Seychelles. Not long ago, the Republic of Seychelles
was the target of foreign mercenary aggression. We
now know for sure that at least the Pretoria regime
was implicated
in this vile attempt to destabilize the
Seychellois people in their chosen path of political and
socio-economic
development.
Possibly the current
trials of the mercenaries will throw more light on the
involvement
of others in this despicable foreign aggression against an independent and sovereign State. It
is also hoped that the current news blackout of the
trials will not continue.

147. At this juncture, my delegation deems its anuropriate to remind the Council of the proposals for peace
and security in Central America and the Caribbean
issued by our Government. Since the La Paz meeting
of OAS in 1979, we have consistently called upon that
body, together with the United Nations. to declare the
Caribbean a zone of peace. We once again issue an
appeal in order to get urgent Latin American and
Caribbean support to achieve the following: first, prohibit the introduction of nuclear weapons in the region;
secondly, stop all aggressive military manoeuvres;
thirdly, dismantle all foreign military bases that exist
in our area: fourthly, establish machinery to deal with
all forms of aggression, including assassination, propaganda intervention,
diplomatic
and economic aggression and mercenary invasion. It is the considered
view of my Government that the Council should make
a definitive pronouncement
on the question of the use
of mercenaries. The recent experience of the sister
nation of Seychelles serves as a dire warning that certain Governments face serious challenges from hired
dogs of war.

1.55. The Council, in the case of the mercenary
aggression against Seychelles, did assume its responsibilities on 15 December 1981 in a manner indeed
becoming of the judicious role it is called upon to play
in the fostering of peace in the world and of the right
of all sovereign States to territorial integrity. It is
hoped that those responsibilities will be carried out.

148. Today we feel impelled to rededicate ourselves
to the cause of peace. Despite the dark clouds over our
region, we are not discouraged or pessimistic. I assure
you, Sir, and the members of the Council, that my Government will do whatever is possible for the achievement of a just and lasting peace in our region. Let us
give peace a chance.

156. It is the sincere wish of the Government of the
Republic of Seychelles .. .that
- . now being dis.*
.._ in .the case
cussed the Council will likewise duly assume to me
full its responsibilities.
This question concerns the
whole international community, and it must therefore ;
be resolved under the auspices of the United Nations.
To attempt to treat it at another level would be grossly
14

to underestimate the consequences of foreign military
intervention in the region.
157. Injustice, poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy cannot be solved by foreign troops. History has
proven time and time again that a people’s revolution
cannot be quelled by dominance from others. Equally,
history has also shown that revolutions cannot be
exported. A people rises against political, economic
and social conditions it finds oppressive. Revolution
is an indigenous battle: a people fights for a cause;
mercenaries, paramilitary forces and others fight only
for money. No country is fostering any revolution or
insurrection in El Salvador: it is the people there,
rising against oppression. Nicaragua has its own projects and development
plans to right the wrongs of
decades of dictatorship and oppression, wrongs that
were supported, unfortunately, by certain Powers.
158. The Government of the Republic of Seychelles
fully supports the principle of a negotiated political
solution to alleviate current tensions in the region and
to avert a foreign military
intervention. Indeed, much
goodwill and effort have already been channelled
towards such a solution, in particular by some States
of the region, allowing the Government of Mexico to
act as their go-between. However, it is now imperative that direct negotiations take place between the
parties concerned. The Government of the Republic
of Seychelles calls upon the Council to encourage
such a decision.
159, My Government is confident that reason will
prevail in resolving this problem, and appeals to all
States concerned not to lose sight of their obligation
to foster peace in the world in order to save humanity from another holocaust. Victims of aggression
deserve all the concern, sympathy and care of the
international
community,
160. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
161. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India):
Mr. President,
I should like to thank you, and through you, the other
members of the Council for affording me this opportunity to address the Council.
162. I should like at the outset to felicitate, through
you, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
the representative of the United
States, with which my country has friendly relations,
on her assumption of the presidency for this month.
Her academic achievements and intellectual sophistication, as well as her integrity and forthrightness, are
well known to all here, and we trust that those qualities will serve her well in discharging her onerous
tasks.
163. My delegation has undertaken to speak during
the present debate not without some serious introspection, Our constant avowal of the objectives and

principles of non-alignment
makes it incumbent upon
us to support the newly emerging countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America in their efforts to eliminate
the vestigial economic and social undertones of colonialism which still affect them, and to reinforce the
foundations of their sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity as well as their unequivocal adherence to their foreign policy perspectives, untainted by
any preconditioning
of bloc attitudes. At the same
time, it is our profound conviction that nothing should
be said or done which could further exacerbate latent
animosities,
regional or interregional,
or project the
problems that confront the nations of Central America
on to a wider international
canvas. If anything, our
purpose is to counsel restraint and to encourage a
serious effort to defuse tensions in the area of Central
America. The broadening of controversy by involving
extra-regional and global forces can only further complicate an already difficult situation in that part of the
world.
164. I should like to reaffirm in this connection the
position adopted by the Foreign Ministers of NonAligned Countries, who, at their meeting at New
Delhi from 9 to 13 February 198 1, noted with concern
the tension prevailing in certain parts of Central
America and the Caribbean, which threatened the
national independence of some States and the peace
and security of the area. The Ministers at that time
urged all States to adhere scrupulously to the principles of the non-use of force or the threat of force,
of non-intervention
and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, and of respect for the
political
independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of the States of the region and for the right
of all States of the region to be free from any interference or external pressure of any kind. Referring to
the pressures directed against Nicaragua, the Ministers affirmed the need to respect the independence
and national sovereignty of that country, free from any
kind of interference in its internal affairs.H
16.5. This concern was once again voiced at a plenary meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries held in New York on 14 December 1981. Those
countries, after hearing a statement by the representative of Nicaragua and taking into account the views
expressed by other representatives as well as available information,
expressed concern over the gravity
of the general situation in the region and appealed to
all States, within as well as outside the region, to
refrain from any interference in the internal or external affairs of independent
countries in that region.
The non-aligned
countries recalled the duty of all
States to adhere to the principles of non-intervention
and non-interference,
non-use of force or the threat
of use of force in international
relations, and peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, as well as the
duty to respect the right of all peoples to choose their
own political, economic and social systems, and to
refrain from causing tension among States to the detriment of regional and international peace and security.’

By the declining day
Lo, man is in a state of loss
Save those who believe and do good deeds, and
exhort one another to truth and exhort one another
to endurance.

166. The process of decolonization
in the region of
Central America and the Caribbean is in its final stage,
but the evolution of political structures and attitudes
in the region has unfortunately
led to sharp confrontation. Tensions and conflicts in the area have emerged
because national developments
have been perceived
by others as being directed not so much by the genius
of the people as by extra-territorial
political and economic impulses.

174. I have listened to the retaliatory statement
delivered by the representative of the United States
in response to the statement of Mr. Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of
National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua-a
very convincing statement indeed. I found the United States
representative’s
statement also interesting in some
respects, particularly
when she launched upon the
psychological
analysis of her opponent, instead of
concentrating
on the main issue. In my delegation’s
view, such psychological analyses were very attractive many, many years ago when the representative
of the United States took an introductory course in
psychology as a young lady in a college. Their validity was already being questioned about I9 years ago,
when 1 was doing my second degree at the American
University
of Beirut. I hope that the representative
of the United States did not really intend to base her
arguments here upon outdated Freudian psychology
and that of his followers, or upon the American psychology of behaviourism,
which experiments with
mice and pigeons and produces general statements
about man, who is the caliph of God, the vice-gerent.

167. True revolutionary
change must come from
within, and cannot be fomented or sustained from
without, even as genuine democracy cannot be implanted or cultivated merely from outside. The sovereign will of peoples and nations will prevail over
any external force. Intervention
is intervention,
whether it be from near or far, overt or covert, acknowledged or otherwise, and it is impermissible;
it
will inevitably bring on its own retribution.
168. Given the facts of history and geography,
regional peace and stability can be built, not merely
on an acceptance of shared aspirations, but also by
giving full scope to a pluralism of political values and
systems; nor can it be served by the exclusion of one
or another State from the mainstream
of regional
development on one ground or another.
169. The Government of India believes that the present situation in the region should not be allowed to
deteriorate and pose a threat to international
peace
and security. As a non-aligned country, we are firmly
opposed to interference and intervention in the affairs
of sovereign States. All nations should be left to deal
with their own problems, and all concerned should
make every effort to resolve issues through peaceful
negotiation.

175. Psychological
categories-such
as negation,
reaction formation, displacement,
identification and
others-are
simply categories in each of which the
representative of the United States can put anybody,
even herself, without discerning any understanding
of the nature of man or of the very vital political issues
which concern all of us here, The representative of
the United States may also know that many psychologists, as well as sociologists, in the Orient do not
attach any significance to the psychological and
sociological
theories of the West. Moslem scholars
who confine their psychological investigation within
the framework of the Islamic cosmological doctrine
are some of them, and Professor Soran of India, of
whom representatives might have heard, is a great
sociologist and another example.

170. The proposals recently put forward by the President of Mexico appear to have evoked a positive response all round. It is our hope that the necessary
pohtical wisdom and goodwill will be forthcoming to
work for a negotiated political solution which will
ensure respect for the principles of the Charter and
take clearly into account the political realities in the
region, as well as the interests of all the States of the
area.

176. Moreover,
the whole approach of the representative of the United States was, I believe, wrong.
For’ what would be the consequences if other speakers were to launch upon analysing her psychology
instead of tackling the main issue, or what if each of
us worked out some sort of psychological model for
the other and everybody found fault with everybody
else’s psychology? I am glad that only the representative of the United States did that.

171. This debate in the Council will have been in
vain if it inflames passions, deepens mistrust and ends
in mutual recrimination.
We urge that consideration
by the Councif should be constructive, directed not
away from but towards a dialogue for greater understanding and reconciliation.
172. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Iran. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

177. That was said for the information
sentative of the United States.

173. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Iran): I take
refuge in Allah, from Satan the accursed. In the Name
of Allah, the Compassionate,
the Merciful.

of the repre-

178. My delegation would have been very interested in some comments on the economic connection
16

to the rest of the world, an issue which seerns to me
more pertinent to the American threat to Nicaragua,
and to the keen interest of the representative of the
United States in so-called democracy in El Salvador
-comments
that she did not in fact make.

179, The fact is that all small nations are struggling
get rid of the imperialist hegemony. We were one
of them, as the representative of the United States
knows, and even since our Islamic Revolution, United
States policy has never left us alone. The United
States press occasionally revealed some immoral and
illegal connections between the United States Administration and all the anti-revolutionary
groups, with
the remnants of the SAVAK-with
whose name I am
sure the representative of the United States is familiar-with
the Munafiqeen,
the fedayeen, the
Monarchists
and the Iraqi Baathists. Fortunately, cooperation with all of them ultimately brought disillusionment to United States policy towards my country,
simply
because the United States Administration
does not know what a revolution is. Too much reliance
upon psychological
analysis and on facts collected
from the ignorant and upon socio-political interpretations which may be good in some classroom situations may not, I am afraid, help. It is true of the
American approach to our Islamic Revolution, as well
as to the revolution in Nicaragua and to other revolutions that may come in the mainstream of the national
struggle for independence and self-determination.
to

180. I am sure that the representative of the United
States has read The War without End and Uncloaking
fh CIA-very
good books. I am sure she knows what
the CIA [United Smtcs Central Intelligence Agency]
means to the oppressed peoples. It is the CIA strategies which have brought the Administration
of he1
country the honorary title of “Great Satan”.
181. The general pattern of United States foreign
policy is to bring mercenary rt+gimes to power, to SUPport them-as
the United States did with the Shahand to keep them in power in order to have access to
the markets of the third world, on the one hand, and
to their raw materials,
on the other. And as soon as
the people start their struggle for independence, the
United
States calls them Communists
and other
names -which
do not necessarily fit in all cases. The
United States is not and cannot be the international
gendarmerie.
No one has commissioned the United
States Administration
to be the international
peacekeeping force. The whole population of Nicaragua is
probably four times smaller than the number of addicts
in the United States, and yet the representative of the
United States considers Nicaraguans a threat to international peace in Central and Latin America. Why?
no not the United States statesmen have enough
problems at home to solve? If I may adopt the same
method
of psychological
analysis--relevantly,
of
course-is
not the United States Administration
projecting the internal problems of that country to the
rest of the world?

182. Why is it that in every international
problem
outside the United States, that country is somehow
involved in one way or another? Why do not Americans keep their good country independent of so many
international
problems?
They have enough land,
enough oil, enough natural resources, enough manpower, enough railroads, enough planes, enough airports, enough food and enough bombs if they want to
destroy all of us; and I am sure they have enough
problems to solve just inside their country.

183. The country has all the natural beauty and all
the bounties of Allah within it. Please tell us where
the starting-point of American contentment is, so that
others can start their independence from there. There
are so many oppressed nations longing for independence and self-determination.
What does the representative of the United States think they should do?
What would she do if she were a wise, loyal Persian
Moslem, with full commitment
to God and His commands? What would she do if she were a Palestinian?
What would she do if she were a Nicaraguan? What
would she do if she were an African subject to rrparrh&cl’? What would she do if she were Indian, Red
Indian, Afghan, Pakistani, Chinese or of any other
nationality?
What honestly would the representative
of the United States here uphold, were she not an
American, in the speech she made last night? Would
she honestly uphold the same position that she did
in her lecture? And how would she then comment on
the CIA with all the knowledge she has about it’? The
problem is that American pragmatism justifies any
means for the end. American epistemology
holds that
if it works it has to be true. As soon as the United
States Administration
finds an idea workable in the
direction of its aim, however materialistic and greedy,
it simply implements it, no matter how many innocent
people-great
saints and spiritual masters like Ayatollah Motahari, Ayatollah Madeni, Ayatollah Dostghaib, Ayatollah Beheshti and hundreds of others,
many of them over 85 years of age, old scholars and
pious people-may
be martyred. They do it because
for them the truth is anything that works, and the
means justifies the end.
184. United States policy-makers
have to reconsider their entire philosophy of life, and I believe that
if the Council had the power to impose a strong resolution upon the United States, it would still be useless
because the problem is not simply a political problem.
It is not a matter of producing a strong resolution. It
is a cultural, religious, economic. social and historical
problem characteristic of particular imperialistic
countries, that is causing trouble For the whole world. So a
resolution might not be the final solution. In this connection, I do not want to overlook other materialistic
philosophies
which are as bad, but, believe me, the
fact is that the American philosophy is awful.
185. American history books say that the President
of the United States is the leader of the world. They
teach American children that Americans are the model
17’ .

“Give the good tidings to those slaves of Mine who
listen to the word and follow the best of it.”

for all humanitv.
American leadershin iustifies all
interventionist
situations by using the shallow greedy
statement that America has interests in the rest of the
world. On what justification
should America have
interests everywhere?
186. If American society shifts slightly from pragmatism towards realism, then other nations are struggling for freedom-freedom
as they understand it.
Whether Mrs. Kirkpatrick’s
system likes it or not, they
are going to do it. And they have every right to do so.
The United States Administration
needs to try to
understand this point and not to waste any effort on
achieving the incorrect.
187. On the basis of the foregoing, my delegation
requests all the good members of the Council to take
whatever steps are necessary to end American intimidation and intervention
in Nicaragua.
188. I should like to ask the President to urge the
United States Government
to reconsider the fundamental issues underlying
the foreign policy of his
country.

Litho in United Nations, New York

NOTES
’ Oj~kial Rrcordv of the G~npnrl Asscw~/~/y, Thirty-sistk Scssiorz, P/e~rcr,y Mrctings, 20th meeting,
2 General Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV).
1 Genewl Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
d Ofjcinl Records of the Gemml As.semhly, Thirty-sixth Sessicm Piarrw!: Meetings, 20th meeting, para. 24.
s Panama Canal Treaty and the Treaty concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal (see T/W UeW’~~nctlfof Stota Brrlletin, vol. LXXVII, No. L999 (Wnshington,D.C.,
U.S. Government Printing Office, 19771, pp. 483-496).
fi General Assembly resolution 36/103, annex, para. 1.
7 Il>icl., para. 2, part II, subpam. (c).
* A/36/1 16 and Corr.1, Political Part, paras. 99-100.
y See A/37/59, annex I.

00400

8&609t+&-0ctobcr 1989--?.nsO
