228

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

adequate humanitarian assistance for relief and expanded
durable solutions;
8. Calls upon all pertinent organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as relevant regional, intergovern­
mental and non-governmental organizations, to lend their
support, within their respective spheres of competence, to
the realization of the goals of the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the Declaration and Programme of Action, to monitor, in
consultation and close co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity and, in particular, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme, the follow-up to the
Conference;
I 0. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Eco­
nomic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/140. Report of the United Nations High Com­
missioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office,1 98 as well as the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-fifth session, 199 and having heard the state­
ment made by the High Commissioner on 12 November
1984, 200
Recalling its resolution 38/121 of 16 December 1983,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concern to the High Commissioner continue to face dis­
tressingly serious problems in all parts of the world,
Stressing the fundamental importance of the High Com­
missioner's international protection function and the need
for States to co-operate with the High Commissioner in
the exercise of this essential function, particularly in view
of the continued and persistent violations of the basic
rights of persons of concern to his Office,
Welcoming the additional accessions by States to the
1951 Convention201 and the 1967 Protocol2°2 relating to
the Status of Refugees,
Particularly concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
seriously jeopardized on account of military or armed
attacks, acts of piracy and other forms of brutality,
Emphasizing that voluntary repatriation or return
remains the most desirable solution to problems of refu­
gees and displaced persons of concern to the High
Commissioner,
Emphasizing also the importance for the international
community to continue to provide assistance and resettle­
ment opportunities for those refugees for whom no other
durable solution may be in sight, particularly in regions
198 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 12 (A/39/12).
199 Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/39/12/Add.l).
200 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Third Committee, 36th meeting, paras.
1-12.

where countries of first refuge continue generously to
receive refugees arriving by land or by sea,
Noting with deep appreciation the valvable support
extended by many Governments to the High Commis­
sioner in carrying out his humanitarian task,
Noting with satisfaction the positive results achieved by
the Second International Conference on Assistance to Ref­
ugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984,203
as part of a continuing process of increasing international
interest in the situation of refugees in Africa and support
for those refugees,
Welcoming the progress made by the High Commis­
sioner in improving the management of his Office and urg­
ing him to pursue his efforts in this direction in line with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and deci­
sions of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
High Commissioner,
Taking note of the decision of the Executive Committee
on the inclusion of Arabic, Chinese and Spanish among
the official languages of the Executive Committee,204
I. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the dedicated and efficient
manner in which they continue to discharge their
responsibilities;
2. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental nature of the
High Commissioner's function to provide international
protection and the need for Governments to continue to
co-operate fully with his Office in order to facilitate the
effective exercise of this function, in particular by acceding
to and fully implementing the relevant international and
regional refugee instruments and by scrupulously observ­
ing the principles of asylum and non-refoulement;
3. Condemns all violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrat­
ed through military or armed attacks against refugee
camps and settlements and other forms of brutality and by
the failure to rescue asylum-seekers in distress at sea;
4. Urges all States, in co-operation with the Office of
the High Commissioner and other competent interna­
tional bodies, to take all measures necessary to ensure the
safety of refugees and asylum-seekers;
5. Also urges all States to support the High Commis­
sioner in discharging his responsibility to pursue durable
solutions to the problem of refugees and displaced persons
of concern to his Office, primarily through voluntary
repatriation or return, including assistance to returnees, as
appropriate, or, wherever appropriate, through integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in third countries;
6. Expresses deep appreciation for the valuable mate­
rial and humanitarian response of many receiving
countries, in particular those developing countries that,
despite serious economic crises and limited resources, con­
tinue to admit, on a permanent or temporary basis, large
numbers of refugees and displaced persons of concern to
the Office of the High Commissioner, and, reaffirming the
principle of international solidarity and burden-sharing,
urges the international community to assist receiving
countries in order to enable them to cope with the addi­
tional burden created by their presence;
7. Notes with satisfaction the initiatives taken by the
High Commissioner in developing the concept of develop­
ment-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees,
201 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
202 Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
203 See A/39/402 and Add. I and 2.

204 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty- ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 12A (A/39 I 2/ Add. I), para. 185.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

wherever appropriate, and urges him to pursue those
efforts in co-operation with interested Governments, as
well as with the World Bank, the United Nations Develop­
ment Programme and other developmental organizations,
including non-governmental organizations;
8. Commends all States that facilitate the attainment
of durable solutions and contribute generously to the High
Commissioner's programmes;
9. Notes with appreciation the support consistently giv­
en to the High Commissioner by agencies of the United
Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations, in carrying out his humanita­
rian task and requests the High Commissioner to continue
to co-ordinate his efforts with those agencies and
organizations;
10. Calls upon all States to promote durable solutions
and to contribute generously to the High Commissioner's
humanitarian programmes in order to assist persons of
concern to the High Commissioner in a spirit of interna­
tional solidarity and burden-sharing.

101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
39/141. Draft Convention against Traffic in Narcot­
ic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and
Related Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/ l 68 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
1981, 36/168 of 16 December 1981, 37/168 of 17 Decem­
ber 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93 and 38/122
of 16 December 1983 and other relevant provisions,
Aware of the dangers posed by the illegal production of
drugs, illicit demand, illicit drug traffic and drug abuse and
of the need to pay renewed attention to these problems
and to their pernicious effects,
Concerned at the increasing damage which the illicit
drug traffic causes to public health, the economic and
social development of peoples, and young people in
particular,
Bearing in mind the Quito Declaration against Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs of 11 August 1984205 and the New York
Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of
Drugs of l October 1984, 206 in which profound alarm was
expressed at the seriousness of the problem,
Recognizing the valuable contribution made by existing
international legal instruments in their specialized areas,
including the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of
1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 207 and the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 208
Convinced that the wide scope of the illicit traffic in nar­
cotic drugs and its consequences make it necessary to pre­
pare a convention which considers the various aspects of
the problem as a whole and, in particular, those not envis­
aged in existing international instruments,
Commending the important work of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse
Control and the International Narcotics Control Board,
1. Reiterates that the struggle against the illegal pro­
duction and demand and the illicit use and traffic in drugs
deserves urgent treatment of the highest priority;
205 N39/407, annex.
206 N39/55 I and Corr. I and 2. annex.

229

2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, taking
into consideration Article 62, paragraph 3, and Article 66,
paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations and
Council resolution 9 (I) of 16 February 1946, to request
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to initiate at its thirty­
first session, to be held in February 1985, as a matter of
priority, the preparation of a draft convention against
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs which considers the various
aspects of the problem as a whole and, in particular, those
not envisaged in existing international instruments, and,
to that end, to transmit to it the draft Convention annexed
to the present resolution as a working paper;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to propose to the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs that it adjust the agenda
of its thirty-first session, as approved by the Economic and
Social Council in its decision 1983/115 of 24 May 1983, to
enable the Commission to initiate the preparation of the
draft convention referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
report to the Economic and Social Council, if possible at
its first regular session of 1985, on the results achieved in
this respect;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
ANNEX
Draft Convention aplnst Traffic In Narcotic Drop and Psychotropic
Substances and Related Activities

Preamble
The States Parties to the present Convention,
Concerned that illicit traffic in and use of narcotic drugs and psycho­

tropic substances transcend the sphere of the physical and moral well-being
of mankind and are detrimental to the identity and integration of peoples,
since they constitute a factor of dependence and corruption which under­
mines their spiritual, cultural, social and economic values, and aware that
such problems must be dealt with within the framework of international
co-operation and global geopolitics, since drugs are goods used to weaken
the legitimate economies of the countries and to undermine their sover­
eignty, and that such practices are impeding development, especially in the
countries of the Andean region, agree to declare illicit traffic in narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances, the fundamental means of promoting
illicit use of such substances, which use is inflicting serious harm on the
youth of the world, to be a grave crime against humanity under interna­
tional law, having regard to the following considerations:
1. Whereas illicit traffic in and use of such substances are detrimental
to the integrity and identity of our peoples since they undermine their spiri­
tual, historical and social values, and, as a result of technical advances in
the communications media, unprecedented expansion in untoward cross­
cultural influences, increase in organized crime and other factors, have
reached proportions too great to be dealt with through the isolated
demands and actions of States,
2. Whereas there is clear evidence that illicit trafficking is closely linked
to the designs and actions of some aimed at subverting the legal order and
social peace in our countries in pursuit of their despicable commercial
aims, and that it constitutes a factor of dependence for developing peoples
and impedes economic integration in keeping with their common interests,
3. Whereas it is clearly established that illicit trafficking operates by
corrupting the political and administrative structures of producing and
consuming countries and undermines the security and defence of peoples
by sapping their military strength and affecting their sovereignty,
4. Whereas there is a need for international legislation that would pro­
vide a basis for effective action to combat illicit trafficking in and use of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances beyond national boundaries,
and for punishing those responsible wherever they may be.
207 U nited Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XI.3, p. 13.
208 United Nations publication. Sales No. E.78.XI.3. p. 7.
