United Nations

S/PV.6536

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6536th meeting
Monday, 16 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud/Mr. Briens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33901 (E)

*1133901*

S/PV.6536

welcome their continued efforts to engage in joint
outreach activities, exchange of information and joint
meetings; and encourage the three groups to further
enhance their cooperation.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Cuba, Costa Rica, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Morocco,
Pakistan, Spain, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri
will make a joint statement on behalf of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Following this
joint statement, the Council will hear briefings by the
Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Puri.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): On behalf of
the Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) dealing
with the issue of terrorism, I have the honour to update
the Security Council on the continued cooperation
between the three Committees and their groups of
experts. Taking account of the fact that the full
statement of my briefing has been distributed to
members of the Council, I shall deliver a summarized
version.
The three Committees continue to attach great
importance to the coordination and cooperation
between their respective groups of experts, the
Executive Directorate (CTED) of the CounterTerrorism Committee, the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Group of Experts the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004));

2

The three expert groups continue to implement
the common strategy on dealing with non- or latereporting States through exchange of information and
joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting Member
States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The three expert groups continue to participate in
platforms of common interest, such as the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Intergovernmental Action Group
against Money laundering in West Africa. Also, both
CTED and the Monitoring Team are observers at the
Eastern and South African Anti-Money Laundering
Group.
CTITF continues to provide a useful framework
within which the three groups of experts can continue
to coordinate their activities and to share information,
particularly on technical assistance. The groups of
expert contribute to the work of several CTITF
working groups, and the Monitoring Team and CTED
have assumed leading roles in some of these groups.
The three groups of experts also participate in the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative.
Exchange of information is carried out on a
regular basis and through joint work conducted by two
or more groups when participating in the same event,
such as the recent CTED workshop on challenges to
border control in the Maghreb and the Sahel, in which
the Monitoring Team participated. Similarly, the
Monitoring Team joined the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s recent special meeting with international,
regional and subregional organizations, held at the
headquarters of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
on measures related to the prevention of terrorism.
Both CTED and the Group of Experts of the 1540
Committee also participated at the ninth meeting of
national focal points of contact of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, organized by the
Organization of American States in March 2011.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

The three groups of experts continue to hold
regular meetings in preparation for visits, workshops
and other joint activities related to specific States,
regions or themes. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
also regularly invites the other two groups of experts,
CTITF and other relevant United Nations entities to
meetings with international and regional organizations
and to its thematic briefings in the framework of its
official meetings.
Another emerging area of cooperation is for one
of the three groups to represent another group at
certain events. For example, the Monitoring Team
represented CTED at the FATF meeting in Cape Town
in November 2010, and CTED represented the
Monitoring Team during its participation in the
meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum Working Group
on Counter-Terrorism in Auckland, New Zealand,
which was co-chaired by New Zealand and the Pacific
Islands Forum secretariat this month. In general, during
their participation in these various events, the groups
of experts continue to explain to participants the
respective activities and mandates of the three
Committees, as well as the content and purpose of the
Global Strategy.
As mentioned in the previous joint statement (see
S/PV.6424), the co-location of the three groups of
experts would greatly contribute to enhanced
cooperation and information exchange among them.
We therefore appreciate the response of the Secretariat
that it will continue exploring all options with a view
towards co-locating the groups at the earliest possible
opportunity, notwithstanding the challenges associated
with such co-location.
The three subsidiary bodies and their respective
groups of experts will continue to cooperate and to
coordinate their work, within their respective
mandates, with a view to ensuring an effective and
efficient approach to counter-terrorism. The three
Committees look forward to receiving further guidance
from the Council on areas of common interest and to
further strengthening their joint activities.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
Ambassador Puri to speak in his capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001).
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I had the
honour to assume the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

11-33901

1373 (2001) at the beginning of this year. I would like
to thank my predecessor, Ambassador Apakan of
Turkey, for his excellent work in steering the
Committee in 2010. It gives me great pleasure today to
brief the Council on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) since the last briefing in November
2010 (see S/PV.6424).
Terrorism is a global scourge and constitutes one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security. The United Nations strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever, and for whatever
purposes. It is an attack on human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial
integrity and security of States and destabilizing
legitimately constituted Governments.
The CTC, in accordance with its mandate,
continues to work actively in advancing the global
fight against terrorism. The Committee in its work has
been guided by relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and
1963 (2010), and continues to play a critical role in
promoting and facilitating their implementation.
The Security Council presidential statement
adopted on 2 May (S/PRST/2011/9) in the aftermath of
the death of Osama bin Laden stresses the need for the
full implementation of its resolutions on terrorism, as
well as other applicable international counter-terrorism
instruments. It also calls on all States to work together
to bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of terrorist attacks, while ensuring that
measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law.
Important tools in the Committee’s work include
preliminary implementation assessments, visits to
Member States, facilitating the provision of technical
assistance, enhancing cooperation and coordination
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations and the identification and promotion of
international best practices, codes and standards. The
Committee, through the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), is also making use of
alternative technologies, including video conferencing,
to enhance its dialogue with Member States.
The Committee continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic

3

S/PV.6536

and regional issues. The major issues considered by the
Committee include the control of cash couriers, the
abuse of the non-profit sector for terrorist financing
and the application of good practices for the
implementation and assessment of resolution 1624
(2005). Important workshops organized during this
period include the launch of CTED’s global initiative
in London, from 18 to 20 January, to prevent the abuse
of the non-profit sector for terrorist financing, within
the
framework
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force working group on tackling
the financing of terrorism and the workshop on
challenges to effective border control in the Sahel and
the Maghreb region, which was organized in close
cooperation with the International Organization for
Migration and held in Nouakchott from 4 to 6 April.
The Committee is also focusing on regional
specific discussions on issues identified in the 2009
survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States (S/2009/620, annex). A
regional discussion on Central Asia was held earlier
this month. In addition, the Committee and CTED
continue to enhance their ongoing dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance for capacitybuilding.
The Committee has adopted its work programme
this year on an annual basis, which will be helpful in
further streamlining the functioning of the Committee.
Earlier, the Committee had been formulating its work
programme on a biannual basis. In pursuance of
resolution 1963 (2010), CTED is working towards
providing, by 30 June, an updated global
implementation survey on resolution 1373 (2001), as
well as a global implementation survey on resolution
1624 (2005) by 31 December. The Committee has also
adopted a plan of action for the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005).
As part of enhancing its interaction with
international and regional organizations and United
Nations entities, the Committee heard briefings on
counter-terrorism in February by Ambassador Marc
Perrin de Brichaumbaut, Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and Mr. Alexey Kuzyura, Chairperson of the Working
Group of the Meeting of Heads of Special Services of
the Russian Federation.

4

Furthermore, of particular significance was the
CTC’s special meeting with international regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
Council of Europe, on the prevention of terrorism, held
at Strasbourg from 19 to 21 April. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the Committee, CTED and
various international, regional and subregional
organizations to hold open and in-depth discussions
about the preventive aspects of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010) and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
special meeting focused on three main areas, namely,
prevention policies, comprehensive and integrated
strategies and the role of law enforcement in
preventing terrorism. Experts from civil society
organizations also actively participated in the event.
The Committee appreciates the close cooperation and
generous support from the Council of Europe in
planning and hosting this event. While the Committee
and CTED will follow up on this important meeting,
the Chair’s summary is in the process of being
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
This year marks an important milestone in global
counter-terrorism efforts, as we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee will organize a special meeting, open
to the wider membership and other relevant
stakeholders, to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the resolution and the establishment of
the Committee.
Other major upcoming events include a workshop
in Islamabad for members of Pakistan’s Parliament on
strengthening the oversight role of Parliament in the
implementation
of
anti-money-laundering
and
combating the financing of terrorism laws, the fourth
regional workshop for police officers and prosecutors
in South Asia on effectively countering terrorism, to be
held in Thimphu, and a workshop in Belgrade for
countries from South-East Europe on the law
enforcement aspects of preventing the financing of
terrorism.
I attach high priority to enhancing transparency,
public outreach and the strengthening of cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations. Besides participating in the CTC’s
special meeting at Strasbourg last month, I also
participated in the meeting of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States held in Washington, D.C., in March.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

In conclusion, the Committee will continue to
play a critical role in the global fight against terrorism.
The Committee will try to do so in a more strategic and
transparent manner so that it can more effectively
contribute to the global counterterrorism efforts within
its mandate. I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of
CTED, and his team for their excellent work. I also
wish to thank the Secretariat for its continuous support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Wittig, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated persons and entities.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I had the honour to
assume the chairmanship of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee in January. In today’s briefing, I
would like to give an overview of the Committee’s
activities and achievements since the last briefing in
November (see S/PV.6424). In addition, I would like to
offer comments on the future work of the Committee
from the Chairman’s point of view.
At the outset, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank my predecessor, Ambassador
Thomas Mayr-Harting of Austria, and his team for their
excellent work in steering the Committee in 2009 and
2010. Under Austria’s able leadership, the Committee
concluded successfully the first comprehensive review
of the consolidated list. Today, I am pleased to report
that the Committee, building on those efforts, has
approved the most comprehensive set of updates to the
consolidated list and the largest group of narrative
summaries of reasons for listing in its history.
Specifically, the Committee has just agreed to 78
list amendments and to making publicly available
almost 200 additional summaries of reasons for listing.
The additional narrative summaries will further
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions. They
mark an important step towards closing an information
gap and further enhancing fair and clear procedures.
However, in resolution 1904 (2009), the Council
clearly flagged that further efforts to that end were
required. Let me now focus on three important aspects
of the Committee’s work.
First, the Council directed the Committee to
continue to conduct reviews on a regular basis. The
Committee, supported by the relevant Member States,
the Monitoring Team and the Secretariat, is working

11-33901

hard to deliver. The review of 48 individuals reported
to be deceased is currently under way. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Member States for their
cooperation and their efforts in submitting to the
Committee any relevant information in the context of
that review. The Committee aims to conclude the
review by the end of May, before conducting other
reviews as requested by the Council in resolution 1904
(2009). In addition, the Committee decided to review
listed entries that are reported to have ceased to exist
and agreed on a paper outlining the modalities of that
specialized review.
Secondly, through resolution 1904 (2009), the
Council established the Office of the Ombudsperson.
As of today, the Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberly Prost,
has received 10 requests for de-listing. The
Ombudsperson submitted her first comprehensive
report on a specific de-listing request to the Committee
in February, as well as two further comprehensive
reports on two additional de-listing cases in April. The
Committee is currently considering these de-listing
requests and has been discussing with the
Ombudsperson her observations, including the
methodology and standards applied in her reviews of
the requests. The Committee will conclude its
considerations according to resolution 1904 (2009) and
the relevant guidelines. The Committee views the
assistance of the Ombudsperson as valuable and
helpful in the process of reaching well-founded
decisions. The Committee is currently considering
options in this regard.
Thirdly, resolution 1904 (2009) encourages
members of the Committee to provide reasons for
objecting to de-listing requests. As Chair, I am
insisting that all Committee members do so in a timely
manner. In that connection, I am pleased to note that
the Committee has been able to reach a consensus on
the way and the form in which reasons for the
Committee’s decision could be communicated to
relevant stakeholders on a case-by-case basis.
Here I should like to draw the Council’s attention
to changes and challenges as I see them and to share
the views of the Chair of the Committee.
The 1267 regime was established in 1999, more
than 11 years ago, in response to attacks planned by
Osama Bin Laden and perpetrated by Al-Qaida. As
times change, the threats posed by international
terrorism are evolving. I should like here to make some

5

S/PV.6536

brief comments, in my personal capacity but informed
by my experience as Chair of the Committee, on
current changes and future challenges.

Government in this context, with a view to promoting
the transition process and the principle of Afghan
ownership.

First, the death of Osama Bin Laden constitutes
clearly an important landmark and a turning point.
However, it is neither the end of Al-Qaida nor the end
of terrorism. The Committee will duly assess the
implications which recent events may have on the
nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban,
and on the future work of the Committee. The
Monitoring Team will have to monitor closely current
and future developments in that regard. It is clear,
however, that rigorous implementation of the sanctions
measures remains essential, since various groups
associated with Al-Qaida remain active around the
world, constituting a continued threat to international
peace and security. At the same time, the Committee,
supported by the Monitoring Team, should consider
how best it can play its part in further marginalizing
Al-Qaida and how it can ensure that the 1267 list
continues to fully and adequately reflect the evolving
threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliated networks.

Finally, as Chair I am pleased to note that the
need for continued reforms as regards fair and clear
procedures remains high on the agenda of the members
of the Committee. At the same time, I have to note that
although many of the substantial reforms set out in
resolution 1904 (2009) are currently being
implemented, they still represent a work in progress,
and the effects of this comprehensive reform agenda
cannot yet be evaluated. This applies first and foremost
to the most ambitious reform step set out in resolution
1904 (2009): the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. I have noted that all members of the
Committee are committed to making this a meaningful
and credible process. This, however, does not exclude
well-founded disagreements on particular cases. As
Chair, I am confident that the Ombudsperson process,
in its current form, can already deliver tangible
improvements as regards fair and clear procedures, in
particular the right to be heard.

Secondly, regarding Afghanistan, the Committee
has discussed the possible implications that political
dialogue in Afghanistan may have on the work of the
Committee and the future design of the regime. The
Monitoring Team, in its recommendations paper, has
provided several options for developing the 1267
regime further according to the perceived needs related
to political dialogue in Afghanistan. It is the view of
the Chair that the Committee and the 1267 regime as a
whole must be prepared to play a facilitating and
supporting role in a political dialogue and not become
a stumbling block in terms of peace and security in the
region. The Committee has been proactive in seeking
and taking into account the views of the Afghan
Government in the process of listing and de-listing
Afghan Taliban. The Committee will consider a draft
checklist of necessary supporting documentation for
de-listing requests. However, taking into account the
dynamics of political processes, it is the view of the
Chair that the design of the regime may have to be
further developed.

In compliance with the provisions of resolution
1904 (2009), the Ombudsperson’s findings are based
on a thorough and conclusive examination of each delisting request. At this stage, it is already clear that the
political will of all Council members to promote fair
and clear procedures has added weight and rigour to
the Ombudsperson process. The observations, even
though formally not binding in nature, are seriously
considered and taken into account before a decision is
taken on any de-listing request presented through the
Office of the Ombudsperson. At the same time, as
Chair of the Committee I am committed to continuing
to assist in trying to build consensus on further
enhancing fair and clear procedures as well as the role
of the Ombudsperson.

As Chair, I recommend that the Council carefully
review and calibrate the criteria for the listing and delisting of Afghan Taliban, reflecting in particular
internationally agreed criteria in the reconciliation
processes. The Council may wish to consider options
for granting an even more visible role to the Afghan

6

This concludes my statement on the Chair’s
personal views.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wittig for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Baso Sangqu,
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Since January I have
had the honour of assuming the chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540. I thank

11-33901

S/PV.6536

Ambassador Heller of Mexico for his leadership of the
Committee in 2010.
In addition to the information just presented in
the joint report, I am very pleased to summarize the
main developments in the work of the 1540 Committee
since the last joint briefing, on 15 November 2010.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1977 (2011) on 20 April 2011. The
resolution reaffirms resolution 1540 (2004), which
calls on all States to implement appropriate and
effective measures to address the risk that non-State
actors may acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
Through resolution 1977 (2011), the Security
Council acknowledges the progress made by States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). The Council
further notes that the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States is a long-term commitment
and task that will require continuous efforts at the
national, regional and international levels. The new
resolution extends the mandate of the 1540 Committee
for a period of 10 years, which will enhance the
Committee’s ability to support the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and to assist States in their
efforts, in particular by enabling the Committee to plan
its activities over a longer period.
The new resolution also provides for two
comprehensive reviews, one after five years and one
before the end of the mandate. These reviews will
provide the Committee with important opportunities
for assessment and to engage in an in-depth dialogue
with Member States on issues related to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The mandate contained in resolution 1977 (2011)
provides the 1540 Committee with a sound and
efficient basis for its work over the next decade. The
resolution mandates the Committee to continue to
strengthen its role to facilitate the provision of
technical assistance and to enhance its cooperation
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations. The Committee is also mandated to
continue to refine its outreach efforts and to continue
to institute transparency measures, including through
regular open meetings with Member States.
The resolution further urges the Committee to
continue to engage actively with States to promote the
sharing of experience, lessons learned and effective

11-33901

practices in the areas covered by resolution 1540
(2004) and to dialogue with States on implementation,
including through visits to States at their invitation.
The resolution also mandates the Committee to conduct
annual reviews of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in order to guide its activities and, on that
basis, to include specific priorities in its annual
programme of work, as necessary.
Taking note of the 2009 comprehensive review
and building on the Committee’s successive
programmes of work, the 1540 Committee conducted
the following activities since its previous briefing last
November (see S/PV.6424).
During the last six months, the Committee
received first reports on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and additional information
from five Member States. Using this and other
information, the Committee reviewed and approved
192 matrices before the end of 2010. The Committee
therefore continues to encourage States to provide
updated information on their implementation efforts.
The Committee continues to work on assistance
requests and on possible next steps. It continues to
elaborate policy guidelines to address a range of
assistance issues and strengthen its clearing-house and
match-making roles. Since the previous briefing, the
Committee has continued to raise awareness about the
revised procedures for processing assistance requests
and to encourage States to provide any updated
information regarding assistance requests submitted
earlier or offers of assistance, as well as updated
information on assistance points of contacts.
The Chairman of the 1540 Committee,
coordinators of its Working Groups and experts
participated in, inter alia, a meeting of 25 international
governmental, regional and subregional organizations
on cooperation in promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) that was hosted by the
Government of Austria and in events related to
resolution 1540 (2004) organized by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Organization of American States, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization.
The 1540 Committee and its group of experts
continued to participate in outreach to facilitate States’
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In addition
to those mentioned above, these events took place in

7

S/PV.6536

Central Asia, the Caucasus, Eastern Europe, the Middle
East, Latin America and the Pacific Islands region.
Thematically, a workshop in Japan addressed issues of
export controls, one in the United Arab Emirates
addressed trans-shipment, and one in France discussed
proliferation financing.
With regard to transparency, the Committee
posted on its website approximately 180 Committeeapproved country matrices, as well as Information
Notes on the outreach activities in which 1540
Committee members and experts have participated
during recent years.
I appreciated the cooperative spirit among the
Security Council members that led to adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), and I look forward to
continuing working in that spirit in the implementation
of the resolution.
Mr. Puri (India): I wish to make a few brief
comments in my national capacity. I am not sure
whether they are informed by my position as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) or are purely national, but I
suspect there is a great deal of fusion here.
To start with, as far as the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is concerned, the death of Osama Bin Laden is a
significant milestone in the global war against
terrorism. However, it does not signify the end of
Al-Qaida or of terrorism. Without the elimination of
terrorists’ safe havens and sanctuaries, there can be no
end to the global war on terror.
For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan’s borders. Attempts to differentiate
between Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other terrorist
groups are fraught with difficulty, since those groups
are operationally and ideologically fused.
We support measures to strengthen the review
process of the listings in the Consolidated List of the
1267 Committee through the Office of the
Ombudsperson, as per Security Council resolution
1904 (2009). At the same time, we are concerned that
the process of listing and de-listing in the Consolidated
List continues to be subjected to political will and

8

pressure — a scenario that we can ill afford in our
united fight against terrorism.
India supports the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to reintegrate those individuals who abjure
violence, give up armed struggle, do not have links
with terrorist groups and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism and human rights as
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. At the same
time, it is important that the red lines on the
reintegration process as laid down at the London
Conference and later reaffirmed at the Kabul
Conference are not diluted. Otherwise, we risk
Afghanistan sliding back to becoming a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups.
On the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), India has expressed
its unwavering commitment to global efforts to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery. India recognizes
that proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery
is a major challenge facing the international
community. As a victim of terrorism for more than
three decades, we are fully cognizant of the
catastrophic dangers that transfers of WMDs to
non-State actors and terrorists could entail. Clandestine
proliferation networks have led to insecurity for all and
must not be allowed to reappear. The international
community must join hands to eliminate the risks
relating to sensitive materials and technologies falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors.
The focus on non-State actors should in no way
diminish State accountability in combating terrorism
and dismantling its support infrastructure or in linkages
with WMDs.
It is important to bear in mind that the successful
implementation of counter-terrorism measures requires
not only the fullest collective effort of the entire
membership but also their fullest participation in
processes that affect the collective security of all
nations equally. Our collective endeavour should be to
enhance coherence and synergy among different
counter-terrorism structures that are dealing with the
issue of terrorism within the United Nations.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union (EU) to be
delivered later.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. Germany supported the new resolution, 1977
(2011), as a sponsor because we are convinced that it
contributes
significantly
to
efforts
for
the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is an important
non-proliferation tool. Importantly, in the new
resolution the Council also stresses the importance of
fulfilling commitments related to arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. That is in
line with our firmly held conviction that disarmament
and non-proliferation are two sides of the same coin.
Germany is convinced that the creation of a group
of experts will prove to be helpful in guaranteeing
better coordination and proper implementation, thus
further deepening cooperation between the experts and
the Committee. In addition, Germany welcomes the
clear focus on assistance being channelled through the
Committee as a top priority in the Committee’s future
work.
Germany will remain committed to the future
work of the 1540 Committee. Germany is ready to
support the Committee by facilitating the Working
Group on Monitoring and Implementation. The
Working Group is of particular importance to us, as we
believe that the full and effective implementation of
the obligations contained in the four pertinent Council
resolutions is key to achieving our common goal of
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.
Germany will do its utmost to deliver a national
implementation action plan, as encouraged in
resolutions 1810 (2008) and 1977 (2011). We hope to
contribute to setting positive examples by moving
forward in that regard. We are currently giving
consideration to organizing a meeting related to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Germany next year, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. The objective of the conference
would be to engage in outreach with international,
regional and subregional industry associations and
groups. We believe that they can play an important role
in complementing and supporting the work of States in

11-33901

implementing resolution 1540 (2004) obligations. It
goes without saying that we will seek close
cooperation with the 1540 Committee in that regard.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we
remain convinced that all measures to combat terrorism
must be carried out in full compliance with
international human rights norms and standards. That is
indispensable to ensuring the efficiency and credibility
of counter-terrorism measures.
Regarding the 1267 regime, I would like to add
that Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf
of the group of like-minded States during today’s
debate. Since its establishment, the Office of the
Ombudsperson has made valuable contributions to fair
and clear procedures. Germany welcomes those efforts
and commends the Ombudsperson for her work. My
country is eager to continue supporting the Office of
the Ombudsperson in a constructive manner with a
view to strengthening the aspect of fair and clear
procedures in the regime and to ensuring that the
consolidated list remains a living document that
adequately reflects the present terrorist threat.
Before concluding, let me stress three areas
where Germany perceives the greatest need for
improvements. First, in order to provide for an
appropriate review mechanism, precise criteria for delisting should be conceived as a complement to the
ones applied for listing.
Secondly, the preventive character of the
sanctions should be enhanced by introducing a
limitation to the duration of listings. Any extension of
a listing should be based on solid information, as we
normally require for new listings.
Finally, adverse effects caused by fragmentary
and ambiguous listings must be avoided. Therefore,
special attention should be given to the submission of
precise and sufficient identifiers along with any
application for listing.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity on the work of
the three Committees.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), South Africa
remains firmly convinced that weapons of mass
destruction do not guarantee security, but rather detract
from it. As long as those weapons exist, humankind

9

S/PV.6536

will continue to face the threat of catastrophe. This
conviction informs our firm commitment to the
principles of the disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction and non-proliferation, both of which are
key contributions to the system of collective security
envisaged in the United Nations Charter.
South Africa welcomes the fact that the Council
rallied behind resolution 1977 (2011), which seeks to
establish a balance between the disarmament and nonproliferation aspects of weapons of mass destruction,
and that the Council has reaffirmed the importance of
fully complying with all relevant obligations. That
balance, along with the improved language on peaceful
purposes, provides an appropriate context for the 1540
(2004) framework.
We wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
persons and entities, for his comprehensive briefing on
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. We
commend and encourage the Committee in its
continued process of regularly reviewing the 1267 list
to ensure that it remains up to date. We also applaud
the Committee for its approval of the narrative
summaries to improve transparency and effectiveness
in the implementation of the sanctions regime.
As noted in the Chairman’s briefing, while
resolution 1904 (2009) has made significant procedural
improvements to the listing and de-listing process,
legal challenges to the procedural and substantive
fairness of the sanctions regime remain. In our view,
those legal challenges threaten the effectiveness of the
regime. I am aware that measures to enhance
procedural fairness and make the listing process more
just have been considered by the 1267 Committee in
the context of the report of the Monitoring Team. We
would hope that those measures will be reflected in the
draft resolution renewing the Committee’s mandate.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
terrorism remains one of the most of the dangerous and
serious threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The international community’s
efforts to counter terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations
must
continue
with
renewed
commitment, focus and resolve. It is therefore
appropriate for the Security Council to be the
implementing body of our collective efforts to counter
and subsequently eradicate that phenomenon.

10

It is also important for the United Nations to
remain at the forefront of that effort, especially as it
will ensure that, in the process of fostering cooperation
among the members of the international community to
counter the scourge, such cooperation is carried out
within the prescripts of international legal norms and
standards to which we are obliged to adhere in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.
Very recent terrorist attacks are yet another grim
reminder to all of us that we must stay the course in
pursuing our stated objectives to counter and
eventually eradicate terrorism. That work began with
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). Almost 10
years later, we note that, since the adoption of that
resolution, the United Nations has made significant
inroads in countering terrorism.
Finally, the Executive Directorate of the CounterTerrorism Committee facilitated numerous outreach
activities, country briefings and regional seminars and
workshops throughout the reporting period. Those
initiatives have made positive contributions to
engendering closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations; facilitated effective
and integrated operations among the wider United
Nations community and international and regional
organizations; and fostered closer cooperation between
and among Member States, the United Nations and
international civil society. Most importantly, I would
advocate technical assistance to States.
All of that not only bodes well for the United
Nations in dispensing its specific mandates, but also
adds value by making a material contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, wish to thank the
Permanent Representatives of South Africa, India and
Germany for their briefings on the activities of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
Nigeria appreciates the important role played by
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts in
strengthening the global non-proliferation regime. In
that regard, we commend Member States for their
increased awareness of their obligations under that
resolution. The increase in reports and the intensified
efforts to promote cooperation between States and
other stakeholders, as well as the adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011) last month, further strengthen

11-33901

S/PV.6536

our collective resolve to achieve global security. More
outreach activities, through regular workshops and
consultations at the country and regional levels, will
help to underpin those improvements. They will also
help to address two critical challenges, namely, the
limited implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in
particular by developing countries, and the lack of
relevant legislative, regulatory and administrative
structures to support implementation efforts.
Nigeria attaches great importance to the clearing
house role of the Committee and expects that the
revised assistance procedures will facilitate the prompt
matching of offers and requests for assistance by
States. By finding potential donors to support
assistance requests, the Committee will help more
States to benefit from relevant technical assistance and
support.
Over the years, resolution 1373 (2001) has
remained an indispensable tool in our collective efforts
to curb the activities of terrorist groups. Resolution
1963 (2010), adopted last year, increases the focus on
the robustness of our engagement on this issue.
Nigeria is satisfied with the role that the CounterTerrorism Committee, established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), has played in guiding our
efforts towards the full implementation of both
resolutions. We welcome the Committee’s adoption of
a plan of action for the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005). In implementing this resolution, due
cognizance should be taken of a country’s and region’s
specific experiences and challenges. There is no doubt
that the 1373 Committee’s work will also benefit from
outreach activities and sustained dialogue with States.
Both activities will help affected States to develop
relevant legislative, regulatory and administrative
structures to support the implementation of all the
resolutions.
Nigeria notes with satisfaction the depth of the
cooperation that exists among the 1373 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and international, regional and subregional
organizations. In this regard, we commend the
Committee on the success of its special meeting in
Strasbourg, France last month. We also note with
satisfaction CTED’s ongoing cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States on
counter-terrorism initiatives in that subregion. I hope

11-33901

that this cooperation will yield
outcomes during the coming year.

some

concrete

Nigeria welcomes the changes to improve the
programme of work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, including the regular updating
of the Committee’s website and implementation of
recommendations of the last review process. The
improved activities and reports submitted to the
Committee are an indication of the remarkable and
exhaustive work and the unequalled support of the
Monitoring Team.
We commend Ms. Kimberly Prost, the
Ombudsperson, for her valuable work and contribution
to us in improving the procedures of the sanctions
regime. We welcome the recent review of deceased
persons, pursuant to paragraph 26 of resolution 1904
(2009), to keep the Consolidated List updated and
relevant.
The determination of de-listing requests for three
names submitted through the Ombudsperson is a good
example of the application of the reform in a fair and
credible manner. These positive efforts should be
further
strengthened
through
the
continuous
improvement of the sanctions regime and by keeping
the Consolidated Lists as accurate as possible. The
need to ensure consistency with international standards
of due process, international law and respect for human
rights must be overriding in the Committee’s work. It
is therefore necessary to start considering further
measures to strengthen resolution 1904 (2009).
Active engagement and cooperation between the
three Security Council Committees remain imperative
for strengthening the implementation of their
respective mandates. In closing, we wish to commend
Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and
Baso Sangqu for their dynamic leadership and sterling
contributions to the work of their respective
Committees. We assure them of Nigeria’s continued
support in the discharge of their daunting
responsibilities.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees they
respectively head.

11

S/PV.6536

The Russian Federation views the stepping up of
efforts in the work of these Committees as an
important precondition to enhancing the effectiveness
of the Security Council’s contribution to countering
global terrorism, which remains one of the main threats
to international peace and security. This fact is amply
demonstrated by regular reports of new terrorist acts in
various regions of the world. At the same time, there
are many examples of successful actions by the
participants in the counter-terrorist coalition of States.
In the Russian Federation, a number of successful
operations to neutralize underground groups in the
northern Caucuses were carried out. Clearly, a key
event was the elimination of Osama bin Laden.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities remains one of the
main participants in the Council’s activity in the
counter-terrorist field.
We view as premature and unjustified the claims
that the link between the Taliban and Al-Qaida are
weakening and that flexible sanctions can serve to
isolate the unreconciled Taliban and adherents of
Al-Qaida. The idea that the Taliban might acquire a
nationalistic character does not bear scrutiny. It is
enough to recall that to date the Taliban have been
backed by motley international groups, including
foreign terrorist organizations. That is why it is
virtually impossible to draw a distinction between the
accomplices of Al-Qaida and purely Afghan Taliban.
Here, we view the initiative to split the sanctions list
into two, for Al-Qaida and for the Taliban, as
unwarranted and fraught with the risk of loss of focus
in the international antiterrorist track.
We back the policy of the Afghan leadership for
national reconciliation and the reintegration into
society of those members of illegal armed groups who
are not tainted by crimes against the Afghan people,
who have rejected violence and links with Al-Qaida
and who recognize the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. As before, we believe that
excluding former terrorists from the sanctions list is
possible only on an individual basis. Here we
considered groundless any proposals for the flexible or
simplified de-listing of the Taliban, including the
proposal for a sunset clause, which would lead to
weakened control by the 1267 Committee over this
process and to de facto automatic de-listing.

12

We back the Committee’s efforts to ensure greater
transparency in the work without prejudice to its
effectiveness, and its efforts to update the sanctions list
to bring it in line with the current terrorist threat.
We consider the work of the Ombudsperson
useful and her present mandate as optimum.
We again urge States, pursuant to resolutions
1735 (2006) and 1904 (2009), to submit to the
Committee requests to include on the sanctions list
individuals and organizations linked to the Taliban and
Al-Qaida, including those financing their terrorist
activities from the proceeds of drug trafficking.
Resolution 1963 (2010), adopted last December,
directs the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) to pay greater attention
to issues of preventing and suppressing terrorism. We
actively contributed to adopting that approach, which,
in our view, secures wider support for and more
effective implementation of the Security Council’s
antiterrorist decisions and organically fits into the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We attach special importance to enhancing efforts
to counteract the radicalization of public opinion and
the ideologies of terrorism, violent extremism and
incitement to commit terrorist acts. To this end, the
Russian Federation initiated the CTC’s adoption of a
plan of action to implement resolution 1624 (2005). It
provides for broader dialogue with States on all aspects
of the resolution and analysis of successful experiences
to disseminate it more broadly and prepare a
comprehensive report on the situation in this field. We
expect effective implementation of the plan and will
actively participate in that work.
To forge a robust network of antiterrorist
cooperation under the aegis of the United Nations, it is
important to bolster CTC contacts with international
and regional organizations. In that context we welcome
the outcome of the CTC’s special meeting in
Strasbourg with international, regional and subregional
organizations on the topic of preventing terrorism. We
endorse the intention of the Chair of the CTC to
organize work on using the outcome of the special
meeting to strengthen cooperation with regional
organizations.
We note the close regular contacts of the CTC,
the 1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) with the conference

11-33901

S/PV.6536

of the heads of special services, security organs and
law enforcement agencies of partner States of the
Russian Federation’s Federal Security Service on
terrorism. We welcome the assistance provided by the
CTC through CTED. We fully back the participation of
CTED pursuant to its existing mandate in the efforts of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force as
well as its cooperation with the panels of experts of
specialized Security Council committees.
Russia attaches great importance to the Security
Council’s adoption last month of resolution 1977
(2011), which reaffirms the very large-scale tasks of
resolution 1540 (2004) and extends the mandate of the
1540 Committee for a further 10 years. We have used
resolution 1540 (2004) as one of the main international
instruments in preventing weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials from
falling into the hands of non-State actors, first and
foremost, terrorists. Resolution 1977 (2011) enshrines
the leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council in these fields and creates conditions
conducive to bolstering multilateral efforts in this area.
The 1540 Committee plays a key role in
coordinating and enhancing the effectiveness of such
efforts. We believe that the Committee and its Panel of
Experts worked fruitfully during the reporting period to
promote the further intensification of activities by the
international community to counter proliferationrelated risks and threats. We welcome the measures
aimed at making the Committee’s work more regular
and systematic. It is important that these efforts
continue.
We believe that the Committee should continue to
devote priority attention to assisting States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and coordinating
the activities of the international community to that
end. We stand ready to continue to support such
measures, including within the framework of our
ongoing cooperation on issues related to resolution
1540 (2004) with participating States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
The Russian Federation will continue to
undertake focused efforts to fulfil the tasks set by the
Security Council to forge a reliable system under the
auspices of the United Nations to counter the black
market in weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to join other speakers in expressing our

11-33901

gratitude to the Permanent Representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their detailed
briefings giving an account of their work during their
first months chairing the respective Committees. Given
the important place that these Committees have in the
overall counterterrorism framework, we believe that
the continued exchange of views through these regular
briefings further contributes to the improvement of the
Council’s efforts in countering this global and everpresent challenge.
The face of terrorism changes every day, taking
new forms, using new methods and manifesting itself
in ways that compel us to continuously reconsider and
re-evaluate the steps we take, the tools we use and the
measures we deploy. Our efforts need to be
multifaceted and comprehensive in order to adequately
respond to the threats and dangers posed by terrorism.
The demise of Osama bin Laden is considered as a
critical development in that regard, and crucial in our
joint efforts to fight terrorism.
We have on a number of occasions pointed out
that the committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has evolved into one of the most critical
instruments in the fight against the threat posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We have thus far witnessed
considerable improvements in the Committee’s
procedures, but its work is a continuous dynamic
undertaking that requires our full attention and
thorough and careful consideration of each new step,
all in order to further strengthen the effectiveness,
transparency and credibility of this sanctions regime.
However, we are aware that there are still some
concerns, and we believe that they will be adequately
addressed in the coming period in order to strengthen
the counterterrorism framework. We extend our full
support to the Committee and its Chairman in further
improving the sanctions regime established by
resolution 1267 (1999).
In addition, I wish to emphasize that we attach
great importance to the role of the Ombudsperson,
which in our opinion can only significantly enhance
and contribute to regime’s fairness and transparency.
However, it is very important to consider our next steps
in order to realize the full potential of this institution.
The effective implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) is an essential prerequisite and
key element of an unyielding and consistent
counterterrorism framework. We are of the view that

13

S/PV.6536

the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with the
valuable support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, remains one of the key elements
of that framework. We therefore strongly support the
work of the Committee to improve its efficiency and
transparency. Thematic discussions and regional
presentations are making the Committee more focused
on challenges, deficiencies and difficulties in the
implementation of the respective resolutions. We are
pleased to see that the Chairman plans to move towards
the Committee’s continued engagement in these
discussions and to make greater use of their outcomes
and results.
Here, it is appropriate to mention very successful
outcome of the recent CTC meeting at the Council of
Europe in Strasbourg with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Furthermore, regular
briefings for Member States proved to be an
indispensable tool in enhancing transparency and
creating a forum for exchange of views and
recommendations.
I would now like to address the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Over the past seven years, resolution 1540
(2004) has demonstrated its great relevance among
international instruments dealing with the issue of
global non-proliferation and counter-terrorism. The
1540 Committee also proved to be an indispensable
mechanism in extending support and assistance to
Member States in building and further developing their
capacity to face the threat of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. Bosnia and Herzegovina
acknowledges and commends this work. We therefore
voted in favour of resolution 1977 (2011) and the
extension of the 1540 Committee’s mandate for 10
years.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) cannot
be fully and effectively implemented by one State
alone. Such implementation is rather a long-term task
that requires continuous efforts by Member States at
the national, regional and international levels. The
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is also a very complex and costly process. We
therefore call upon Member States able to provide
resources to extend their voluntary financial
contributions to States in need of assistance to
implement the resolution. No financial cost is too high
if it helps prevent the potentially devastating

14

consequences of terrorist attacks with weapons of mass
destruction.
In conclusion, we are thoroughly convinced that,
under the able chairmanships of the Permanent
Representatives of Germany, India and South Africa,
the Committees will continue to pursue effective and
stronger measures in the fight against terrorism. Bosnia
and Herzegovina will, for its part, continue to fully
support and contribute to the overall international
efforts in countering terrorism, at both the national and
international levels.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank Ambassadors
Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for
their comprehensive briefings and commend them for
their work chairing their respective Committees.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the European
Union.
Following the order of the briefings we have
heard, let me turn first to the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). We very much appreciate
the high priority given by Ambassador Singh Puri to
enhancing transparency and public outreach and further
strengthening cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations. In this regard, we note
in particular the outcome of the special meeting on the
prevention of terrorism organized by the Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) last month in Strasbourg and hosted by the
Council of Europe. The preventative aspects of the
fight against terrorism reflected in resolution 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) and highlighted more recently
in resolution 1963 (2010) should play, we believe, an
indispensable role in the general framework of any
comprehensive structural counter-terrorism strategy in
order to actively address conditions conducive to
radicalization, incitement and recruitment to terrorism.
In this regard, we congratulate the CTC for the well
designed set of thematic discussion panels, which were
attended at a remarkably high level and fruitfully open
to civil society experts.
We strongly believe that effective counterterrorism measures and respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law are not only
complementary but mutually reinforcing. In the light of
that view, we encourage the Committee to continue to
incorporate the consideration of human rights and rule
of law issues in its country visits, preliminary

11-33901

S/PV.6536

implementation assessment programmes and strategic
activity plans.
Along with its work in assisting Member States
on matters relating to the better implementation of
relevant Council resolutions, the Committee should, in
our view, continue, and even intensify, its regional and
thematic approach with a view to developing regional
capacities and networks, prompting multi-sector
cooperation between States and organizations involved
in dealing with challenges concerning terrorism threats
to their region. In this regard, we welcome the
initiatives by the Committee and CTED in South Asia
and the Sahel, which, together with the Horn of Africa
region, should be seen, in our opinion, as key priority
areas for further international coordinated engagement
in countering international terrorism.
With regard to the briefing on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I wish
to thank Ambassador Wittig for sharing with us his
useful and appropriate personal comments on the
Committee’s current challenges. We welcome the very
relevant achievements and engagement of the Chair
regarding the ongoing process of review of several
categories of individuals and entities on the
Committee’s consolidated list, as well as with regard to
their respective narrative summaries.
Following the adoptions of resolutions 1904
(2009) and 1267 (1999), the Committee has taken
significant steps to promote transparency and improve
the sanctions regime. The establishment of the Office
of Ombudsperson to assist the Committee in de-listing
requests was one significant landmark in this regard,
opening an important door to listed individuals seeking
the reappreciation of the measures that affect them and
to reassess and readdress the situation. Portugal
strongly supports Judge Kimberly Prost and commends
her for her strong commitment to carrying out an
important mandate.
The three comprehensive reports already
submitted are a testimony to the serious work done so
far by the Ombudsperson to collect all the relevant
available information on the cases in question and to
provide final observations with reasoned arguments
that merit serious consideration by the Committee. In
this regard, we also attach importance to a complete
and well-founded response of the Committee to these
observations.

11-33901

In light of the upcoming draft resolution to renew
resolution 1904 (2009), we believe that improving the
Committee’s procedures and working methods with a
view to underlining the preventive and temporary
nature of the sanctions regime with fair and clear
procedures and enhanced transparency, in line with the
thrust of the Monitoring Team’s recommendations in
its recent report, will only reinforce its impact,
allowing for a stronger application of the sanctions
regime by States, thus rendering it more effective in
the framework of counter-terrorism. We look forward
to this future exercise and to engaging fully in its
negotiations.
In relation to the 1540 Committee, I wish to
thank Ambassador Sangqu for his report and his
leadership of the Committee during the few months
leading to the unanimous adoption of resolution 1977
(2011) last month, extending the mandate of the
Committee for the next 10 years. We feel that a good
compromise was reached. A decade will provide the
necessary continuity to effectively monitor and assist
efforts to prevent weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the wrong hands, while maintaining a wide
ownership of the process. With two comprehensive
reviews per cycle, regular assessment is ensured, as
well as the opportunity to adjust to new realities,
challenges and threats.
We welcome in particular the fact that the
resolution recognizes the significance of active and
enhanced cooperation with States and relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations to
promote the sharing of experiences, lessons learned
and best practices, as well as facilitating the provision
of technical assistance in order to meet all the requests
that might be presented to the Committee. Finally, we
support the establishment of a group of experts, and we
consider it essential to conduct a careful reflection in
the near future on its expertise requirements and on a
workable structure that will improve the Committee’s
ability to carry out its mandate.
Allow me to say one last word to express our
appreciation for the close cooperation and coordination
among the three counter-terrorism committees, aimed
at facilitating the fulfilment of their mandates,
improving efficiency and maximizing results. In this
regard, we support the possible future co-location of
the groups of experts. We also commend the
committees’ contributions within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force

15

S/PV.6536

(CTITF), and in this respect I wish to welcome the
outreach efforts of the CTITF and commend it and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their very useful briefings to the general
membership on the activities pursued, in cooperation
with States and regional organizations, in the context
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Allow
me to join my colleagues in thanking the Chairmen for
their briefings. Their dedicated leadership is central to
the effectiveness of the Council’s three counterterrorism-related committees.
This meeting of the Council takes place at a
critical juncture in our collective counter-terrorism
efforts, with the death of Osama bin Laden earlier this
month and the tenth anniversary of 11 September 2001
approaching. Bin Laden’s death is the most significant
blow yet to Al-Qaida’s leadership, but it does not mark
the end of Al-Qaida or of terrorism. We know that
much work remains. Our partnerships have put
unprecedented pressure on Al-Qaida. The United States
will actively pursue its bilateral and multilateral
counter-terrorism efforts, including efforts at the
United Nations. For the United States, the United
Nations is a key partner in the collective effort to
combat and prevent terrorism.
I thank Ambassador Puri for his exceptional
guidance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
during his first five months as its Chairman. He has
fostered greater efficiency in the work of the CTC and
has worked closely with Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), to keep the general
membership up to date on the Committee’s activities
through open meetings. The CTC and CTED made
great strides in 2010. We applaud CTED’s increased
focus on developing innovative regional capacitybuilding workshops. Whether in the Horn of Africa, the
Sahel, South-East Asia or South Asia, CTED has
proven itself by bringing together local officials from
the region to identify practical solutions to common
counter-terrorism challenges.
We are particularly pleased with how resolution
1963 (2010) has helped align the Council’s counterterrorism framework with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We support the emphasis
on addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of

16

terrorism and on reminding all that respect for human
rights and the rule of law is an essential part of a
successful counter-terrorism effort. We also need to
stress the critical role that local communities and civil
society can play in our collective efforts to prevent and
combat terrorism.
For over 11 years, the sanctions regime under
resolution 1267 (1999) has been one of the United
Nations most effective counter-terrorism tools and a
symbol of international consensus against the ongoing
threats posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The death
of Osama bin Laden must not slow the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). The Committee should update its sanctions list
regularly to reflect the changing nature of the terrorist
threat.
The United States welcomes the significant
enhancements to the regime’s listing and de-listing
processes, most notably the review of every name on
the consolidated list and the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson to ensure that de-listing
procedures are fair and transparent. Over the past
several months, we have worked very closely with the
1267 Ombudsperson. She has performed an important
role in facilitating the flow of information among
petitioners, Member States and the Committee, and her
reports to the Committee have provided valuable
information. We look forward to continuing to work
with her to further enhance the integrity of the
sanctions regime.
In June, the Council will review the 1267 regime
and renew the mandates of the Monitoring Team and
the Ombudsperson. We hope that other members will
join us in considering a range of reforms to tailor the
regime to the unique threats posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. In addition, we will continue to push for more
robust implementation of existing sanctions by all
Member States in order to make global sanctions more
effective.
Let me thank Ambassador Wittig and his team for
doing excellent work since he took over as Chairman
in January. They, along with the Secretariat, have
worked diligently to implement the latest round of
reforms. I also thank the Monitoring Team for its
important role.
The United States welcomes the Security
Council’s recent adoption of resolution 1977 (2011),
which extends the mandate of the Committee

11-33901

S/PV.6536

established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for 10
years. Let me thank Ambassador Sangqu, the
Secretariat and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their work that led to
resolution 1977 (2011), as well as for their continuing
efforts to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004).
The United States will continue its commitment
to the work of the Committee under its new long-term
mandate, and in that regard we are pleased to announce
that we will make a contribution of $3 million for the
1540 Committee’s work. Resolution 1977 (2011) urges
the Committee to actively engage in dialogue with
States on implementing resolution 1540 (2004), and we
are coordinating with the Group of Experts to conduct
a country visit to the United States in September 2011.
We look forward to the Committee’s recommendations
regarding working methods, modality and structure to
maximize
the
Committee’s
efficiency
and
effectiveness, and we strongly support appointing a
coordination and leadership position on the Group of
Experts, which would help coordinate the overall
activities of the Committee.
We support the efforts and overall direction of
these three committees. Under the capable leadership
of the Chairmen, the Council’s counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States’ actions
to deter terrorism and proliferation efforts by non-State
actors.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): While
the events of 2 May 2011 marked a very important step
in the fight against terrorism, the most recent events in
Morocco, which my country firmly condemns, remind
us that terrorist groups are resolved to continue their
criminal activities. The Security Council must
therefore devote greater attention and vigilance to this
issue as long as the terrorist threat remains a clear and
present danger.
The Committees chaired by Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri, Ambassador Peter Wittig and Ambassador
Baso Sangqu show the resolve of the international
community in combating this threat. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank them for their
briefings on the activities of the Committees that they
have led since January. I would also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the role played by Turkey,
Austria and Mexico in leading the work of the
Committees in 2010 and 2011.

11-33901

My delegation would like to reaffirm its firm
support for the actions undertaken and mechanisms set
up under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).
The struggle against terrorism also requires more
sustained
international
cooperation
and
the
strengthening of the capacities of the States that are
least equipped to effectively combat this scourge.
Special attention must be paid to the credibility and
legitimacy of international counter-terrorism efforts by
ensuring full respect for obligations imposed under
international, human rights, refugee and international
humanitarian law. My delegation would like to make a
few comments on these three Committees.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, we
welcome the first general update of the sanctions list of
all individuals and entities suspected of being
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We believe
that the various amendments made to the list in 2010
by the Monitoring Team and the substantial
information provided on these persons and entities
represent significant progress in terms of the fairness
and transparency of the sanctions.
My delegation urges the Committee to continue
its consideration of pending situations, pursuant to
paragraph 26 of resolution 1904 (2009), especially
those concerning deceased individuals and entities that
no longer exist.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute, as other
delegations have, to the assistance provided by the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost, in the
Committee’s consideration of de-listing requests
submitted to it. We are also convinced that
strengthening cooperation and dialogue between the
Committee and Member States will enable us to better
grasp the difficulties faced in the implementation of
resolution 1267 (1999). Similarly, strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL in the field of exchange of information
remains essential.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
Committee has, first, improved its methods of work to
ensure greater transparency and effectiveness in its
work; and secondly, better utilized the tools at its

17

S/PV.6536

disposal, including preliminary assessments, to better
focus on the needs of Member States, country visits,
cooperation with regional organizations, and the
promotion of codes of conduct.
We welcome the organization of regional training
workshops as part of an approach that enables us to
highlight the specific challenges faced in certain areas
of the world. My country also had the honour of
hosting, last June, a workshop for countries of the
Central African subregion on the legal provisions
applicable to illegal acts committed against the security
of maritime navigation and offshore platforms. The
conclusions of the workshop have enabled us to raise
awareness among the countries of the subregion on the
dangers of illegal practices on the high seas and to
strengthen their cooperation with a view to putting an
end to such practices. As the Chair of subcommittee C,
Gabon will continue to support the efforts of the 1373
Committee.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation
welcomes the adoption on 20 April of resolution 1977
(2011), extending the mandate of the Committee for 10
more years. The resolution also recalls the obligation
of Member States to adopt national provisions
regarding the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. We therefore
welcome the establishment of a group of experts under
the Committee, charged with ensuring the
implementation of the resolution. We also welcome the
strengthening of the objectives of the Committee in the
fields of assistance and cooperation.
In conclusion, we recall the global nature of
counter-terrorism efforts, which require the active
participation and cooperation of all States,
international and regional organizations and civil
society. Gabon will continue to lend its support to
Ambassador Puri, Ambassador Wittig and Ambassador
Sangqu in the discharge of their respective mandates.

international conventions and protocols against
terrorism and fully support the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The repudiation of
terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a
fundamental principle of our international relations.
Brazil values the important work carried out by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. We believe that its
ongoing efforts to improve its working methods are
crucial to strengthening its legitimacy. As we begin
discussions on a revision of the work of the
Committee, it is important to keep fairness and respect
for due process as our guiding principles. In that
regard, we believe that the recent proposals by a group
of like-minded countries regarding listing and
de-listing procedures, access to information and the
activities of the Ombudsperson deserve careful
consideration.
Brazil also commends the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate. We also appreciate the CTC’s
outreach activities, especially the technical assistance
provided to Member States.
The risk of terrorists’ gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction will be completely eliminated only
when these weapons no longer exist. The complete
elimination of weapons of mass destruction must be
our ultimate objective. In this sense, resolution 1540
(2004) remains an important tool for keeping non-State
actors away from weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. In order to preserve its widely
recognized legitimacy, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts must continue to act in a transparent way and
in particular reinforce their dialogue with the wider
United Nations membership.

Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank Ambassadors
Puri, Wittig and Sangqu for their valuable briefings and
able chairmanship of their respective Committees. We
commend the ongoing cooperation among these
Committees, which play a central role in the broader
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.

Brazil reaffirms its commitment to a coordinated
and multidimensional response to the challenges posed
by terrorism. Addressing the root causes of this scourge
is also of the essence. The United Nations should be at
the forefront of these efforts. The Security Council,
through the work of the three Committees, must
continue to strive to help bring terrorism to a definitive
end.

There is no excuse for terrorist acts. Brazil has
historically condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We are party to all relevant

Finally, we once more extend our heartfelt
solidarity and sympathy to all those who have suffered
from the devastating impact of terrorism.

18

11-33901

S/PV.6536

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their detailed
briefings on the activities of the counter-terrorism
Committees and for their efforts and energetic work in
leading them. The recommendations and analyses in
their briefings deserve our careful attention.
The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
are essential mechanisms to ensure the implementation
of the obligations deriving from those instruments. It is
therefore essential to continue strengthening their
institutional capacities, continuously assess their
working methods and revitalize their tools in order to
facilitate cooperation and assistance to Member States.
To that end and in accordance with resolution
1963 (2010), the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
through the Executive Directorate, should continue to
work closely and in coordination with other United
Nations bodies on capacity-building to apply the
counter-terrorism international instruments, including
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the resolutions of the Security Council.
We welcome the review of the preliminary
assessment of implementation format and the
strengthening of dialogue with the Member States.
Greater transparency in the preparation of assessments
will provide more accurate information not only on the
status of implementation, but also on the assistance
needed by Member States. We highlight the renewed
emphasis placed on respect for human rights as an
essential part of international efforts against terrorism.
In this regard, the Committee should also promote
measures aimed at protecting and promoting the rights
of victims of terrorism. Unfortunately, this essential
element of the fight against terrorism, reflected in the
Global Strategy, has not been properly developed in the
framework of the Organization.
Regarding the 1267 Committee, Colombia
welcomes the reforms introduced by resolution 1904
(2009), aimed at improving procedures, particularly
with regard to respect for due process, transparency
and the quality of the information contained in the
consolidated list. The creation of the Office of the
Ombudsperson was a major step towards the
strengthening and legitimacy of the regime.
Ms. Kimberly Prost has done an outstanding job in her
few months as Ombudsperson.

11-33901

We must continue to deepen the reform process
aimed at establishing fairer and more transparent
procedures. The Committee should ensure greater
availability of and access to the information related to
individuals and entities, and the reasons for listing
and/or de-listing. It is necessary to strengthen the
Office of the Ombudsperson and to provide resources
sufficient to the effective accomplishment of the
mandate. It is essential that the Committee facilitate
the provision of assistance to Member States so they
can have appropriate procedures to fully implement the
obligations arising from resolution 1267 (1999) and
subsequent resolutions.
I would like now to refer to the 1540 Committee.
My delegation co-sponsored resolution 1977 (2011)
because we are convinced that the very existence of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
delivery systems constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. With the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council
acknowledged the progress achieved by States, and
recognized that the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is a task that requires ongoing efforts at
the national, regional and international levels.
International cooperation and technical assistance
are essential tools in responding effectively to the risk
that non-State actors may acquire, develop or use
weapons of mass destruction and/or traffic in them.
The extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee
for 10 years will help us to plan its long-term activities
and increase its capacity to support Member States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
Through various resolutions, the Security Council
has ordered that States must prevent all terrorist acts,
block and punish their funding, offer no passive or
active support for terrorism, and intensify and facilitate
the exchange of operational information, inter alia. We
therefore reiterate that cooperation in this respect
cannot be left to the discretion of States but is an
obligation under Chapter VII of the Charter.
My country has suffered the scourge of terrorism
and condemns it in all its forms and manifestations. We
reaffirm that there are neither motivations nor
circumstances to justify it. We are convinced that
terrorism can be defeated only with comprehensive and
decisive action of the international community through
cooperation and compliance with the obligations of
international law. International declarations and

19

S/PV.6536

condemnation of terrorism of any form are essential,
but even more important are decisive strikes against
terrorism and its perpetrators, such as that which
recently put an end to the criminal career of Osama Bin
Laden. Terrorist groups and the international networks
they have created remain active, requiring the
international community to reiterate its resolve to fight
them head on.

Terrorism is the arch-enemy of the international
community, and China, too, has been its victim. China
opposes all forms of terrorism and hopes that the
international community will continue to intensify
cooperation and take joint steps to crack down on it.
China supports the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations and the Security Council in playing a key role
in the international struggle against terrorism.

International cooperation should be the guiding
principle in the fight against terrorism. It is therefore
necessary to continue strengthening the coordination
between the three Committees and between them and
competent United Nations entities that are part of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Chairmen of the three Committees, the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa,
for their exhaustive briefings and efforts alongside all
members of the Security Council to promote
international counter-terrorism cooperation. I should
like to make the following comments.

Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their
briefings.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has recently made notable progress in the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1904
(2009). In June, the Council shall adopt a draft
resolution renewing sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. China hopes that the new resolution will help
the Committee to improve its work and safeguard the
authority and effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
China appreciates the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) in implementing the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions. China
supports the CTC’s activities, such as the organization
of workshops, improving national preliminary
assessment of implementation reports, facilitating
technical assistance, pursuing dialogue with Member
States and helping them to intensify their counterterrorism capacity-building.
The Security Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011) reflects the resolve of Member
States to promote international counter-proliferation
efforts and represents a new phase in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). China hopes
that the Committee will pursue its work in a practical
and prudent manner, assist Member States in fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution, and promote
progress towards all goals set forth in resolution 1540
(2004) in a balanced, comprehensive and effective
manner. China will continue alongside other Member
States to support and participate in the work of the
Committee and to promote further progress in the
international non-proliferation process.

20

First, with respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and Associated Individuals
and Entities, Lebanon welcomes the efforts of the
Committee, its Panel of Experts and the Secretariat,
which have helped to update the consolidated list and
better to disseminate information on the reasons for
listing. We also support the efforts of the
Ombudsperson, who has contributed to the
transparency of the Committee’s regime and to respect
for the fundamental rights of listed individuals. We
believe that the success of her mission is closely linked
to States’ cooperation with her. Lebanon supports
efforts to improve the working methods of the
Committee. In that regard, we reiterate that if we want
sanctions to have greater legitimacy, they must be in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
international humanitarian law, even if they are
preventive in nature.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which was established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), Lebanon welcomes its efforts and those of the
Executive Directorate to promote the legislative and
institutional capacities of States in combating
terrorism. We encourage the continuation of
cooperation with States and international and regional
organizations in order to implement the provisions of
resolutions 1624 (2005), 1373 (2001) and 1267 (1999),
for combating terrorism must be complemented by
regional and subregional efforts. We welcome the
Committee’s meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations in Strasbourg in April to
consider the best ways to prevent terrorism.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

Lebanon looks forward to the comprehensive
updated survey on resolution 1373 (2001), which will
be published next month, as the survey will evaluate
the implementation of the resolution and the challenges
all of us face. We would also like to emphasize the
importance of the meeting to be held to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001). That will be a very important
international milestone that will provide us an
opportunity to discuss the issue of terrorism and
counter-terrorism in general.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we support the
adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which extended the
Committee’s mandate for a further 10 years. The
Committee will have to address a number of new
challenges in the coming 10 years in order to fully
implement the resolution’s provisions. Resolution 1977
(2011) affirmed the importance of States’ compliance
with their obligations to work towards disarmament
and limit proliferation. In that regard, we wish to stress
the importance of all three aspects and the need to take
into account the principle of equitable geographic
representation in selecting the members of the Panel of
Experts.
We welcome the role played by the Committee to
strengthen the ability of States to take effective
measures at the international level to prevent terrorists
and non-State actors from acquiring sensitive
technologies that could lead to proliferation, whether
nuclear, biological or chemical. We believe that the
assistance provided by the Committee and the Panel of
Experts to States that request it is one of the key
elements to implementation.
Efforts undertaken at the national, regional and
international efforts are of great importance when it
comes to providing assistance, exchanging experiences
and capacity-building. All of this is aimed at better
implementing resolution 1540 (2001). In that regard, I
would like to recall the efforts made by the League of
Arab States to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their falling into the hands of
terrorists. We also wish to stress the importance of
making the Middle East a zone free of nuclear
weapons.
Finally, given the numerous acts of terrorism we
have suffered over the years, Lebanon is among the
States most familiar with the dangers of terrorism. We

11-33901

would therefore like to reaffirm our cooperation with
the three Committees and our full support for counterterrorism efforts.
We believe that the death of Osama bin Laden,
leader of Al-Qaida, opens up a new chapter but does
not bring an end to terrorism, which continues to claim
lives on a daily basis regardless of faith or nationality.
We therefore call for continued constructive dialogue
among all countries to develop a common definition of
terrorism pursuant to international human rights law.
This is a scourge that threatens all of our lives, our
security and our prosperity. It also threatens the values
that unity us.
Notwithstanding the resolutions and steps
adopted by the United Nations, Lebanon believes that
the struggle against terrorism entails dealing with the
root causes of this phenomenon, especially by
eliminating hotbeds of tension, double standards,
foreign occupation, ignorance and violations of human
rights and sacred religious principles.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks
indeed to the Chairs of the three Committees for their
very helpful briefings today. We commend their
commitment and energy in leading the work of these
Committees dedicated to the fight against terrorism.
This debate comes at an important moment. The
death of Osama bin Laden has significant
consequences for the fight against terrorism
worldwide. As British Foreign Secretary William
Hague said, it was a devastating, but not a terminal,
blow to Al-Qaida. We will need to be as vigilant and as
determined as ever in fighting terrorism. The United
Nations, including through the work of these three
Committees, has a crucial role to play. Let me turn first
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), which is a unique tool in countering
terrorism worldwide and in its potential to support
Afghan and international efforts on reconciliation in
Afghanistan.
This sanctions regime has undergone significant
reform since its inception, in 1999. The Committee has
made great strides forward in ensuring that procedures
are fair and clear. Today, it systematically and regularly
reviews all designations. A fundamental development
has been the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. We are fortunate to have found such a
well qualified and dedicated individual in Kimberly
Prost as the first incumbent of that role. We are

21

S/PV.6536

encouraged by the level of cooperation that States have
extended to Ms. Prost, the seriousness with which the
Committee approaches this process and the significant
improvements that Ms. Prost has already brought to
bear on the de-listing process.

Within the Committee, we will soon begin a
review of the Group of Experts to ensure that the
Committee is getting the best possible support and that
the Experts are working as effectively as possible to
provide support to the States requesting assistance.

There is of course more that we can do. We must
consider whether today Taliban and Al-Qaida listings
belong under one sanctions regime. The death of bin
Laden presents an opportunity for us to send a clear
message to the Taliban that it is time for them to
separate themselves from Al-Qaida and to participate
in a peaceful political process in Afghanistan. We must
ensure that the list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) supports, rather
than frustrates, this reconciliation process.

I should like to close by reiterating the
importance that the United Kingdom attaches to the
Security Council’s fight against terrorism and our
ongoing commitment to the work of the 1267, 1373
and 1540 Committees.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), too, we have come
a long way. But the threat from international terrorism
is evolving and becoming more diffuse. Our response
to it as the international community must therefore
evolve. The United Nations should continue to work to
build the counter-terrorism capacity of all Member
States. It must fill the gaps that would otherwise be
exploited by terrorists, their financiers and their
supporters. As we take this forward, we must ensure
complementarity in the work of States, the United
Nations and other multilateral actors to best mitigate
the terrorist threat.
Finally, let me turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which is a crucial
component of international efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
terrorists. We welcome the recent renewal of resolution
1540 (2004), which placed it on a solid, long-term
foundation. Our extension of its mandate by 10 years
demonstrates the conviction of the Security Council
that international action is essential to combat this
threat. The United Kingdom believes that it is key that
we continue to move from reporting to implementation
over this period.
The next 10 years present an opportunity for us to
achieve significant progress in implementation and for
the 1540 Committee to assist States in meeting their
obligations under this resolution. We must ensure that
the Committee and the Group of Experts have the
architecture in place to ensure that they can work
efficiently and effectively to achieve this aim.

22

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their
briefings.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as representative of France.
I should like at the outset to associate myself with
the statement to be made later by the representative of
the delegation of the European Union (EU) on behalf
of the EU.
International terrorism remains a serious threat to
international peace and security. The death of Osama
Bin Laden does not mean the end of Al-Qaida. The
relentless fight against those criminals must continue
and involve all States Members of the United Nations.
The United Nations must remain mobilized
through the work of its three sanctions committees.
First, the sanctions regime set up in 1999 against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban must continue to evolve,
which will not weaken but strengthen it. The upcoming
review of resolution 1904 (2009) will provide an
opportunity for us to assess the effectiveness of
sanctions, their adaptation to a constantly evolving
threat and their legitimacy. To that end, we must take
into account the changing relationship between the
Taliban and Al-Qaida over the past 10 years and their
respective objectives. We should like also to see the
sanctions regime have a more direct impact on the
quest for a political solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan. Thus we wish to bolster the legitimacy of
the current regime by responding to a number of
criticisms, some of which are justified, by improving
the mechanisms set up pursuant to resolution 1904
(2009).
Secondly, 10 years after its creation, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) is continuing to make
progress in the fight against terrorism at the global
level, even as States continue to face new challenges. I

11-33901

S/PV.6536

should like to touch on two areas in which the
Committee, as a result of the support of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), adds value
that is recognized by all: border protection and the
fight against the financing of terrorism.
In that context, the regional workshop held
recently by the CTED in Nouakchott with the
participation of practitioners from the Sahelian region
opens the door to improved regional cooperation in an
area that is especially affected by terrorism. The
combat against terrorism also requires that many States
improve their technical capacities. France is making a
contribution in this area and is determined to support
the work of the CTED in this field.
Thirdly, with respect to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I, too,
should like to welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), which extends for a further 10
years the mandate of the Committee. The Council is
thus sending a clear and unified signal on the need for
long-term action by the international community to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.
Security Council resolution 1977 (2011) also
provides the Committee with the means to more
effectively fulfil its mandate. These include the
strengthening of the Group of Experts charged with
assisting it; the five-year review mechanism; and the
drawing up of a list of specific priorities in the area of
the sharing of experiences and best practices and in the
promotion of an active dialogue, including on the
ground, between the Committee and States regarding
their implementation efforts.
We also welcome the fact that resolution 1977
(2011) strengthens the work of the Committee in the
field of assistance, an area to which we attach
particular importance. France is thus ready, in
cooperation with the Office for Disarmament Affairs,
to host a conference in Paris on assistance. We must
not only raise awareness about resolution 1540 (2004)
but also focus our efforts on its concrete
implementation by all Member States. Resolution 1977
(2011) provides us with a clear road map for the next
years. It is now up to us to use these new tools, and we
intend to work actively in that respect with the other
members of the Committee.
Finally, coordination is important. That is why
France lends its full support to the work of the

11-33901

Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
will continue to coordinate the work of various actors,
including the three Committees we are dealing with
today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism-related committees
for their respective briefings on the developments
during the last six months.
Japan welcomes the recent remarkable progress
in the field of counter-terrorism. Yet the death of
Osama Bin Laden does not mean the end of the fight
against terrorism. The threat of terrorism remains
serious, and it is necessary for the international
community to cooperate closely in all areas of counterterrorism. In that regard, the work of the three
committees continues to be of high significance.
In order to strengthen the counter-terrorism
capacity of individual Member States, the enhancement
of assistance for capacity-building is a matter of
urgency.
We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1977 (2011) and the decision contained
therein regarding the 10-year extension of the mandate
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We commend the fact that the resolution
focuses on activities such as implementation,
assistance, international cooperation and transparency.
With respect to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, we must address the issue of Member
States’ limited resources, expertise and capacity to
fully implement the resolution. We must also increase
awareness among Member States through assistance
and outreach activities. In this regard, Japan is coorganizing a seminar, to be held on 31 May, to
exchange views and experiences on non-proliferation,
including with regard to resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1977 (2011). We will continue to cooperate with the
activities of the 1540 Committee so that we may
achieve the international objective of non-proliferation.
In order to strengthen counter-terrorism capacity,
an assessment of the shortfall of counter-terrorism
measures in Member States is essential. In this regard,
we attach great importance to the preliminary
implementation assessment by the CTC as a crucial

23

S/PV.6536

tool and consider the country visits conducted by the
CTC to be one of the most valuable mechanisms for
making the assessment more effective. Such visits
facilitate an accurate assessment of the current
situation of counter-terrorism in a given country, as
they provide direct contact with the relevant
authorities. The CTC has decided to conduct a country
visit to Japan by the end of 2013. We anticipate that the
visit will be a good opportunity for Japan and the CTC
to have a fruitful discussion on the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Japan will continue its efforts to strengthen its
national capacity and to assist, to the maximum extent
possible, in the enhancement of the counter-terrorism
capacities of other States, especially developing States.
Even after the death of Osama bin Laden, Member
States should continue to implement rigorously assets
freezes and other relevant measures against him and
against individuals and entities associated with him.
In order for the 1267 sanctions regime to be fully
effective, continued efforts to ensure the credibility of
the Consolidated List are indispensable. To that end,
Japan took active part in the negotiations for resolution
1904 (2009) as a member of the Security Council.
It is my hope that, at the review in June this year
pursuant to resolution 1904 (2009), the legitimacy and
credibility of the Consolidated List will be enhanced
and the 1267 sanctions regime will be strengthened. In
this regard, we call on the members of the Security
Council, taking into account the obligations of the
Member States under the Charter of the United
Nations, to duly consider the proposals by like-minded
States, including Switzerland and Costa Rica. Japan
will continue to cooperate actively with the 1267
Committee, the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring
Team.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of
September 11 and of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), Japan supports the initiative by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to organize a special
meeting open to the wider membership and relevant
stakeholders. We expect that, as this year marks a
milestone in our collective global counter-terrorism
efforts, this meeting will provide a good opportunity
for the international community to reflect on and
review the progress made so far in the fight against
terrorism.

24

At the same time, we strongly request that the
three Committees make a determined effort to enhance
their mutual cooperation, while avoiding duplication of
work, and to cooperate with Member States and other
relevant organizations both inside and outside the
United Nations to achieve our common goal of
eradicating terrorism. The Government of Japan will
continue to take all possible measures to counter
worldwide terrorism and to cooperate positively and
proactively in the efforts of the three Committees.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Mr. President, we
congratulate you and the delegation of France for the
excellent work of the Security Council under your
leadership this month. We also felicitate the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations and
his team for their successful presidency of the Council
during the month of April.
We support the efforts of the Council’s three
subsidiary
Committees
in
promoting
greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States with
regard to their respective areas of activities.
Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine should be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.
Roughly 72 hours ago, two terrorist suicide
bombers attacked a paramilitary training centre in
northwest Pakistan, killing more than 80 soldiers of the
Frontier Corps and injuring more than 70 other
persons. The incident has once again highlighted the
enormous sacrifices that Pakistan continues to make in
order to rid the world of terrorism.
Pakistan needs the solid and unwavering support
of the international community in its fight against
terrorism. Pakistan has deployed 160,000 troops on its
border with Afghanistan and has set up 822 border
posts to interdict members of A1-Qaida and Taliban. As
a result of terrorist acts and our efforts to root out
terrorism. Pakistan has lost 30,000 men, women and
children and more than 5,000 armed forces personnel.
The international community needs to promote
economic and social development as part of a holistic

11-33901

S/PV.6536

approach to curb and eliminate extremism and
terrorism.
The
promotion
of
socio-economic
development in places afflicted by extremism should
be a high priority.
Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering the financing of terrorism. Pakistan has
become a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
Financial Monitoring Unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions. Hundreds of bank accounts, to the tune of
750.8 million rupees, have been frozen. We are
implementing
the
comprehensive
international
standards embodied in the 40 recommendations and
9 special recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force. We are active members of the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) organized a workshop for
Pakistani parliamentarians in Islamabad in November
2009 and a study visit of Pakistan’s parliamentarians to
Turkey in February this year. Today, the Executive
Director of CTED, Mr. Mike Smith, is in Islamabad to
organize a workshop for strengthening anti-moneylaundering laws and countering financing for terrorism.
We have noted the work programme of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for 2011 annexed
to document S/2011/223, and we appreciate the
Committee’s efforts to enhance transparency by
holding informal briefings for Member States.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and its Monitoring Team have a difficult task to
perform. We appreciate the efforts of the 1267
Sanctions Committee to bring clarity to its working
methods, and we note that the Committee has made an
effort to improve its guidelines. There are many
interesting ideas in the eleventh report of the
Monitoring Team (see S/2011/245) to improve the
Committee’s performance and enhance transparency in
its work. Some of those ideas are hard to implement,
and others can be incorporated easily in the current
regime. Different ideas to enhance the efficacy of the
1267 sanctions regime need to be studied in detail.
We are of the view that the institution of the
Ombudsperson must be strengthened and her views on
listing and de-listing issues given due weight. In case
of disagreement between observations of the

11-33901

Ombudsperson and a decision of the Committee, the
rationale for the Committee’s decision should be made
public in the interest of greater transparency.
We are not surprised that decisions of domestic
and international courts and tribunals on the 1267
sanctions regime have garnered worldwide attention.
The litigation relating to individuals and entities on the
Consolidated List in Canada, the European Union, the
European Court of Human Rights, the United
Kingdom, Pakistan and the United States has
highlighted legal challenges faced by the sanctions
regime in various parts of the world.
The preventive nature of the sanctions makes the
listings very simple and enforcement-friendly.
However, the legal community is more inclined to
verifiable evidence that could be acceptable in a court
of law. The questions of due process and effective
remedy are at the heart of court deliberations. We will
have to consider exclusive sharing of the verifiable
evidence with the courts and fixing a time limit for the
effectiveness of a listing.
Pakistan was a member of the Security Council
when resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. We agreed
that it was a timely measure to address the threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to non-State actors. We have
consistently identified the need to make the 1540
follow-up mechanism more inclusive, transparent and
balanced in terms of responsibilities of States and the
international cooperation available to them to achieve
its objectives.
We believe that the recently adopted resolution
1977 (2011), which extended the mandate of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), should have been negotiated
after an open debate by the Council. In such a debate,
all Members of the United Nations would have had the
opportunity to express their views on, inter alia, the
scope, limitations, future direction, tenure of mandate
and experiences in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). That open debate would have then
provided the basis for the negotiations and extension of
the resolution. Such an open and inclusive process for
discussing an important resolution would have helped
to increase the level of confidence of all United
Nations Member States in this process, as it is they that
are ultimately required to implement the resolution,
which has its roots in State-driven efforts.

25

S/PV.6536

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoglu (Turkey): Let me begin by
thanking the three Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We highly appreciate their
leadership and the valuable work undertaken by the
Committees they respectively chair.
Earlier this month, the Security Council voiced
the sentiments of the larger international community
when it welcomed the news that Osama bin Laden
would never again be able to perpetrate acts of
terrorism, and reaffirmed that terrorism could not and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or group (see S/PRST/2011/9).
Despite that development, which certainly marks
as an important milestone in global efforts to eradicate
terrorism, there is no room for complacency. Indeed,
today, terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
continue to pose serious threats to international peace
and security. No country is immune to those crossborder threats. We should thus act in an even more
steadfast manner and strive to increase the
effectiveness of our endeavours.
I would like to thank to Mr. Peter Wittig,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), for his
valuable efforts. Over the past decade, the sanctions
regime has proven to be an effective tool in countering
Al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists and other individuals
and entities affiliated with those groups. We believe
that it has been instrumental in preventing many
possible terrorist attacks by imposing sanctions against
individuals and entities on its consolidated list.
At this stage, we need to concentrate our efforts
on further strengthening the sanctions regime. In that
regard, the rulings of national and regional courts
concerning some of the names on the list prove to be a
priority area that requires further and careful attention.
In that context, Turkey will pursue a constructive and
flexible approach so that the principles of due process
and fair procedures are taken into consideration, as
called for in some court decisions, without prejudging
the final decisions of the 1267 Committee.

26

We are also following the review process of the
consolidated list. With the active contribution of the
Monitoring Team, the Committee has already reviewed
a significant number of names. We hope that, with the
finalization of the review process, the consolidated list
will better reflect current threats, and thus become a
more credible instrument in coping with the
challenges.
We welcome the prolongation and refinement of
the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate through resolution 1963 (2010).
In particular, we appreciate the resolution’s focus on
countering incitement to terrorist acts motivated by
extremism and on ensuring respect for human rights
and the rule of law. Both aspects are crucial for
combating international terrorism in an effective and
legitimate manner.
We also would like to thank the members of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and especially the
Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri,
Permanent Representative of India, for his seamless
efforts. We also would like to recognize Mr. Mike
Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and his professional
and hardworking team for their support and
contributions to the work of the Committee.
That said, there are still deficiencies in the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), deriving from the lack of either political will or
capacity. In our view, one of the main challenges of the
Committee is to ensure that Member States fully
understand their obligations as listed in those
resolutions and take the necessary measures to
implement them. In that regard, the dialogue between
the Committee and Member States should be
intensified so that the Committee can more effectively
fulfil its monitoring and assistance tasks. For its part,
Turkey will effectively and actively strive to achieve
further progress in that direction. It is important that
the focus be on the practical measures for either
expanding the scope of some of the already-existing
arrangements or filling in the gaps identified in
implementation.
Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
emerged as an important component of the global
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes. We
are pleased that the level of implementation of the
resolution has improved remarkably. We thank the

11-33901

S/PV.6536

Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), under the able Chairmanship of
Mr. Baso Sangqu, and the Group of Experts for their
diligent work. Turkey continues to support the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which in our opinion is a
continuous process. Our efforts should therefore
continue unabated.
We believe that the country visits and outreach
events, such as conferences, seminars and workshops,
organized at the regional and subregional levels, are
also highly beneficial. We therefore support the
continuation of such activities within the framework of
all three Committees.
Before I conclude, let me emphasize again that
effectively countering terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction can only be ensured
through close cooperation among all Member States as
part of an integrated approach. I would like to reiterate
the determination of my country to continue to actively
support the work of all three Committees.
The President (spoke in French): It is now
12.30 p.m. and I have 10 speakers still inscribed on my
list. I intend to continue with the debate until we have
heard all speakers. I ask the remaining speakers to
make their remarks as succinct as possible.
I now give the floor to the representative of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the informal group of
like-minded countries that has taken a specific interest
in the question of fair and clear procedures in targeted
sanctions. That group currently includes Austria,
Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.
I will concentrate my remarks on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, in particular the
question of improving fair and clear procedures and
thereby also strengthening the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. I should underline that the group
fully supports and recognizes the application of
targeted sanctions as a useful and necessary tool to
effectively combat international terrorism.

11-33901

The issue at hand is how to ensure that the
Council and its Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee can continue to take effective and decisive
action in the face of terrorism while at the same time
honouring fundamental rule-of-law and due process
guarantees. Our common obligation to implement
decisions made by the Council coexists with our
obligation to respect fundamental human rights. As is
well known, the current sanctions regime continues to
face legal challenges, including by proceedings in
national and regional courts. That not only poses
challenges for Member States, but also creates the risk
of diluting the perceived authority vested in the
Security Council.
Those challenges are not a phenomenon that is
specific to one particular region alone. Individuals are
pursuing their right to challenge their designation in
regional and national courts around the globe. The
efficiency of the sanctions regime and the protection of
human rights are of global concern. The strengthening
of the system has to be pursued on a global level.
The like-minded countries welcome the
successive improvements that have been made to the
1267 sanctions regime so far, notably the establishment
of the focal point, the introduction of narrative
summaries and the comprehensive review undertaken
and followed by detailed periodic reviews of the
consolidated list and the various categories of listings.
Most importantly, we see the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson as a major step forward.
In this regard, we wish to commend the work that
Judge Kimberly Prost has already undertaken.
However, we believe that still more can and needs to
be done.
It is against this background, and with a view to
the adoption of the follow-up to resolution 1904 (2009)
in mid-June, that we sent a letter to the President of the
Council early in April outlining several proposals that
we believe would merit close consideration by the
Council in its continued efforts to improve and
strengthen the system. This letter has been distributed
as an annex to the written version of this statement. In
the interest of time, I will briefly highlight only some
of the proposals.
A key proposal is to introduce a time limit for all
listings. A set time limit would underline the
preventive and temporary nature of the sanctions
measures. It could also have implications for the level

27

S/PV.6536

of applicable due process requirements. We would like
to stress that the proposed sunset clause would not
result in automatic de-listings once the time limit has
expired. The Council and its sanctions committee
would retain the prerogative of maintaining a name on
the list upon review, but by affirmative decision. We
call on the Council to seriously consider introducing
such time limits for listings.
Secondly, a fundamental element of due process
is that the listed individual or entity be given access to
sufficient information to present an effective defence.
Much has already been achieved with the introduction
of narrative summaries of reasons for listings. Both the
narrative summaries and other information given to a
petitioner should be as detailed and comprehensive as
possible, which presupposes that States have provided
the Committee with such information. Upon request,
the Committee should, after consultation with the
designating State, inform the petitioner through the
Ombudsperson about the identity of the designating
State. We encourage the Council to look into every
possibility for improving its information base and the
petitioner’s legitimate access to such information.
A third element that I would like to highlight is
the need for the enhanced cooperation of States with
the Ombudsperson, which is particularly relevant with
regard to access to information. Legal and practical
ways should be actively explored to allow the
Ombudsperson access to all relevant information
regarding a particular listing. We encourage the
Council to make express provisions in the upcoming
resolution for Member States’ full cooperation with the
Ombudsperson.
The like-minded group also proposed a series of
improvements regarding the procedures for de-listing.
Important in themselves, these improvements would
also serve to further counter the argument that listing is
a one-way street. For instance, the Committee should
take its de-listing decisions by majority vote. In cases
where, in the view of the Ombudsperson, the retention
of a list entry is no longer founded, the Ombudsperson
should be competent to recommend de-listing.
Absent the Committee’s decision within 30 days
to confirm the entry on the list, the entry should be delisted. The sanctions committee would retain its full
prerogative of deciding whether to maintain a name on
the list or not. In cases where a de-listing request has
been rejected, it is proposed that the Committee

28

provide reasons for its decision to be transmitted to the
petitioner through the Ombudsperson and the States
concerned.
Let me conclude by making some general
remarks. Our proposals are not intended to question the
legitimacy or prerogatives of the Security Council. On
the contrary, the proposals would serve to better
safeguard the credibility and efficiency of its work by
enabling the Council to continue to assert its powers
while advancing fundamental due process principles.
The overarching goal is to strengthen the current
system. Improving the fairness and clarity of the
procedures would be conducive to a more efficient
implementation of the sanctions regime by Member
States. Rendering the system more sustainable would
enhance the authority of the Council and that of the
Organization as whole.
The like-minded countries wish to continue a
constructive dialogue with the Council and are grateful
for the interest already expressed by so many of its
members. We look forward to fruitful negotiations in
June leading to significant improvements to enhance
fair and clear procedures in the 1267 sanctions regime.
I would now like to make some very brief
comments in my national capacity.
(spoke in Spanish)
Costa Rica supports the comprehensive approach
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy approved by the General Assembly in
September 2006, which explicitly acknowledges as part
of the Strategy the relevance of the protection of
human rights and the rule of law. Costa Rica believes
that one of the major institutional challenges to the
United Nation system is achieving a consistent policy
that does not seek to organize human rights and
counter-terrorism into a hierarchy.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I would like to
focus on two additional aspects.
First, despite the major progress made, we still
believe that the final aim must be to establish an
independent review mechanism. Secondly, we believe
that it is appropriate to make public the identity of each
designating State. To the extent that there is
appropriate transparency in that regard, each
designating State will have additional reasons to justify
its requests for listing and bear responsibility for them.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

Costa Rica reiterates its commitment to
implementing all resolutions of the Security Council
that seek to combat terrorism in all of its
manifestations. We trust that these regimes will be
strengthened by means of procedures that are
increasingly fair and just.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Chairs of the Committees for the
information they have provided. The three Committees
have carried out commendable work that Cuba values
and closely follows. My country, as all know, complies
strictly with its obligations under resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
Cuba reiterates its firmest rejection of all terrorist
acts, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations, regardless of who commits them,
against whom they are perpetrated and where they are
carried out. All terrorist acts, for whatever purposes
they are carried out, must be condemned.
The Cuban people has suffered first hand a broad
spectrum of terrorist attacks since the triumph of its
Revolution. As indicated by President Raúl Castro,
“as early as March 1960, President Eisenhower
approved a covert action programme against the
island that was declassified a few years ago. The
United States Central Intelligence Agency played
a leading role in planning, providing logistical
support, recruiting and training mercenaries to
carry out terrorist acts under the aegis of the
Government of that country — arson, bombings,
sabotage of every type, the seizing of aircraft,
ships and Cuban citizens, attacks against our
Government offices and killings of diplomats,
machine gunning of dozens of facilities, many
attempts to put an end to the lives of the principal
leaders of the Revolution, and particularly
hundreds of plans and actions targeting the
Commander-in-chief”.
The Cuban people have lost some 3,478 of their
number as victims of terrorism. Another 2,099 have
been left permanently disabled by acts of terrorism
carried out over the course of half a century against our
country. This is precisely why we strongly condemn all
acts and manifestations of terrorism, wherever and by
whomsoever committed. Cuba has an impeccable

11-33901

record in addressing terrorism, and I wish to reiterate
our steadfast resolve not to allow Cuban territory to be
used to organize, instigate, support or carry out acts of
terrorism.
My country has systematically provided a number
of comprehensive reports on this topic to the relevant
Committee. We have strict and effective controls on
our borders, based on our more than 50 years of
experience fighting terrorism, that have allowed us to
thwart many acts of terrorism. Cuba has subscribed to
the 13 international conventions on this topic and
strictly complies with its commitments and obligations
arising from the resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council.
My country does not possess weapons of mass
destruction of any type and has no intention to acquire
them. It respects its obligations under relevant
international instruments on nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons.
We believe the adoption by the General Assembly
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (resolution 60/288) to be of the utmost
importance. My country has implemented various
legislative measures in this area, including long before
the adoption of the Strategy, with a view to preventing
and suppressing all acts and activities directly or
indirectly relating to terrorism.
For all of these reasons, I reiterate Cuba’s
rejection of the unilateral development by the
Government of the United States of America of a list of
States that supposedly support terrorism, and the
inclusion of Cuba on that list. This practice is in
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It is spurious and politically
motivated. No Government can arrogate the right to
categorize the actions of other nations with regard to
terrorism, especially not a Government of double
standards that refuses to prosecute confessed
perpetrators of horrendous terrorist acts against Cuba
and other countries of this hemisphere, such as Luis
Posada Carriles, allowing them instead to roam free
and participate in political activities.
I have here a book entitled Voices from the Other
Side: An Oral History of Terrorism Against Cuba, by
Keith Bolender, which I make available to the relevant
Committee and the Security Council, together with the
other materials with which we keep the Committee
informed. This book, which was launched here at the

29

S/PV.6536

United Nations on 26 April, contains a detailed
explanation of the many terrorist acts perpetrated
against the Cuban people, organized and funded from
the United States, with the participation of a mafia that
enjoys impunity in this country.
I also have here, available to the Committee, a
DVD entitled “Cuba’s Reasons: Path of Terror”, with
information and testimony from the Salvadorian
terrorist Francisco Chávez Abarca, who was recruited
by Posada Carriles to carry out criminal acts against
Cuba. These materials, together with many others from
the same series, can be accessed on the website
www.cubadebate.cu.
All of these actions against Cuba enjoy the
blessing of the United States Government.
Incontrovertible proof of that can be seen in the result
of the recent legal farce in El Paso against the wellknown and self-confessed terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who was tried not for terrorism but for
perjury, despite all the evidence against him in the
possession of the United States Government. He was
acquitted of all charges and moves freely about this
country, enjoying official protection and announcing
further terrorist acts with total impunity.
On the other hand, five Cuban patriots — heroes
in my country — were unjustly sentenced and cruelly
imprisoned for trying to prevent terrorist acts against
Cuba from the United States. Only three weeks ago, on
25 April, the Prosecutor requested that the habeas
corpus petition made by one of them, Gerardo
Hernández Nordelo, be rejected, and did the same
shortly thereafter with respect to those made by
Antonio Guerrero and René González. These three,
together with Ramón Labañino and Fernando
González, are irrefutable proof of the terrorism
perpetrated by the United States against the Cuban
people.
I reiterate here once again our willingness to
make a more detailed presentation on these issues
before the Counter-Terrorism Committee and to
provide any additional information or clarification
deemed necessary.
Cuba will continue to strictly comply with the
provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) and to cooperate with the subsidiary
bodies created pursuant to those resolutions.

30

In conclusion, I reaffirm my country’s readiness
to cooperate with all States, including the United States
of America, in preventing and combating international
terrorism on the basis of mutual respect, the sovereign
equality of States and the principles and norms of
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate the opportunity offered to my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities carried
out by the three Security Council Committees
specialized in the fight against terrorism. At the outset,
I wish to note that Spain fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.
Terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Acts of terrorism are
unjustifiable wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.
The United Nations system has carried out
important work in the fight against terrorism and
should continue to play an important role as the
guarantor of international law. The implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
2006 (resolution 60/288), is a valuable tool against the
global threat of terrorism. The Security Council should
carry out its work in a way that is complementary to
the efforts of the General Assembly, which should in
general be the pre-eminent forum for the international
community to formulate its responses to the global
problems of our time.
I reiterate Spain’s firm commitment to fighting
all forms of terrorism, regardless of its motivation or
manifestation, and my Government’s wish to see this
objective be a permanents priority on the agenda of the
United Nations.
It is essential to work at the national and
international levels to prevent and combat this scourge.
In doing so, we must not neglect to address the
underlying causes of terrorism, such as radicalization.
The Alliance of Civilizations initiative, noted in
resolution 1963 (2010), which Spain promoted as a

11-33901

S/PV.6536

tool for enhancing understanding among countries,
societies and individuals, can be useful in this regard.

the CTC and relevant bodies promoting and protecting
human rights, such as the Council of Europe.

Moral and political reasons compel us to provide
assistance and support to the victims of terrorism. The
convening by the Secretary-General of a new
symposium in support of victims of terrorism, as a
continuation of the one convened in 2008, would be
much appreciated by Spain. On this matter, we also
hope the Security Council will provide the necessary
continuity to its intention expressed in resolution 1566
(2004) regarding assistance to victims of terrorism
through establishing an assistance fund or a practical
assistance mechanism, as set out in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted by the
General Assembly (General Assembly resolution
60/288).

Similarly, we want to highlight the new strategy
devised by the Executive Directorate to enhance its
role as facilitator of technical assistance and to
undertake a permanent dialogue between donor and
recipient States, in the interest of greater efficiency.
The adoption of resolution 1963 (2010), which
extended the mandate of the Executive Directorate,
will enable the Directorate to increase its participation
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and make it the pre-eminent facilitator of
technical assistance, strengthening States’ capacities
and thereby reinforcing the desired integral nature of
the fight against terrorism.

I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and the work they
have carried out together with their respective groups
of experts.
First, Spain would like to highlight the work of
the 1267 Committee. We value the efforts to increase
the transparency of the review and updating of the
names of persons and entities on the sanction regime’s
Consolidated List. The adoption of Security Council
resolution 1904 (2009) led to an improvement in the
application of the sanctions regime in response to
concerns expressed by national and regional courts.
The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
is starting to bear fruit. Ms. Prost presented her first
report to the Security Council (S/2011/29) early this
year and the Security Council, in its presidential
statement adopted on February 28 (S/PRST/2011/5),
recalled the obligation to ensure that the Office
continues to perform its work effectively, to which the
renewal of its mandate in June will contribute.
Spain wants to highlight as well the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
monitor compliance with resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010) and to facilitate technical
assistance to countries that request it. We welcome the
dialogue, in the context of fighting terrorism, between

11-33901

The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or States outside
the scope or in violation of international law constitute
serious threats to international peace and security. We
express our support for the efforts of the 1540
Committee to design mechanisms for monitoring the
implementation of that resolution and its work to
extend its universal application. Spain welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which
extends and strengthens the mandate of the Committee
in the essential framework of full and strict compliance
with the obligations and commitments incumbent upon
Member States in matters of arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons
of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. In
this context, Spain wants to highlight the work of the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and
calls for increased cooperation among all stakeholders
with expertise in combating nuclear terrorism.
I conclude by expressing Spain’s appreciation for
the efforts of these three Committees to improve the
effectiveness of their work. It is also encouraging to
see the growing awareness that all measures taken must
respect the rights of individuals. With this essential
respect for human rights, the whole international
community must demonstrate its firm determination to
face down the barbarity of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Because I am speaking on behalf of the Human
Security Network, I will deliver my statement in
English.

31

S/PV.6536

(spoke in English)
It is my honour to speak on behalf of Austria,
Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali,
Norway, Slovenia, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer, and my own country, Switzerland. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that advocates a people-centred, holistic
approach to security, which complements the more
traditional understanding of national and international
security.
Let me join the other speakers in thanking the
Chairs of the three Committees for their informative
briefings.
Terrorism is undeniably a major threat to human
security. The Human Security Network therefore
supports the fight against international terrorism based
on the principles of the Charter, international law and
the relevant international conventions, and it welcomes
the strong leading role the United Nations has taken in
this field. From a human security perspective, the
strength of the United Nations actions against terrorism
is commensurate with the respect for the founding
objectives of the United Nations.
Of particular importance is the adherence to
human rights and fundamental freedoms and the
observance of the rule of law in situations where the
United Nations actions directly affect individual rights,
which is the case in the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.
Against that background, the Human Security
Network welcomes the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly
resolution 60/288) five years ago — recently
reaffirmed, in 2010 (General Assembly resolution
64/297) — which offers a comprehensive framework
for a coherent international response to terrorism. We
affirm the important role of the United Nations system
in strengthening the international legal architecture by
promoting the rule of law, respect for human rights and
effective criminal justice systems, which constitute the
fundamental basis of our common fight against
terrorism.
The Human Security Network also emphasizes
that further international cooperation among States,
international and regional organizations and the United

32

Nations is essential in the fight against international
terrorism in order not just to combat and eliminate
terrorism but also to prevent it.
The Human Security Network applauds the
considerable efforts of the Security Council to make
the procedures of its Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee clearer and fairer, in particular through the
adoption of resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009),
which introduced periodic reviews of the Consolidated
List and an enhanced system of notifications and
established the Office of the Ombudsperson. We are
convinced that clearer and fairer procedures render the
work of the 1267 Committee more legitimate and thus
more effective.
The Network observes, however, that concerns
still remain as to the rights of listed individuals and
entities. Accordingly, we have taken note with interest
of the suggestions of the group of like-minded States
on targeted sanctions — as presented earlier by my
colleague from Costa Rica — on how the procedures of
the 1267 Sanctions Committee could be improved, in
particular in the field of listing, de-listing and
strengthening the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to consider
the recommendations of the group of like-minded
States, also in view of the adoption of a follow up to
resolution 1904 (2009) in June 2011.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Permit me, at the outset, to thank the Chairmen of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their comprehensive and informative
briefings. ASEAN is deeply supportive of their work
and looks forward to continued cooperation and
collaboration with them.
Today’s meeting comes at a remarkable time for
members of ASEAN. For many years, we have
recognized the global challenge of terrorism and have
worked with the international community in that
respect. But we have also worked diligently on a

11-33901

S/PV.6536

regional basis to complement the efforts of the global
community. With this in mind, ASEAN is pleased to
announce the imminent entry into force later this
month of the ASEAN Convention on Counter
Terrorism. This is a very important tool in our arsenal.
ASEAN also re-emphasizes the importance of working
towards acceding to and ratifying the relevant
international instruments on counter-terrorism.
During the eighteenth ASEAN Summit in Jakarta
last week, ASEAN leaders also agreed to continue
promoting the effective implementation of the ASEAN
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Counter-Terrorism
and to develop initiatives aimed at addressing the root
causes of terrorism and conditions that are conducive
to terrorism and to promote cooperation on deradicalization and interfaith dialogues. ASEAN is of
the view that these efforts would also contribute to the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
ASEAN is determined to continue to cooperate,
not only in the prevention and suppression of
extremism and terrorism but also to address and
remove the root causes and conditions that give rise to
these threats to humanity. ASEAN approaches that task
through the promotion of development that is both
equitable and inclusive. Such development would also
embody peaceful and mutual respect among the various
communities and take into account their peculiarities of
diversity and historical uniqueness.
ASEAN continues to work to coordinate and
cooperate with the United Nations on key global issues
in general, and with the counter-terrorism Committees
of the Security Council in particular. We would,
however, like to see further cooperation and
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees in order to ensure broader support from
the wider membership of the United Nations.
ASEAN recognizes that, to be effective, a global
counter-terrorism
strategy
should
be
broad,
comprehensive and based on profound respect for
human rights, with full adherence and respect for
human rights and the dignity of the person. ASEAN
therefore acknowledges the important work being done
within the United Nations system to spur and sustain
development, to provide education and to encourage
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as part of the
broader efforts to address terrorism and to counter
radicalization.

11-33901

ASEAN underscores the importance of
implementing resolution 1904 (2009), in particular the
provisions regarding coordination and outreach,
whereby the expert groups of the Committees are to
enhance information sharing and coordination on visits
to countries within their respective mandates, on
facilitating and monitoring technical assistance, on
relations with international and regional organizations
and agencies and on other issues of relevance to the
three Committees. The resolution further underlines the
need for the groups to be co-located as soon as
possible.
Allow me to now touch briefly on specific
references to the individual Council counter-terrorism
Committees.
With reference to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), ASEAN member States have carried out their
obligations under the resolution. We call upon the
Security Council to promote the legitimacy and
credibility of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, in particular by addressing concerns about due
process and transparency in its listing and de-listing
procedures.
Turning to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
ASEAN member States have also taken measures at the
national and regional levels to carry out the various
obligations under the resolution. We now have various
mechanisms in place to achieve these objectives.
However, we urge the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to intensify cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, with a view to enhancing
the capacity of Member States to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitating the provision
of technical assistance. We would also like to reiterate
the importance of cooperation in capacity-building
programmes, both for ASEAN and on a countryspecific basis, as a two-pronged approach that would
benefit all ASEAN stakeholders and the larger
international community.
On the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), ASEAN member
States have taken measures at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels to strengthen the
global response to the serious challenge and threat to
international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their

33

S/PV.6536

means of delivery. Furthermore, ASEAN member
States have taken measures to strengthen export
controls, to prevent proliferation financing and
shipments and to secure sensitive materials that could
be used for weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that ASEAN stands
ready to continue to work together and to contribute to
the successful outcome of our common efforts in the
fight against terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to
extend my appreciation to the Chairpersons of the
counter-terrorism Committees for their professional
work and for their informative briefings this morning.
We welcome the opportunity to engage in such
exchanges and in the periodic informal briefings for
Member States. We hope that they will continue to be
held on a regular basis. The comprehensive briefing
held by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force last week is another encouraging initiative that
further demonstrates the significance of close
cooperation and coordination among all United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the Security
Council counter-terrorism Committees.
Monitoring and ensuring that States fully
implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
remain at the core of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s
activities.
The
upcoming
tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
later this year, serves as a reminder of the vital and
ongoing role of the Committee. Earlier this year, Israel
submitted its preliminary implementation assessment,
reflecting its commitment to a continued, informed and
constructive dialogue with this important body.
Technical assistance, facilitated by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), is
an essential tool for countering terrorism that offers an
important means for developing expertise and sharing
best practices. In this regard, Israel continues to
expand its technical assistance and cooperation on
several levels and in a number of regions.
To the same end, Israel’s counter-terrorism
agencies cooperate with a large number of regional
organizations. We recently signed an agreement with

34

the counter-terrorism branch of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism for a joint cooperation
project in Latin America, particularly in the fields of
improving aviation security, preventing the financing
of terrorism and countering radicalization.
The recent removal of Osama bin Laden from the
terrorist landscape represents a significant step forward
in the fight against terrorism. However, despite recent
advances in the fight against terrorism — and indeed,
perhaps because of them — we must be ever more
vigilant. Preventing acts of terrorism is only one part
of the challenge. Addressing incitement to terrorism
represents another long-term and equally difficult part
of the equation. Resolution 1624 (2005) unanimously
condemned the incitement to, justification of or
glorification of acts of terrorism. In this regard, the
Internet poses both a challenge and an opportunity.
We therefore support the efforts of CTED
pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010) to produce a global
implementation survey of resolution 1624 (2005) by
December. We also support its decision to update its
global implementation survey on resolution 1373
(2001) by June, in order to assess the evolution of risks
and threats.
The anguish of countless victims of terrorism
provides a powerful reminder that no cause or
grievance can ever justify terrorism. Every day, at least
one Member State suffers from some form of a terrorist
attack. Roadside bombs, rockets, mortars, suicide
bombers and kidnappings continue to wreak havoc and
bring grief and agony to nearly every corner of the
world.
Given Israel’s first-hand experience with the
devastation caused by terrorism, we attribute particular
importance to United Nations initiatives to voice and
commemorate the untold stories of the victims of
terrorism. Every day, more Israelis fall within the range
of terrorist rockets as a result of illegal arms smuggling
into Gaza. Hamas’s and Hizbullah’s ever-growing
arsenal of missiles and rockets is made possible by the
continuous transfer and smuggling of weapons and
ammunition by two prime sponsors of terrorism in our
region, namely, Iran and Syria. Only two months ago,
we witnessed another example of this illegal activity
when the cargo vessel Victoria, which set sail from
Syria, was found to be carrying some 40 tonnes of
concealed weaponry of Iranian origin among a cargo of
lentils and cotton.

11-33901

S/PV.6536

We continued to witness the devastating
consequences of this smuggling activity when, last
month, members of the Hamas terrorist organization
used an anti-tank missile that they had smuggled into
the Gaza Strip to strike and completely destroy a
school bus travelling in southern Israel, injuring the
bus driver and killing a 16-year-old child.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
remains an important part of the efforts to isolate
terrorists and their means to inflict harm. Israel
welcomes the considerable progress made towards
promoting clear and fair procedures concerning the
inclusion of individuals and entities on the
consolidated list. In this regard, the work of Judge
Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson represents an
important step in addressing concerns over due
process. Her informative reports provide a concise
outline of her Office’s activities.
We believe that it is critical to continue to
develop
international
standards
against
the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and dualuse items. The international community must continue
to seek and implement measures that keep the world’s
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the
world’s most dangerous individuals, especially in our
region. In this regard, I wish to reiterate Israel’s full
support for resolution 1540 (2004) and the renewal of
its mandate in resolution 1977 (2011).
The struggle against global terrorism calls for our
political resolve and tireless action. We must not forget
the victims of terror, and we must not overlook the
culpability of those who seek to incite, sponsor or
justify terrorism or of those who provide sanctuary to
terrorists. We appreciate this opportunity for dialogue
and will continue to actively engage in and support the
important work of the Council’s counter-terrorism
committees.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Acting Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Sir, for inviting the
European Union to intervene in this debate. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as

11-33901

Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this declaration.
I wish at the outset to thank the Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
briefings. At the beginning of this month, the Security
Council welcomed the news that Osama Bin Laden
would never again be able to perpetrate acts of
terrorism. It also reaffirmed that any measure taken to
combat terrorism must comply with international law,
in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. This development could be an
opportunity to re-examine the relationship between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, taking into account the
evolving nature of terrorist threats and the current
political situation in Afghanistan.
Action by the United Nations against the scourge
of terrorism must be firmly rooted in the rule of law.
The European Union therefore welcomes the important
improvements to the procedures of the 1267
Committee in the course of recent years. In particular,
the establishment under resolution 1904 (2009) of the
Office of the Ombudsperson was a significant
enhancement of due process at the United Nations
level, which from a legal perspective provides persons
and entities seeking to be removed from the
consolidated list with a remedy that should be utilized
to its fullest extent.
We
welcome
the
Security
Council’s
encouragement of individuals seeking de-listing to
pursue their case through the Ombudsperson. In
addition, the Security Council should also encourage
States and relevant international organizations to refer
individuals and entities seeking de-listing to the Office
of the Ombudsperson. This would be important in
respect of proceedings before domestic and regional
courts and international human rights bodies pertaining
to the implementation of the 1267 sanctions regime,
and in the light of legal concerns raised from within the
United Nations system.
We note that the Security Council will respond to
the observations contained in the first activity report of
the Ombudsperson in the context of the renewal of her
mandate in June. This could be an opportunity to
further clarify elements of the implementation of the
Ombudsperson process. The renewal, further
clarification and enhanced transparency of the
Ombudsperson process are also important in the

35

S/PV.6536

context of recurrent judicial challenges that have arisen
worldwide. In this regard, access by the Ombudsperson
to information — including, where relevant, to
classified information — is necessary. This will require
appropriate arrangements to be put in place. The
Security Council should encourage all Member States
to agree on such arrangements with the Ombudsperson.
Furthermore, the Committee should consider
publishing the observations contained in the case
reports of the Ombudsperson in order to make the
information available to the petitioner.
Regarding the consolidated list, the Security
Council should seriously consider the options proposed
by the Monitoring Team in its most recent report,
including those pertaining to time limits for listings.
This would be in line with the preventive nature of the
measures decided by the Security Council. We also
note that the Committee’s guidelines already provide
for the referral of decisions to the Security Council in
case of a lack of consensus within the Committee.
As regards the 1373 Committee, the European
Union welcomes the prolongation and refinement of
the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate through resolution 1963 (2010), adopted in
December last year. In particular, we appreciate the
resolution’s focus on countering incitement of terrorist
acts motivated by extremism, as well as on ensuring
respect for human rights and the rule of law. Both
aspects are crucial to combating international terrorism
in an effective and legitimate manner.
In this regard, the European Union is becoming a
key supporter of capacity-building measures in third
countries, inter alia in the areas of law enforcement,
judicial
cooperation
and
counter-radicalization
measures. On this occasion, the European Union
expresses its appreciation to the Committee for the
constructive dialogue with international, regional and
subregional organizations on the prevention of
terrorism that took place at the special meeting in April
in Strasbourg. We would also hope to continue and
enhance the dialogue between the Committee and the
European Union on all aspects of the global fight
against international terrorism, in line with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Regarding the 1540 Committee, the European
Union welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) on 20 April. It is our conviction that the

36

mandate extension for 10 years will contribute to
persistently curbing the risk of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery to non-State actors — one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security in our time.
The mandate contained therein provides the Committee
with an effective basis for its future work.
The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), both
internally and externally. I can inform the Council in
this context that the European Union is currently
finalizing, in consultation with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, a new European Union
Council decision in support of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Last but not least, I wish to reiterate the
importance the European Union attaches to close
cooperation between the three Committees and
between their groups of experts, including joint
outreach activities, exchange of information and joint
meetings, their co-location as requested by resolution
1904 (2009), and their collaboration within the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
reports of the Chairmen of the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1267 (1999), which are useful for Member States.
The fateful events of 11 September 2001 shocked
the world. All States Members of the United Nations
firmly condemned the scourge of terrorism. The
Security Council adopted resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), in which it urged States not to give refuge
to terrorists and not to resort to political motivations
for refusing requests for extradition. The United
Nations thus assumed the commitment to fighting
terrorism within the framework of multilateralism and
international cooperation based on respect for the selfdetermination and sovereignty of peoples and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. It was
a fight against terrorism within the framework of the
United Nations Charter and international law.
The events of 11 September 2001 also served as a
pretext for unilateralist, imperialist and aggressive

11-33901

S/PV.6536

actions against sovereign countries. The rubric “war
against terrorism” was used to justify a preventive war,
regime change and State terrorism and to set aside or
undermine the fragile international legal architecture.
In the name of the fight against terrorism Afghanistan
and Iraq were invaded, thousands of innocent people
have been murdered and State terrorism has been
promoted. Ten years after the terrible events of
11 September, the world is not a safer place.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
reiterates its commitment to the fight against this
scourge, in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin or motivation, including State terrorism,
which today constitutes an instrument for subjecting
countries and peoples to foreign occupation and neocolonial domination.

That same State, claiming to wage a global war
against terrorism throughout the world, refuses to
condemn the vicious terrorist Luis Posada Carriles or
to extradite him to Venezuela, where he was serving a
prison sentence for the bombing of a Cubana de
Aviación airliner in which 73 Cuban athletes were
killed. This notorious international terrorist today
walks free through the streets of Miami, Florida, after
having been acquitted in a court in El Paso, Texas, not
on charges of terrorism but of having lied about his
immigration status.

The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Morocco.

A few days ago, Mr. Posada Carriles admitted in
an interview on CNN in Spanish to being a CIA agent
and boasted of having carried out numerous political
assassinations in several Latin American countries.
Like him, other terrorists live freely in that country,
including Raúl Diaz Peña, José Antonio Colina and
Germán Rodolfo Varela, who were sentenced to prison
in Venezuela for the 2003 bombing of the Spanish and
Colombian consulates in Caracas. While selfconfessed, convicted terrorists are protected, five
innocent Cubans, who themselves worked in the fight
against terrorism, remain detained in United States
prisons.
As long as the practice of classifying some
terrorists as good and others as bad persists; as long as
State terrorism is promoted; and as long as innocent
people are being killed under the pretext of a supposed
fight against terrorism and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law are
violated, the world will not be a safer place.
The deplorable living conditions in various parts
of the world; injustice and inequity; ethnic, religious
and other kinds of discrimination; and foreign
occupation of and interference in sovereign countries
all fuel terrorism. Those terrible scourges, which
undermine the dignity of millions of human beings
throughout the world, must be eradicated.

11-33901

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this debate on
counter-terrorism, an issue that lies at the very heart of
the mandates of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004).
I should like to take this opportunity to express to
the Council and to the Secretary-General Morocco’s
gratitude for the statement of support and solidarity
following the terrorist attack that struck my country on
28 April.
That cowardly attack, far from weakening the
resolve of the Kingdom of Morocco, strengthened the
country’s commitment to continue its efforts to
consolidate the rule of law and reform. The
spontaneous, energetic and unanimous response of the
Moroccan people in the face of that criminal act
remains the main bulwark with respect to this
challenge and made clear the absolute rejection by the
entire Kingdom of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its perpetrators or aims.
The three Committees set up by the Security
Council resolutions, which I mentioned earlier,
represent important elements of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture. My country is pleased
to be able to engage in exemplary cooperation with the
three Committees and their Groups of Experts.
My delegation supports the overall approach of
the 1373 Committee, which is aimed on the one hand at
continuing to deploy strategic and transparent efforts
and, on the other, at strengthening its role in
facilitating the provision of technical assistance for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), so as to build up the capacities of Member
States in the fight against terrorism, in close
cooperation
with
the
Counter-Terrorism

37

S/PV.6536

Implementation Task
multilateral donors.

Force

and

bilateral

and

Turning to the 1267 Committee, my country has
followed with interest the efforts undertaken to
implement the provisions of resolutions 1822 (2008)
and 1904 (2009), aimed at improving the quality of the
consolidated list and the effectiveness of the sanctions
system. My delegation continues to advocate greater
cooperation with Member States in the listing and delisting procedures so as to ensure that they are
considered partners in the decision-making process.
The Committee would benefit from taking into account
the lessons learned from the first review of the
consolidated list, carried out under paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008), with a view to beginning,
under the best possible conditions, the reviews to be
conducted under paragraphs 23 and 42 of resolution
1904 (2009).
In that respect, we have taken note with interest
of the proposals contained in paragraphs 44 to 46 of
the eleventh report (S/2011/245) of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. My
delegation also shares the concerns set out in paragraph
56 of the report on the lack of clarity regarding certain
entries on the consolidated list that yield false positive
matches during screenings by private financial
institutions. These lead to practical difficulties and
complications that can have a very real impact on the
social status and state of mind of the law-abiding
individuals and members of their families who are the
victims in this respect. We would like special attention
to be devoted to this issue.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the programme of work for 2011 of the 1540
Committee and welcomes the activities that have been
planned with a view to strengthening cooperation with
Member States and to assisting them in their efforts to
implement their commitments under resolution 1540
(2004).
We also support the overall approach of the
Committee, which is aimed at facilitating the provision
of technical assistance so as to overcome the
difficulties experienced by countries in the full
implementation of the resolution.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Morocco
has continued its efforts aimed at bringing its
legislation in line with its commitments, pursuant to
the international conventions and agreements it has

38

ratified as well as resolution 1540 (2004). Morocco,
which has an export-control system for dual-use
materials, is on the verge of adopting new legislation in
the area of external trade that will incorporate recent
developments in this field, including dual-use
materials.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran would like to
thank the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council for presenting their reports to the
Council.
Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security. Addressing this
problem requires an integrated and comprehensive
approach. Clearly, the United Nations has made
considerable progress in the areas of both standardsetting and the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures. However, despite all those efforts and
activities, we have, unfortunately, witnessed an
escalation in terrorist attacks in various parts of the
world.
Genuinely combating terrorism very much
depends upon how we identify its root causes. Foreign
intervention, aggression and occupation, exclusion,
selectivity and expansionist economic and political
policies are among the root causes that create
conditions conducive to the spread of violent acts and
terrorism. Furthermore, the double standard exercised
by certain States in dealing with terrorism has
aggravated the situation. On the one hand, they appear
to confront some terrorist groups while, on the other,
they overlook others. Perhaps one reason for the rise in
terrorist activities in recent years, in terms of frequency
and the advanced tactics used by terrorists, is the
wrong and selective approach by certain States in
dealing with terrorism.
Distancing the international order and today’s
dialogues from justice is perhaps among the most
fundamental damage inflicted upon the structure of
fighting for peace. Just peace is a discourse to answer
the challenges of today and the tomorrow’s world
peace, including preventing and fighting terrorism.
Based on that discourse, the Islamic Republic of Iran
hosted a two-day conference in Tehran on counterterrorism from 15 to 16 May. Peace activists and
representatives of non-governmental organizations

11-33901

S/PV.6536

from more than 60 countries took part in the
conference entitled “Global alliance against terrorism
for a just peace”. The Conference was an occasion to
work on identifying the concepts and the theoretical
foundations of modern terrorism, its root causes,
actors, tools and consequences for world peace and
security, as well as feasible strategies to counter
terrorism. We are of the belief that establishing a just
peace not only prevents terrorism; it also certainly
strengthens the pillars supporting the world’s efforts to
confront terrorism by respecting human dignity. The
conference was a prelude to an international meeting
on countering terrorism to be held late June in Tehran
with the participation of high Government officials and
relevant international organizations.
On the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that it
should not have operative impact on the rights
enshrined in internationally negotiated instruments
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, as well as
the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that any
emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access by
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should not divert the attention of
Member States from nuclear disarmament as the
highest priority of the international community.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken serious
steps in implementing the Security Council’s
resolutions on terrorism, including resolution 1373
(2001). We have submitted six national reports on our
implementation of that resolution, in which we have set
out the concrete steps that our country has taken to
implement the provisions of that and other relevant
resolutions. Those steps include stepping up border
control security and surveillance measures at border
entry and exit checkpoints. Moreover, we have
intensified our fight against drug trafficking mafias.
Given the fact that this menace constitutes a breeding
ground for terrorism, Iran’s efforts in that regard have
undoubtedly made a fundamental contribution to the
global fight against terrorism.
As one of the first victims of terrorism in the
region, Iran has made unwavering efforts to fight it. We
have always strongly condemned this vicious menace
in all its forms and manifestations. As I said earlier, the
application of double standards in dealing with

11-33901

terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern that seriously undermines the international
community’s collective fight against terrorism. The
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subject to various
acts of terrorism by certain terrorist groups over the
past three decades.
In that regard, particular reference should be
made to the Mujahidin-e Khalq Organization terrorist
group, which has thus far perpetrated numerous
terrorist operations in Iran, resulting in the killing and
wounding of tens of thousands of civilians and officials
and damage to private and Government property. That
terrorist group has also devised many atrocious ploys
to incite acts of terrorism inside and outside the
country. This terrorist group was long supported and
sheltered by the former regime in Iraq. It was also
engaged in Saddam’s bloody campaigns against the
Iraqi people. Despite its heinous and appalling record
of terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism, some
attempts are being made to delist the group from the
terrorist lists of some States. Any decision in that
regard would be another indication of the selective
approach and double standard with which some States
deal with terrorism. It is obvious that this kind of
attitude towards terrorist groups weakens the
international consensus against terrorism and
encourages terrorists to continue their inhuman
activities. Such support is indeed in clear violation of
the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).
In the past several years, the Jundullah terrorist
group has attacked and killed dozens of people in the
eastern and south-eastern parts of our country, in an
attempt to create an environment of intimidation and
insecurity. At the same time, the group Party for a Free
Life in Kurdistan is active at our western borders, and
recently carried out a number of terrorist attacks.
Those groups also enjoy the support of some
foreign countries. We expect all countries to uphold
their international obligations in this regard.
I would like to reiterate that we should all
strengthen our cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. Only through a coordinated and
comprehensive approach will the international
community’s fight against terrorism yield lasting
results.
Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
reference made to my country by the representative of

39

S/PV.6536

the Israeli regime. I should like to place on record that
my delegation rejects the baseless allegations and
distortions made in the Chamber that were intended to
distract the international community’s attention from
the facts concerning the State terrorism, criminal
policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region by the
Israeli regime, in particular the heinous crimes
committed against the people of Palestine, Lebanon
and Syria, to say the least. Just in the past few days, at
least 20 people lost their lives at the hands of this
regime’s brutal forces in the Golan Heights, Ramallah
and Lebanon.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja΄afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As the Security Council is aware, Syria has on
many occasions said in the Council that we fully
cooperate, on an ongoing basis, with the Committees
established by the Council pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). My country
resolutely condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, in particular State terrorism. Terrorism
is indeed a crime that affects all peoples. We firmly
believe that the United Nations plays an essential role
in combating terrorism. There is no denying that
terrorism should not be linked to any religion,
nationality, culture or civilization. Under no
circumstances is it appropriate to fail to distinguish
terrorism from the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence.
The famous resolution adopted by the General
Assembly in 1974, resolution 3314 (XXIX), defines
occupation as constituting the worst possible form of
aggression. The representatives of Israel may say what
they wish when it comes to lies and untruths beyond
the realm of international legality. Within that realm,
however, there are many resolutions condemning and
denouncing Israel’s acts and its violations of the rights
of the Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian peoples living
under its occupation for decades.
The representative of Israel has once again taken
advantage of the forum of the Security Council for
propaganda, which cannot stand against truth. He
obviously thought that, in inappropriately mentioning
my country’s name in his statement, it would be
possible to deflect attention from the root causes of
problems in the Middle East, namely, the continuing
occupation by Israel of Palestinian territories, and

40

ensure that people’s gazes were averted from the
crimes perpetrated by Israel against the unarmed
Palestinian people.
The whole world knows that Israel, as an
occupying Power, is implementing a sadistic holocaust
against the Palestinians, a holocaust based on
settlements and the displacement of people and the
annexation of Arab territories. State terrorism is the
worst form of terrorism in the world. There is a special
archive, an encyclopedia and a museum testifying to
the crimes of genocide and war crimes perpetrated by
Israel since it began its occupation of the territories.
State terrorism perpetrated by Israel has affected
the United Arab Emirates, as the Council is aware, and
the Sudan. Other areas have been affected as well,
including European and non-European capitals alike,
which have seen assassinations of Palestinians and
other Arabs. Israel is the State that has introduced
official terrorism to the region. All of that in the
knowledge that Zionist terrorist groups such as the
Stern Gang, the Irgun, the Hagganah and the Balmakh
have massacred thousands of Palestinians and caused
their exodus, as well as killing Count Folke
Bernadotte, a United Nations representative, in 1948.
The first terrorist act in the region was committed by
Israel, in 1954 — I repeat, in 1954 — with the
hijacking of a Syrian civilian aircraft. In those days,
nobody spoke of Hamas or Hizbullah.
I shall conclude by quoting what I read in an
Israeli newspaper. In 2009, Or Ben-David Katz, a
19-year-old Israeli girl, stated that she fully intended to
flout Israeli law by refusing to perform military
service. In an open letter to the Israeli Government,
that young woman declared:
“To refuse means to say no. No to the military
rule in the West Bank, no to the use of violence as
a means of defence … no to war and no to a
society that claims to be democratic, but forces
youths to carry weapons, kill and be killed”.
That young woman has been imprisoned three times for
her views.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has asked to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): I would like to respond. It
is somewhat surreal to hear a representative of a
regime that brutally killed hundreds of its own civilians

11-33901

S/PV.6536

and citizens over the past few weeks, and which
continues to do so as we speak, talk about terrorism.

It is a shame and a disgrace for Syria to exploit
the memory of the victims of the Holocaust.

As a country that actively supports, harbours and
finances terrorist organizations, and that hosts the
headquarters of internationally recognized terrorist
organizations, Syria’s practices indeed reflect its longstanding perspective on sponsoring terrorism.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

11-33901

The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

41
