II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to convene when
necessary and to carry out the tasks entrusted to it in its
mandate;
5. Reaffirms its decision to reconvene the Conference
at an appropriate time, in accordance with Conference resolution I (I);

6. Renews its appeal to all States of South-East Asia
and others concerned to attend future sessions of the Conference;
7. Requests the Conference to report to the General
Assembly on its future sessions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consult with and assist the Conference and the Ad Hoe Committee and to provide them on a regular basis with the necessary facilities to carry out their functions;
9. Expresses its appreciation once again to the Secretary-General for taking appropriate steps in following the
situation closely and requests him to continue to do so and
to exercise his good offices in order to contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
10. Expresses its deep appreciation once again to donor
countries, the United Nations and its agencies and other
humanitarian organizations, national and international,
that have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean
people, and appeals to them to continue to provide emergency assistance to those Kampucheans who are still in
need, especially along the Thai-Kampuchean border and
in the holding centres in Thailand;
l l. Reiterates its deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in co-ordinating humanitarian relief
assistance and in monitoring its distribution, and requests
him to intensify such efforts as are necessary;
12. Urges the States of South-East Asi?. once a comprehensive political solution to the ~.npuchean conflict
is achieved, to exert renewerl ~riorts to establish a zone of
peace, freedom and neutr:dity in South-East Asia;
13. Reiterates ::,~ hope that, following a comprehen-

sive political solution, an intergovernmental committee
will be established to consider a programme of assistance
to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and
for the economic and social development of all States in
the region;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;

15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "The situation in Kampuchea".
63rd plenary meeting
5 November 1985

40/8. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1984, IS
IS International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for /984 (Austria, July 1985) (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr. I); transmitted to the members of
the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/40/576 and
Corr. I).

19

Taking note of the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 31 October
1985, 16 which provides additional information on the
main development of the Agency's activities during 1985,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
to promote further the application of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, as envisaged in its Statute,
Also recognizing the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the Agency in order to
en~arge the contribution of nuclear energy and its applications to their economic development,
Conscious of the importance of the work of the Agency
in the implementation of the safeguards provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 17
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives, as well as
ensuring, as far as it is able, that the assistance provided by
the Agency or at its request or under its supervision or
control is not used in such a way as to further any military
purposes, as stated in article II of its Statute,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
on nuclear power, nuclear safety, radioactive waste management, radiological protection and, in particular, of its
work directed towards assisting developing countries in
planning for the introduction of nuclear power in accordance with their needs,
Noting that the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency at its twenty-ninth regular session
approved the reappointment by the Board of Governors of
the Agency of Mr. Hans Blix as Director General of the
Agency for a further term of four years, commencing on I
December 1985,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXIX)/RES/442,
GC(XXIX)/RES/443 and GC(XXIX)/RES/444, adopted
on 27 September 1985 by the General Conference of the
Agency at its twenty-ninth regular session,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;

2. Affirms its confidence in the role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the application of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes;
3. Urges all States to strive for effective and harmonious international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant to its
Statute, in promoting the use of nuclear energy and the
application of nuclear science and technology for peaceful
purposes; in strengthening technical assistance and cooperation for developing countries; and in ensuring the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Direct(lr General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the fortieth session of the General
Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
69th plenary meeting
8 November 1985
16 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. Plenan•
Meetings. 56th meeting.
17 Resolution 2371 (XXII). annex
