UNZTZ?D NATIONS

/ NATIONS

UNZES

NINETEENTH
YEAR
th MEETING: 1C;FEBR UAR Y 1964
dme S.i!?ANCE: 10 FÉVRIER 1964
DIX-NEUVIÈME
ANNÉE

1090

CONSEIL

IBE 8faCURITi!

DOCUMIEBITS
NEW

OFFICIELS

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/1090) . . . . . . . . . , . , . . , , . , , , . , .
Adoptionoftheagsnda..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The India-Pakistan
question:
Letter dated 16 January 1964 from the Minibterfor
External Affaira
of Pakistan addressed to th.3 President of the Seourity Counofl
(8/6617);
Letter dated 24 January 1964 from the Permanent Reprew&ative
of
India addressed to the Presidant of the Seourity Counoil (S/‘6622) ,

TABLE

DES

page

MATIÈRES

Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda/l090),
, , , . , . . . , , , . . . , , , ,
Adoption de l’ordre du jour, . . , . , . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . , . . , . , . .
Question Inde-Pakistan:
Lettre, en date du 16 janvier 1964, adress6e au President du Conseil
de s6ourit6 par le Ministre
des affaires ext6rieures du Pakistan
(S/6617);
Lettre, en date du 24 janvier 1964, adras&+eau President du Conseil
do s6ourite par le repr6ssntant permanent de l’Inde (S/6622), , , ,

S/PV. 1099

NOTE:
Relevant doouments of thû Security
suut3lements
to the Offfofal R6COrds.
- ~..

.Council are publlshed in quarterly

Symbols of Vnfkd N.aHons documenb are oomposod of capfkl letters
Mention of such a syml>oJ fndloates a referenoe to
oombfned Wb f&wes.
a Vnfted Natforls dioument.
*

+

Mr. Carlos
The repres
Dolivin, Brnril, China
Coast, Moroooo, NO~
Republios,United K
NorthernIrelnnd and1
Presidenh
Presenk

*

Les dooumentspertinents du Consell de s6curitB sont publi6sdansdes
suppl6montstrimestriels aux Doouments offfoiele.
Les ootes des documents de J’Organfsatfon des Natfons Vnfes se composent
mention
d’une cote dans un
de lettres majuscules et de ohfffres. La simple
texte sfgnfffe qu’il s’agft d’un document dc J’OrganfsaHon.

ProvisionaI

a#

1. Adoptionof the age
2. The India-Pakistnn
Letter dnted 16
for External Affnil
Presidentof the Se

Letter dated!d4J
Representativeof 1
of the Seourity Cou
Adopti

The agenda was adoJ
The

Indio

Letter dated
16 Januc
Externat
Affairs
of f
dent of the Security
I
Latter
datsd
24 Jant
Repressntative
of ir
of the Security
Coun,

1. The PRESIDENT::
boisions taken by the
resentativesof Indin
W oonsiderationof ti
At Me

fnvftatfon of tr

(India)and Mr. 2. A.
at Ule Counofl table.
2. The PREiSIDENT:
Oontinuelts disoueeio
flrst speakerinsorlbf
letherepresentative c

2. Mr. CHACILA(Ind
Oftha Fore@ Mlniste
morein f3orrow thnn
Qer, but !t ta diffio
Wrow 10 due to the
i)nkistonshouldhove
WA1 vilify my Count
le a oalumny to the
bat 11bas oet up sine
* Wghbour, ngalnst 1

:’

ONE THWSAND

AND NINETIETH

MEETING

Held in New York, an Monday, 10 February
MILLE

QUATRE-VINGT-DIXIÈME

Tenue CI New York,

le lundi 10 Mvrlsr

Presfdent: Mr. Carlos Alfredo BERNARDES (Brazil).
Preees~~ The representatives ofthefollowingState8:
Bolivia, Brnzil, China, Czeohoslovakia, Franoe, Ivory
Coast, Moroooo,
Noway, Union of Soviet Sooialist
Republlos, United Kingdom of Qreat Britain snd
Nortbern Ireland and United States of Amerioa.
Provlziono] agenda (S/Agenda/l090)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
a. The India-Pakistan question:
Letter dated 16 January 1964 from the Minister
for External Affaira of Pakistanaddressedto the
Presidentof the Seourity Counoil(W6617):
Letter dated24 January 1964frorpthePermanent
Representatlveof India addressedto the President
of the Seourity Counoil(!3/6622).
Adoption

PrBsfdent:
Prkenfa:

The Indlo-Paklston

1964, CI 15 heures,
M. Carlos Alfredo BERNARDES(Br6siI).

Ordre

du iour

provisoire

(S/+‘\genda/lOW)

1. Adoptionde l’ordre du jour,
2. QuestionInde-Pakistan:
Lettre, en date du 16 janvier 1064, adress6e
au PrBsident du Conseil de s6ourite par le
Ministre des affaires extkkieures du Pahistan
(W6617);
Lettre, en date du 24 janvier 1964, adressBe
au PrBsidentdu Conseilde s&urIt8 par le rsprbsentantpermanentde PInde (W6622).
Adoption

L’ordre
question

SÉANCE

Les reptisentants des Etats suivants:
Bolivie, Br$sil, Chine, Cbte-d’ivoire, Etats-Unls
d’Am$rique, France, Maroo, Norv& Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagneet dtIrlande du Nord, TohBooslovaquie et Union des R@ubliquessocialistes sovi&
tiques,

of tha agenda

The agenda was adopteri.

1964, at 3 p.m.

de l’ordre

du leur

du jour est adop?&

Latter dated
16 January
1964 from
the Minister
for
External
Affairs
of Pakistan
oddreesed
tn the President of the Security
Council
(S/5517);
Letter
dated
24 Jonuory
1964 from
the Permanent
Representative
of Indta addrrssed
to the President
of the Security
Councll
(S/5522)

Question
Inde-Paklstan
Lettre,
en date du 16 janvier
1964,
adress6e
au
P-(sident
du Conseil
de s6curlt6
par le Ministre
des affaires
ext6rlaures
du Pakistan
(S/5517);
Lettre,
en date du 24 jonvler
1964,
adressée
ou
Président
du Conseil
de s6curlt6
par
le repr6sentant
permanent
de l’Inde (S/5522)

1. ThePRESIDENT:In aooordanoe
with the previous
deoisionstakenby the Counoil,1 shall invite the rep
resentativesof India and Pakistan to partioipate in
Wr oonsiderationof the question.

1. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’Anglais): ConformBment A la d6oision prise antkieursment par le
Consell, je vais inviter les repr6sentantsde lQ.uls
et du Pakistan A partioipsr A nos travaux sur oetta

At tbe fnvi~lion of the Preefdent, Mi. M. C. Chagla
(&&a) and Mr. 2. A. Ehuttu (Pakistan) trmk plaoes

question.
Sur IVnvitation
du Pidafdent,
M, M C. Chagla
(Inde) et M. 2. A. Bhutto (Pakiataa) prmnent plaoe
d la table du Conseil.

at tbeCormofltable.
2. The PRESIDENT:The Seourity Counoil will now
Continue
its disoussionof the questionbefore it. The
first speakerinsoribed on my list for this afternoon
1stherepresentntiveof India, on whom1nowonll.
3. Mr. CHAGLA (India): 1 listened to the statement
OftheFore@ Minister of Pnkistnnat the last meeting
morein sorrow tban in nnger. Oneonn control one’s
angel’,but !t 10 diffioult Eooontrol one’ s~rrow. My
aorrowis due to the fnct thnt the representativeof
l’akietnnshouldhnve given expressionto sentiments
Whbh
vilify my country nnd my Government,whlch
8rQa calumny to the record of pence andprogress
lbatil hns set up einceits indopendenco.
And this by
* nuiyhbour,ngnlnstus whoeoonly desire is to live

2. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglais): Le Conseil
de S&urit6 va maintenantreprendre l’examende la
question
dont il est saisi. Le premier oratsur insorit
sur ma liste pour cet npr&s-midieet le reprbsentant
del’Inde, A qui je donnela parole.
8. M. CHAGLA (Inde) [traduit de ltanglais]: J’ai
6ooutBla d6clnrntion du Ministre des affnires ext&
rleures du Pakistan II la dernibre sbnnceavec plus
de tristesse que de colere. On peut contenir sa
colere, mais il est difficile d%tre mnftre de sn
tristesse. Si j%prouve de In tristesse, c’est pnrce
quele repr6sentnntdu Pakistanncru devoir exprimer
A l%gnrd de mon paye et de mongouvernementdes
opinionsoutragenntesqui sont une insulte A l’effort
de paix et de progres que l’Inde ne cessede d0ployer

in peaoe and amity with the people of a oountry whioh
only a few years baok oonstituted, along with itself,
the sub-oontinent of India. 1 do not propose to imitate
the Foreign Minister of Pakistan. 1 do not wish to
wear out the patienoe of the members of the Seourity
Counoil by a lengthy dissertation, Their patlenoe has
been suffioiently taxed. 1 think, therefore, it will be a
waete of time to reiterate what 1 have already said
in my earlier maternent [IOSQth meeting]. That 1s on
the reoord and it steaks for itself. It olearly defines
the position and attitude of my oountry and 1 stand
by every word 1 have said there.

depuis son ind6pendanoe. Et oette attitude est oolle
Yun voisin aveo lequel nous avons toujours d6sirb
vivre dans l’harmonie et l’amlti6, puisque son peuple
et le n8tre oonstituaient nagu6re la p6ninsule indienne. Je n’ai pas l%rtention d%nlter le Miniatre
dos affaires ext6rieures du Pakistan. Je ne veux pas,
en faisant un long disoours, abuser du temps des
membres du Conseil, dont la patlenoe a d6ja 6t6
mise B rude Bnreuve. J’estime dono sunerfI’u de r6p&er oe que j’ai d0ja dit dans ma d6olaration an&
rieure 110886me s6anoel. Cette d6olaration fiuure dans
le oompte rendu et se-passe de tout oommentaire.
Elle d6finit olalrement la podtion et l’attitude de
mon pays et je n’ai pas un mot h en retirer.

4. Tac repreeentative of Pakistan has realieed $hat
the only way he oan seek to justify his approaoh to
the Seourity Counoil is to make out a oase of trouble
and dieoord in Kashmir or, to quote hls own words in
bis opening statement that Kashmir is in open rebellion against India [1087th meeting]. If the faots
show that there have been no oommunal disturbanoes
in Kashmir, that on the oontrary there hae been oomplete harmony and that far from revolting agalnst
India, Kashmir at every stage of this unfortunate
inoident of the loss of the saored relia ha8 turned to
India for help and support, then it is olear that no
ohanse has corne about in the situation in Kashmir
whioi, aooording to the representative of Pakistan,
justifies the present application of Pakistan to the
Seourity Counoil-not that the faot of disturbanoe or
trouble in Kashmir -vould justify any intervention by
Pakistan, sinoe we have repeatedly stated that what
happene in Kaehmir is entirely a domestio matter
for India.

4. Le repr6sentant du Pakistan a compris que le seul
moyen de justifier le reoours de son pays au Conseil
de s6ourit0 Btait de pr6tendre qu’il existe des troubles
et des oonflits’ au Caohemire et dWfirmer, oomme
il l’a fait dans sa d6olaration pr6liminaire [10878me
e6anoe], que le Caohemire Btait en r6bellion ouverte
oontre PInde. Si les faits prouvent que, bien loin
d’avoir 6t6 le th6Rtre de oonflits entre oommunaut66,
le Caohemire oonnaftune atmosph6re d’harmonie oomal&e: aue. loin de se r6volter oontre l%nle, il a,
but au 1otÏg de 08 malheureux Bpfaode de la dlspai
rition de la relique saorBe, fait appel B l’Inde pour
lui demander aide et assistanos, il devient olair qu’il
n’est survenu dans la situation au Caohemire auoun
ohangement qui, selon le repr6sentant du Pakistan,
~uisae
luetifier le reoours du Pakistan au Conseil de
80ourid. Les troubles et les oonflits au Caohemirs
ne justifieraient d’ailleur pas l’intervention du Pakistan, puisque nous avons d6olar6 Il maintes reprises
que os qui se passe au Caohemire rel6ve exolusivement de la oomp6tenoe de l’Inde.

6. The Fore@ Mini&er of Pakistan has quoted
President Ayub Khan as having said that reoently
there was a spontaneous referendum in Kashmir. How
right he 1s. And whet was the result of that referendum? The olear verdict that the Kaehmiris gave was
that while they were opposed to the Iooal administration, they had full oonfidenoe in the fairness and
sense of justioe of the Covernment of India. In my
earlier statement I quoted utteranoes of responsible
Pakistan statesmen inoiting the people of Kashmir
and inflamintz oommunal nassions. 1 said before and
1 repeat thaT Pakistan ex$eoted that the loos of the
saored relio would lead to bloodshed in Kashmir and
the Muslim oommunity would rise against the Hindus
and the Sikhs. Even here the Forelan Minister of
Pakistan hae stated that at this veri minute blood
1s flowing in Srinagar. May 1askwhether it is a statement of faot or a wish and a hope? Let me oategorioally state to the members of the Counoil that there
is no trouble whatsoever in Kashmir today, The saored
relia has been found and, what is more, it has been
identified by the respeoted religious leaders of
Srinagnr, inoluding Mnulnnn Masoodl, who 1s not only
not a supporter of the Covernment but who is a member of the Cpposltion.

6. D’aprgs le Ministre
des affaires ext6rieures du
Pakistan, le pr6sident Ayub Khan aurait dbolar6 qu’un
df8rendum spontan6 avait r6oemment eu lieu au
Caohemire. Il ne saurait mieux dire. Et quel a 6t6
le r6sultat~ de os r6f6rendum? Les Caohemiriens ont
r6pondu sans ambiguit6 que, sWs Btaient hostiles 6
l’admtnistratlon
looale, ils gardaient pleinement
oonfianos dans la justioe et ltimpartialit6 du Qouornement de l%ide. Dans ma d6olaration ant&ieurs,
j’ai oit6 les paroles d’hommes politiques autoris6e
du Pakistan, qui tendaient !A fanatlser la population
du Caohemirs et B enflammer les passions entre le6
oommunautbs. Le Pakistan pensait, je l’ai dit et je
le r6p&e, que 1s disparition de la relique saor6s
entrafherait une effusion de sang au Caohemire et
aue la oommunaut.6 mueulmane s%isurgerait oontrs
& hindous et les sikhs. Ioi m6me, le-Ministre de8
aftairss ext6rieures du Paktetan a d6olar6 qu’au
moment m6me oh il parlait, le sang ocwlait 6 Srlnagar.
A-t-il voulu par-18 rendre oompte d’un fait ou exprimer un vœu et un espoir? Je tiens R d6olarer oat6goriquement aux membres du Conseil qu’il n’y a
absolument nuoun d0sordre nujourdlhl au Caohemire.
La relique saor6e a 0t6 retrouv0e et, qui plus est,
identifi6e par les ohefs religieux respeot6s da
Srinngar, y oompris Maulana Mas&,
qui, loin
d%tre favorable au gouvernement, fait partie de l’opposition.
9. On nous a dit que la question du Cnohemire 6tait
une question vitale; Vitale pour qui? Pour In population du Cachemire ou pour le Pal&&an? Dans des
moments de sino6rit.6, le pr6sident Ayub Khan a plus
d’une fois d6olar6 que le Cachemire Btait d’une im-

6. We bave been told that Kashmir 1sa vital question.
Vital to wbom? TO the people of ltasbmlr or to Pakistan? Presldent Ayuh Kban In moments of self-revelntlon has more than onoe stated that Kaehmir 1s vital
to Pnkistan’e economy and defonce. 1 quote:

“Kashmir 1s 1
oally but milita1
of life and death,
This is what Pret
1969. And again
“You might say
Weil, we oannol
we are bloody-n
reason that KasI
seourity. Thirty
irrigated from r1

This is from the a
Khan at a lunohe’
Club in Washingto:
in the Pakistan T1
President:

aKashmlr is 11
well as eoonomic
Tbis was whnt Pr
on 19 July 1961, L
of the following daI
nPa.kistan~s Pr
a life-and-death
tbe solution of tl
of the safety of OI
wing of our oount
President Ayub Kl
on 18 Cotober, an
Tfmes of the follow
7. SO the oat is c
for human reason
Vital t0 Pakistan fo
seourity and its ou
the founder of Pak
onoe said that he
whioh he had obtal
trunoated Pakistan
aideration of huma
oeaselessly and pe
oase before this Cc
8. The trutb 1s th
port of its hvo-ne
Knshmir, beoause
jority,

must

neoeE

we are thinlring 0
their rigbts, of th6
111penoe nnd quie
tbis unendinn aont
a plebisoite.“Does
Will ùo? In the 111nc
bltished.
If tbe 1
exp1oitedto producr
ring of communal
aoale may lead to
Iadla nnd Pakistan t

tc the notioe of the East Pakistan Gcvernment. Sinoe
1966, of o~urse,
there have been eeveral hundred
more onses. We oondemn these riots, whether in
Pakistan or ln India. We regret the loss of innocent
lives, and we do our best to prevent suoh riots.

munaut6s dont les viotimes ont 6t6 des membres de la oommunaut6 minoritaire, L’attention du Gouvernement du Pakistan oriental a 6t6 appel6e sur oes
incidents. Depuis 1966, il s’est produit, bien entendu,
plusieurs oentaines d’autres incidents, Nous oondamnon8 08s violenoes, qu’elles 88 produisent au Pakistan
ou en Inde. Nous dbplorons la mort de viotimes innooentes et nous faisons de notre mieux pour lcemp6oher.
16. LB enoore, Yattitude de l’Inde et celle du Pakistan sont diam6tralement op~os6es.
Comme
le le disais tout B l’heure, le Pakistan a toujourseu pour
politique d’inoiter les oommunaut6s h entrer en oonflit,
Le repr6sentant du Pakistan a oit6 oertaines d6olarations de membres de 1’Hindu Mahasabha, qui est
un parti religieux de l’Inde. Le fait que oe parti
ne compte, parmi les 600 membres du Parlement
indien, qu’un seul royr6sentant suffit a en r6v6ler
la popularit6. LtIndIon National Conaress, qui est le
parti‘aotuellement au pouvoir, est r6Ëolument oppos6
a la dootrine de 1’Hindu Mahasabha. Je d0fie le Ministre des affaires ext6rieures de citer une seule dBolaration des dirigeants de l’lndian National Congres6
ou de membres du Gouvernement indien inoitant les
hindous de l’Inde il attaquer les musulmans. En
v6rit6, da telles d6olarations seraient oomraires A
la politique fondamentale de l%klian National
Congres& Le mahatma Gandhi a donn6 aa vie pour
la onuse de l’unit6 entre hindous et musulmans et,
malgr6 les provooations graves du Pakistan, le parti
qu’il dirigeait et qui a oonquis l’ind6pendanoe de
l’Inde a toujours pr6oh6 la oonoorde entre oommunautk
Il n’est pas un musulman de l’Inde qui
ne oonsidZ3re notre premier ministre oomme un ami
sinobre,

16. Here again the attitudes of Indta and Pakistan
are diametrioally different. A3 1 pointed out earlier,
the inoitement to communal riots ha8 been a part of
Pakistan’s polioy. The representative of Pakistan
has quulad Rome statements of members of the Hindu
Mahasabha, whioh is a oommunal party in India. The
representation of the Hindu Mahasabha in the Indian
Parliament-one
member out of 600-refleots
the
following that party enjoys among the people. The
Indian National Connress, whioh is the party in power
today, is strongly opposed to the philosophy underlying that party, The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan
is not in a position, and oannot be in a position, to
quote leaders of the Indian National Congres8 or the
members of the tndian Government inoiting tbe Hindus
in India to attaok the Muslims. Indeed, that would be
opposed to ths basio poltoy of the Indian National
Congres& Mahatma Gandhi gave his life in the onuse
of Hindu-Muslim unity, and, notwithstanding the grave
provouations we have had from Pakistan, the party
whioh he led and whioh won the independenoe of India
has always ‘preaohed communal harmony. There is
not a Muslim in India who does not look upon our
Prime Minister as a true friend.
17. May 1 refer to the testimony of an exalted and
impartial observer of the Indian soene. Even Pakistan
will not be able to ohallenge the importanoe and the
signifioanoe of his statement. His Majesty King Saud
of Saudi Arabia at the oonolusion of his visit to India
said this, and 1 would draw the Counoil’s attention
to his words:
“When 1 set foct on this preoious soil,“-that 18,
Iadia-*two questions engaged my mind: the fate of
the Muslims of lndia and the general administration
of thls sub-oontinent after withdrawal of the British
rule . . I 1 desirc now, at the oonolusion of my visit
to India, to say to my Muslim brethren a11over
the world, with greater satisfaotion, that the fate
of the Indian Muslims is in safe hands., . This assurance has been oorroborated by all Muslim leaders
whom 1 met.”

17. Puis-je invoquer le t6moignage d%me personnalit bminente et impartiale qui a suivi les 6v6nements dont l’Inde a 6t6 le th66tre7. Le Pakistan luim6me ne pourra oontester l’importanoe et la valeur
de oette d6slaration. Sa Majest6 le roi Saud d’Arabie
Saoudite a dit au terme de sa visite en Inde - et je
demande au Conseil de bien peser tous ses mots:
nLorsque j’ai mis le pied sur oette terre si
ohere” - il s’agit de l’Inde - flj’6taispr6oooup6par
deux questions: le sort des musulmans de l’Inde
et le urobl6me de l’administration a6n6rale de
oette pèninsule apres le retrait des Britanniques,. .
Je veux maintenant, au terme de ma visite en
Inde, dire A mes fr8res musulmansdu monde
entier oombienje suis heureux de voir que le
sort des Indiens musulmansse trouve entre do8
mains s(ires.. . C’est 06 que m’ont oonfirm6 tous
les chefs musulmansquej’ai renoont?6s.n

18, Here is another pieoe of impartial testimony-1 am
quoting it from a dooument of the Sub-Commission
on Prevsntion of Disorimination and Proteotion of
Minorities:
“In the course of a discussion at ths United N&ions
Sub-Commission on 11 Jnnunry 1069, Mr. Riohard
Hisoooks (United Kingdom) sald thnt in hidia Mnlmtmn
Gandhi and Mr. Nehru, two outstandlng leaders of
the world, hnd the oourage to ewlm agalnst tho ourrent and brlng about n revolutlon in tbe approaoh
to untouchabllity and to mlnorltles. Mr. Nehru partloulnrly in the last ten yenrs waa responslble for
spcnsorlng legislation in the battlc against dlscrlmlnatlon of rellgious mlnorltles.

18. Voioi un autre t6moignageimpartial, tir6 d’un
dooumentde la Sous-Commission
de la lutte oonti’e
la disorimination et de la proteotion desminorit68.
Je oite:
“Au cours des d6bntsde la Sous-Commission
lo
11 janvier lDGD,M, Richard Hisoooks,duRoyaUmeUni, a dit qu’enIndele mahatmaGandhi
et M. Nehru,
deux 6minentespersonnalit6s mondiales, rivaient
le courage d’aller a centre-oourant pour amener
une r6volution dan8 l’attitude B l’bgnrd desintouchableset des minorit6s. M. Nehru a, plus partloullerement au cours des 10 dernieres ann6ee,
pris l%iitiatlve de toute une ~61%de lois visant
B combattre la dlsorimlnationh l’encontre desmlnorlt6s religieuses.
6

“He wond
for instano
the exampl

YIeAor H
been In Ind
the Indian :
moting talc
minorities I
19. Let us
oountry, we h
but the Gover
and 1 am g1
whioh has sh
porting of Vif
munal holooo
the Gcvernm
and order. 0
familiar with
to restrain i
oontrolled, i:
offioial baoki
against India
against India
are a few ins
newspaperst
the Hurrivet
mir is aflam
flowing in Bha
are being ou
a stntement1
both in Ind%
statementto
Kashmir as
flowing and l
ls not inoitem
from the m
blessedby the

“Thoy”-th
“bave oalled
to deolare‘j(
Muslim shri
lege.11

Whioh Muslim
Foreign Minis
them,
thel

“The Pree
direotsd the
reoruit 1rax~
andmakethe

Tbat la an or
war. Tbey nr
maroh on Knsh
20. The Fore1
in the way tht
its minorltles.
ing minoritles

risque d’entrafher de graves conflits entre oomnunautis dans toute l?nde et tout le Pakistan,et de
provoquer des deplaaementsde population.Les viotimes ne sertitem pas les politiciens qui prbohent
la guerre sainte, mais des millions d’lnnooentsqui
ne sllnt6ressent pas A la politique et qui ne demandent qu’A vivre an paix et A mener uneexistence
normale, Si dononousn’avonsen vue quele maintien
de la paix et le respeotdes &.res humains,nousdevrions bien rGfl$ohir avant de troubler unesituation
qui existe depuisquel’Inde a aoo6d6Al’r~d$pendance.
9. The whole burdenof the Pakistan ForeignMinis9. Le Ministre des affaires ext6rieures du Pakistan
tsr’s songhas beenthat the only thing whiohpoisons ne oessede r&$ter que le seulfacteur de discorde
relations betweenPakistan and India 1sthe Kashmir entre le Pakistanet l’Inde est le problemedu Caoheproblem, and that, if the Kashmir problem is not mire et queles rapports entre les deuxpaysne pourront s’atn0liorer et les conflits entre communaut6s
solved, relations betweenthe two oountries will not
nrendre fin si le nrobleme du Cachemiren’est pas
improve, and oommunaltroubles~111oontinue.This,
to my mind, is an openthreat to the Seourity Counoil.. &SO~U.A mon a&, il y a IA une menaceouverte
Pakistan 1s telling you, Mr. President, in strong, au Conseilde &ourit& Le Pakistanvousdit, Monsieur
strident and threatening tones, that, if the Kashmir le PrBsident, en termes 6nergiques,nets et oomproblem is not eettled, there will be bloodshedand minatoires que si le probleme du Cachemiren’est
war. 1s anyone going to submit to this threat and pas r&olu, le sangooulera et la guerre fera rage.
Qui dono est prQt A o6der A cette menaoeet Aoes
intimidation?
efforts d’intimidation?
10. The iron fist is oonoealedin a velvet glove. The 10. Unemainde fer seoaohesousungant de velours,
representatlve of Pakistan has quoted Chairman Le repr6sentant du Pakistan a oit6 le prl3sident
Khrushohev and President tiohnsonand has relied
Khrouohtohevet le presidentJohnsonet s’est r&olam6 de oe qu’ils ont dit au sujet du r8glementdes
on what they snid about the settlementof territorial
disputes by peaoeful methods. Even the devil oan diff$rends territoriaux par desm&hodespaoifiques.
quoteSoriptures for his purpose.1 oannotimaginea Mais le diable lui-m6mepeut se servlr de PEoriture
more perverse interpretation of the very noblesen- A ses propres fins. Je ne sauraisimaginer d’interpr&ation plus abusive des nobles sentimentsextiments to whioh Chairman Khrushohev gave expression, whioh were whole-heartedly endorsedby prim& par le pr6sident Khrouohtohev,qui ont 6t6
the Prime Minister of India and to whioh Presldent approuv6s sans r$serve par le Premier Ministre
Johnsonresponded,than for a oountry to talkof peaoe de l’Inde et auxquelsle prhsident Johnsona ggalewhlle brandishinga sword.
ment fait 8oho, que oellop’un pays qui parle de paix
tout en brandissantune 6p6e.
11. The relianoe of the Forelan Minister of Pakistan 11. Que le Ministre des affaires exttrieures du
on the appeal madeby ChairmanKhrushohevmakes Pakistanse r6olamede l’appel lano6par le PrBsident
even more inexulioablehis refusa1to loin with India Khrouohtohev rend enoore plus inexplioable son
refus de signer aveo l’Inde unedholarationconjointe
in a no-war deolaration. It is true that thesesentiments are embodiedand enshrinedin the Charter of de renonciation A la guerre, Certes, oes principes
sont dejA insorits dans la Charte desNationsUnies,
the, United Nations, but they require oonstantremindersandreiterations. Onbehalfof myGovernment, mais ils doivent Btre constammentrappel6s et rdi1 wish to deolare that India underno oiroumstanoes tQr6s. Au nom de mon gouvernement,je tiens A
will resort to war for the aettlementof its differenoes d6olarer qu’en auouneoiroonstanoel’Inde n’aura rewitb Pakistan. 1 repeat that India under no oiroum- oours A ca guerre pour rdgler ses diff6rends aveo
stanoeswill resort to war for the settlement of its
le Pakistan. Le Ministre des affaires extbrieures
differenoeswith Pakistan, Will the Fore@ Minister du Pakistan est-il pr& A faire unedQolarationanaof Pakistanalso makea similnr deolaration?
logue?
12. It 1strue that Pakistanwantspeaoe,but it wants 12. Il est vrai que le Pakistan veut la paix, mais
il la veut A la pointedesbaf’onnetteset aux conditions
peaoeat the point of a bayonetandon its ownterms.
Why bavewe hadno refutationfrom the representative qu’il a lui-m6me fix6es. Pourquoi le repr6sentant
of Pakistan of the statementsmadeby responsible du Pakistan n’a-t-il pas d6savou0les d6olarations
Pakistan leaders threatenins violenoe againstIndia? des dirigeants pakistanaisautoris6s qui ont mena&
As 1 have saidbefore, eveniihis letter to-the Seourity l’Inde de reoourir A la violenoe? CommeJe l’ai dit
Councilof 16January 1964(S/6617].Uthereisathreat auparavant, m6me la lettre qu’il a adress6c le
16 janvier 1964 nu Conseil de s6ourit6 [S/6617u]
of violencewhioh1snot avendeoentlyveiled but wl~ioh
contient une menacede recours A la violenoe qui,
is openundflagrant,
loin dVtre pudiquementdissimu%e,est aussidirecte
queflagrante,
13. The ropresentntive of Pakistan bas repented 13. Le repr6sentantdu Pnkistann denouveaucalomthe slanderagainstIndin thot Knshmir1sunderIndia’s ni6 l’Inde en disnnt que le Cachemirese trouvnit
sousla lldominntioncoloniale” indienne.Si le Cnche~~ooloninlrulel’. Kashmir beonmepart of India net
as a result of oonquest,nor is it n criseof oneraoe mire est devenu partie intagrnnte de l’Inde, oe n’est
pas A la suite d’une conqueteet ce n’est pasnon
ruling over nnother; Knshmir has nlwnys beenpnrt

who would suffer are not the politioians in Pakistan
who preaoh a holy war but millions of innooent people
who are not interested in politios and who want to
be left in peaoe to oarry on their normal avooationa.
SO, if we are thinking only in terms of maintenanoe
of peaoeand respeotfor humanbeings,thenwe should
think a thousandtimes before we disturb n situation
whiohbasexisted sinoeIndia beoameindependent.

of India sinoe
Kashmir and 1
nionlly the sa1
part of India th
this majority p
Muslims in In(
betweenPakist
Pakistan finds
makes the re]
peaple of Kash
mon nationalit
oommontradit
bondof religic
a philosophyw
The basio phll
our Constitutio
sooiety in whic
together happi
the lnw and o
tunities.

14. The Fore1
with grent ind
treated in Indi
dots.
It 1s a
overy Muslim
1s the Pakistan
to rely on suol
Dre celebrated
of other oomm
brethren. Fnirs
tens of thousan
psy their respec
mir, as 1 poin
was mourned r
Muslims, Hindu
reoovered the
Muslim oommm
ties in Kashmir
there was no rc
ooveredrelit WL
incite further l
mentnlity whioh
stand that Hindt
in penceandoon

15. The Foreig
communalriots
of 550. This 1s
sny thnt we inha
period of comm
oontinent. This 1
bave ronso11s to

tntion of Indinnp
hnsbeento creal
incidents should
l’nklstnn

hns me

give the Counc;l
alone, t!iore wei
in Enst Pnkistnn
communltywere

of India sinoe time immemorial, and the people of
Kashmir and the rest of India are raoially and ethnioally the same. Even religiousiy; although in that
part of India the Muslims might be in a large majority,
this majority professes the same religion as 60million
Muslims in India. It is here that the basio differenoe
between Pakistan and ourselves arises. The bond that
Pakistan finds with the people of Kashmir, and whioh
makes the representative of Pakistan say tbat the
peaple of Kashmir are their kith and ktn, is not oommon nationality: it is not a oommon raoe: it is not
oommon traditions or oommon history: but the mere
bond of religion. We emphatioally deny and repudiate
a philosophy whiob equates nationality with religion,
The basic philosophy on whioh our State is based and
our Constitution enaoted 1s a multiracial sooiety, a
sooiety in whloh people of different religions oan llve
together happily and oan be treated as equals before
the law and oan enjoy the same rights and opportunities.

14. The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan has spoken
with great indignation of the way the Muslims are
treated in India and of the frequenoy of oommunal
riots. It 1s a gross travesty of truth to say that at
every Muslim festival Muslims are being attaoked,
1s the Pakistan oase SO bad and SO weak that it has
to rely on suoh patent falsehoods? Muslim festivals
are oelebrated from time to time with members
of other oommunities refoioing with their Muelim
brethren. Fairs are held at Muslim ehrines, where
tens of thousands of Hindus and Muslims attend and
pay their respect to the saints. Even recently in Kashmir, as I pointed out, the 106s of the eaored relio
was mourned not by the Muslims alone but by the
Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs, and when the relio was
reoovered the rejoioing was not oonfined to the
Muslim oommunity, but extended to a11the oommunities in Kaehmir and ths rest of India. On the oontrary,
there waa no rejoicing in Paskistan, where the reoovered relit was desoribed as a fake, presumably to
incite further hatred agdnst India. Pakistan has a
mentality whioh makes it impossible for it to understand thnt Hindus and Muslims oan Iive side by aide
in pence ancl ooncord,

15. The Fore@ Minister painted a lurid pioture of
communal riots in India. He mentioned the figure
of 650. This 1s a gross exaggeration. Here 1 might
sny that we inherited a bad legaoy from the British
period of communal rlote throughout the Indian subcontinent. This WRBa phase whiob botb our oountrlcs
hava rossons to be ashamecl of, but the whole orientatlon of Indian policy since India became independent
lias been to create confidence 80 that these communal
incidents should bocome a thing of the past. Since
l~akistnn has mentioned certain figures, may 1 also
give the Cou~;l some figures. Belween 1860 and 1966
alone, there were 8,021 cases of communal incidents
In East Pakistan, in whioh members of the minority
communlty were viotims. These incidentswere brought

plus parce quQne raoe en a domine une autre: le
Caohemire a toujours fait partie de l’Inde depuis
des temps imm8moriaux, et la popuIation du Caohemire et oelle du reste de l’Inde
sont identiques
tant du point de vue raoial que du point de vue
ethnique. M6me dans le domaine religieux, s’il est
vrai que dans oette partie de l’Inde les musuImans
uonstituent la grande majoritJ3, leur religion est
la morne que oelle des SO millions de musulmans
de l’Inde. C’est 18 que r8side la diff&enoe fondamentale entre le Pakistan et nous, Le lien qui unit
le Pakistan au peuple du Caohemire et qui fait dire
au reptisentant du Pakistan que la population du
Caohemire est du mgme sang que oelle du Pakistan,
ce n’est pas la oommunaut6 de nationalit6, oe n’est
pas non plus la oommunaut6 de raoe ni la oommunaut0 de traditions ou d’h8ritage historique, ofest
un simple lien religieux. Nous repoussons et rejeton8
oatigoriquement une philosophie qui identifie la naHonalitB & Ia religion. La oonoeption fondamentale
sur laquelle s*appule notre Etat et sur laquelle notre
oonstitution est fond& est oelle d’une sooigt8 multiraoiale, d’une sool&$ dans laquelle des gens profsssant des religions diff&!entes peuvent vivre harmonieusement ensemble et 6tre trait& oomme des
@aux devant la loi en b0n8fioiant des marnes droits
et des marnes ohanoes.
14. Le Ministre des affaires extbrieures duPakistan
a par18 aveo une vive indignation du traitement infIigB aux musulmans de PInde et de la frt3quenoe des
oonflits entre oommunautt3s. C’est dgnaturer grosaVArement la v8rit8 que de pr&endre qu% ohaque f&e
musulmane, les musulmans sont viotimes de voies
de fait, La cause pakistanaise est-elle si mauvaise
qu’il faille la defendre B l’aide de mensonges aussi
flagrants? Les f&es musulmanes sont oWbri3es r$guIigrement et les membres des autres oommunaut4s
se r&uissent
nveo leurs frgres musulmans. Des
foires sont organis$es dans les sanctuaires musulmans et des dieaines de milliers d’hindou8 et de
musulmans y assistent et V&&ent les saints. Tout
raoemment enoore, au Caohemire, oomme je l’ai
aoulignB, la disparition d’une relique saor& a BtB
d0plor8e non seulement par les musulmans, mais
aussi par les hindous et par les sikhs, et lorsqu’elle
a atB retrouvge la joie n’a pas seulement 8olat8
dans la oommunauti musulmsne, mais dans toutes
les oommunautge du Caohemire et du reste de l’Inde.
En revanohe, personne ne S’est r&oui au Pakistan,
oh l’on a raoonte que la relique retrouvee Btait
fausse, probablement pour attiser la haine oontre
IQde. La mentallU des Pakistanais est telle quVls
ne parviennent pas B oomprendre qu’hindous et musulmans puissent vivre o6te ii o6te dans la paix
et l’harmonie.
lb. Le Ministre des affaires ext&ieures a d@eint
sous des oouleurs sinistres les conflits ~1 ont BolaU
en Inde entre oommunaut6s, Il a mentloi& le chiffre
de 6GOvictimes. C’est 18 une exag6ration gvoseihre.
Je reconnais que, dans toute la p6ninsule indienne,
l%re de la domination britannique a 6tg marqu6e par
des conflits religieux. C’est la une phase de notre
histoire don& nos deux pays ont lieu d’avoir honte:
mais, depuis l’ind6pendanoe, toute la politique de
l’Inde a eu pour objet de or0er un climat de oonflanoe.
afin que les incidents entre communaut0s
ne se
renouvellent plus. Puisque le Pnkistan a mentionA
des chiffres, Je vais h mon tour en fournir quelqueeuns au Conseil. Rien qu’entre 1960 et lPS6 il y a
eu au Pakistan oriental 8 021 tncidents entre oom-

tc the notioe of the East Pakistan Gcvernment. Sinoe
1966, of o~urse,
there have been eeveral hundred
more onses. We oondemn these riots, whether in
Pakistan or ln India. We regret the loss of innocent
lives, and we do our best to prevent suoh riots.

munaut6s dont les viotimes ont 6t6 des membres de la oommunaut6 minoritaire, L’attention du Gouvernement du Pakistan oriental a 6t6 appel6e sur oes
incidents. Depuis 1966, il s’est produit, bien entendu,
plusieurs oentaines d’autres incidents, Nous oondamnon8 08s violenoes, qu’elles 88 produisent au Pakistan
ou en Inde. Nous dbplorons la mort de viotimes innooentes et nous faisons de notre mieux pour lcemp6oher.
16. LB enoore, Yattitude de l’Inde et celle du Pakistan sont diam6tralement op~os6es.
Comme
le le disais tout B l’heure, le Pakistan a toujourseu pour
politique d’inoiter les oommunaut6s h entrer en oonflit,
Le repr6sentant du Pakistan a oit6 oertaines d6olarations de membres de 1’Hindu Mahasabha, qui est
un parti religieux de l’Inde. Le fait que oe parti
ne compte, parmi les 600 membres du Parlement
indien, qu’un seul royr6sentant suffit a en r6v6ler
la popularit6. LtIndIon National Conaress, qui est le
parti‘aotuellement au pouvoir, est r6Ëolument oppos6
a la dootrine de 1’Hindu Mahasabha. Je d0fie le Ministre des affaires ext6rieures de citer une seule dBolaration des dirigeants de l’lndian National Congres6
ou de membres du Gouvernement indien inoitant les
hindous de l’Inde il attaquer les musulmans. En
v6rit6, da telles d6olarations seraient oomraires A
la politique fondamentale de l%klian National
Congres& Le mahatma Gandhi a donn6 aa vie pour
la onuse de l’unit6 entre hindous et musulmans et,
malgr6 les provooations graves du Pakistan, le parti
qu’il dirigeait et qui a oonquis l’ind6pendanoe de
l’Inde a toujours pr6oh6 la oonoorde entre oommunautk
Il n’est pas un musulman de l’Inde qui
ne oonsidZ3re notre premier ministre oomme un ami
sinobre,

16. Here again the attitudes of Indta and Pakistan
are diametrioally different. A3 1 pointed out earlier,
the inoitement to communal riots ha8 been a part of
Pakistan’s polioy. The representative of Pakistan
has quulad Rome statements of members of the Hindu
Mahasabha, whioh is a oommunal party in India. The
representation of the Hindu Mahasabha in the Indian
Parliament-one
member out of 600-refleots
the
following that party enjoys among the people. The
Indian National Connress, whioh is the party in power
today, is strongly opposed to the philosophy underlying that party, The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan
is not in a position, and oannot be in a position, to
quote leaders of the Indian National Congres8 or the
members of the tndian Government inoiting tbe Hindus
in India to attaok the Muslims. Indeed, that would be
opposed to ths basio poltoy of the Indian National
Congres& Mahatma Gandhi gave his life in the onuse
of Hindu-Muslim unity, and, notwithstanding the grave
provouations we have had from Pakistan, the party
whioh he led and whioh won the independenoe of India
has always ‘preaohed communal harmony. There is
not a Muslim in India who does not look upon our
Prime Minister as a true friend.
17. May 1 refer to the testimony of an exalted and
impartial observer of the Indian soene. Even Pakistan
will not be able to ohallenge the importanoe and the
signifioanoe of his statement. His Majesty King Saud
of Saudi Arabia at the oonolusion of his visit to India
said this, and 1 would draw the Counoil’s attention
to his words:
“When 1 set foct on this preoious soil,“-that 18,
Iadia-*two questions engaged my mind: the fate of
the Muslims of lndia and the general administration
of thls sub-oontinent after withdrawal of the British
rule . . I 1 desirc now, at the oonolusion of my visit
to India, to say to my Muslim brethren a11over
the world, with greater satisfaotion, that the fate
of the Indian Muslims is in safe hands., . This assurance has been oorroborated by all Muslim leaders
whom 1 met.”

17. Puis-je invoquer le t6moignage d%me personnalit bminente et impartiale qui a suivi les 6v6nements dont l’Inde a 6t6 le th66tre7. Le Pakistan luim6me ne pourra oontester l’importanoe et la valeur
de oette d6slaration. Sa Majest6 le roi Saud d’Arabie
Saoudite a dit au terme de sa visite en Inde - et je
demande au Conseil de bien peser tous ses mots:
nLorsque j’ai mis le pied sur oette terre si
ohere” - il s’agit de l’Inde - flj’6taispr6oooup6par
deux questions: le sort des musulmans de l’Inde
et le urobl6me de l’administration a6n6rale de
oette pèninsule apres le retrait des Britanniques,. .
Je veux maintenant, au terme de ma visite en
Inde, dire A mes fr8res musulmansdu monde
entier oombienje suis heureux de voir que le
sort des Indiens musulmansse trouve entre do8
mains s(ires.. . C’est 06 que m’ont oonfirm6 tous
les chefs musulmansquej’ai renoont?6s.n

18, Here is another pieoe of impartial testimony-1 am
quoting it from a dooument of the Sub-Commission
on Prevsntion of Disorimination and Proteotion of
Minorities:
“In the course of a discussion at ths United N&ions
Sub-Commission on 11 Jnnunry 1069, Mr. Riohard
Hisoooks (United Kingdom) sald thnt in hidia Mnlmtmn
Gandhi and Mr. Nehru, two outstandlng leaders of
the world, hnd the oourage to ewlm agalnst tho ourrent and brlng about n revolutlon in tbe approaoh
to untouchabllity and to mlnorltles. Mr. Nehru partloulnrly in the last ten yenrs waa responslble for
spcnsorlng legislation in the battlc against dlscrlmlnatlon of rellgious mlnorltles.

18. Voioi un autre t6moignageimpartial, tir6 d’un
dooumentde la Sous-Commission
de la lutte oonti’e
la disorimination et de la proteotion desminorit68.
Je oite:
“Au cours des d6bntsde la Sous-Commission
lo
11 janvier lDGD,M, Richard Hisoooks,duRoyaUmeUni, a dit qu’enIndele mahatmaGandhi
et M. Nehru,
deux 6minentespersonnalit6s mondiales, rivaient
le courage d’aller a centre-oourant pour amener
une r6volution dan8 l’attitude B l’bgnrd desintouchableset des minorit6s. M. Nehru a, plus partloullerement au cours des 10 dernieres ann6ee,
pris l%iitiatlve de toute une ~61%de lois visant
B combattre la dlsorimlnationh l’encontre desmlnorlt6s religieuses.
6

“He wond
for instano
the exampl

YIeAor H
been In Ind
the Indian :
moting talc
minorities I
19. Let us
oountry, we h
but the Gover
and 1 am g1
whioh has sh
porting of Vif
munal holooo
the Gcvernm
and order. 0
familiar with
to restrain i
oontrolled, i:
offioial baoki
against India
against India
are a few ins
newspaperst
the Hurrivet
mir is aflam
flowing in Bha
are being ou
a stntement1
both in Ind%
statementto
Kashmir as
flowing and l
ls not inoitem
from the m
blessedby the

“Thoy”-th
“bave oalled
to deolare‘j(
Muslim shri
lege.11

Whioh Muslim
Foreign Minis
them,
thel

“The Pree
direotsd the
reoruit 1rax~
andmakethe

Tbat la an or
war. Tbey nr
maroh on Knsh
20. The Fore1
in the way tht
its minorltles.
ing minoritles

388
*du,
,mt
hz
peLï
:g:
our
nit.

tlaktst
nrti
ient
tler
t le
OS0
d:bS8

les
1En
‘8 A
inal
our
et,
hrti
de
bmgui
kmi
m-iiii8Ur

tbie
2: :
si
:z
, de
..*
~ en

Inde
le
clos
ous
hn
ltre
tes.
n 10
nelnl,
lent
iner
:Ou-

atlkJB,
rlult
pli-

“He wonderedwhetherleadersin other oountrles,
for instanoePakistan, had the oourageto emulate
the exampleof tho Indian leaders.

‘M. Msooolcsa dit qu’il se demandait si les
dirigeante d’autres pays, par exemple oeux du
Pakistan, avalent le couragede suivre Itexemple
des.dirigeantsindiens,
“Sefior HernAn Santa Cruz (Chile) said he had
*M. HernAnSantaCrue, du Chili, a d6olati rm’il
been in India reoently ‘and felt that Mr. Nehruand
S’&ait r$c%mmentrendu en Inde et qutb son avis
the Indian Parliamentplayeda notablerole in proM. Nehruet le Parlementindienfaisaientbeaucoup
moting toleranoe and getting the viewpolnts of
pour enoouragerla tid0ranoe et la oompr0henslon
mieorities appreoiated.”
8 l%gard desmlnorlt.ka
18. Let ua look at the Press. As in every other
l@, Voyons maintenantoe quedit la presse.Comme
oountry, we havaa fewirresponsiblenewspapers
aleo, danstous les autres pays, nousavonsquelquesjourbut the Governmenthas alwaysappealedforrestraint,
naux qui n’ont pas le sensde leurs responsabilit&s,
and 1 am glad fo pay a trlbute to the Indian Press, mais le gouvernementa toujoursenoourag8A la mowhioh has shawnoommendable
restraint in the rederation et le suis heureux de rendre fol hommage
porting of vlews dnd in their oommentson the oom- A la presse indienne,qui a fait preuve d’uneretenue
rnunal holooaust in East Pakistan and has asslsted digne de taus 108Blqes dansles reportages et le8
the Government of India in the restoration of law oommantairesqu’elle a oonsaor6saux massaores
and order. Ours is a free Press, andthosewho are
entre oommunaut0s
au Pakistanoriental, et qui aaidb
familiar with a free Press lmowhow diffioult it ta
le QauvernementIndien k r&ablir
l’ordre publia.
to restrain it; but in Pakistan, where the Press is
En Inde, la presse est libre, et oeux qui saventoo
oontrolled, important papers, papers whioh have qu’est une presse libre savent aussi oomblenil est
offioial baoking,have oarried on a raging oampalgn’ dlffioile de lui imposer la moddrationsouhaitable;
against India. There is hardly a day when hatred mais au Pakistan, ofi la Presseust oontil6o, des
against India and the Hindusis not preaohed.Here journaux importants qui jouissentds l’appui offiolel
are a few instanoesof what hasappearedin Pakistan se sont U+s Aune oampagneaoharnasoontrel%de.
newspaperereoently. This is from an Urdu paper, Il ne se passe guAre de jour que l’on n’y inoite A
the Hurriyet of Karaohi, of 4 February 1864:“Kashla haine oontre l’Inde et les hindous.Voioi quelques
mir is aflame. Rivers of SndianMuslims’ bloodare
exemplesdesd6olarationsqu’ontr6oemmentpubll6es
flowingin Bharat”-that is, India-“and Muslimwomen les journaux pakistanais.Je oiterai d’abord un exare being outraged.” One oan imaginethe effeot of
trait du journal urdu, I’Iiucriyet de Karaohi du
a statementlike that on the minds of the Muslims, 4 ft3vrier 19641 “Le Caohemire cet en flammes,
both in Inde? and in Pakistan. If ever there wasa
Le sangdes musulmansindiensoouleAflots dansle
statementto inflame passions,it is that. They p lnt
Bharat” - olest-A-dire en lnde - “et les femmes
Kashmir as aflame, with rivera of 1\4lAim blood musulmanes
sontattaqu6es.”Onpeutimaginer l’effet
flowing and Muslim women being outrrged. If that
quedesproposde oe genre peuventavoir sur l’esprit
is not inoitement,1 donot knowwhatit ls. I now quote des musulmans,ausai blen en Inde qu’au Pakistan,
from the w
of Karaohi, of 1January1964-a paper, Si daolaration a jamais contribut Asxoitsr les pasblessedby the Government:
sions, oteet bien oelle-18. On vient nousdire quele
Caohemireest en flammes, que le sangde8 musulmans oou10A flots et que les femmes musulmnnea
sont attaqu6es. Qu’est-08 que cela sinonune tnoitation A la haine?Je olteral maintenantle m-de
Karaohi qui, dans aon numaro du ler janvier 1964,
dorivait (il s’agit d’un ‘journal offioiel qui a la
b6n6diotiondu gouvernement):
“Thoy”-that la, the people of West Pakistan“Ils” - o’est-A-dire les habitants du Pakistan
“bave oalleduponthe Musllms in Indla andPakistan
oooidental- “ont inoit Aoette oooaslonlesmusulto deolare‘Jehad’fl-holy war-“on the issueandsave
mans de l’Inde et du Pakistan A la wjehad*Muslim shrinesin that oountry from further saoric’est-A-dire A la guerre sainte- “en vue de prblege.tt
server les sanotuairesmusulmansde oe pays de
tout neuveausa0rilAge.n
Whioh Muslim shrlne has been saorlleged?Will the
Quel sanotuaire
musulmana-t-il 6t6 ltob et d’un
Fore@ Mlnister tel1 me that? 1 quote again from
eaoril&e?
Le Ministre
des affaires 8xd rieures
the m,
the issueof 17 January 1964:
peut-il me le dire? Toujours dansle w de Karaoht,
on lit, dansle numf3rodu 17 janvier 1
YP64:
*The Presldent, Sardar MohammedAlam Khan,
“Le prasident Sardar MohammedAlam Khan a
direoted the Muslim Conferenoeoffioe-bearers to
don& l’ordre nux representants A la Cor&$rooruit ‘rnznkn~s~~~-thntis, fanatlos-“for ~jehncl~ renoe musulmanedo reorutor
des *rasakarsn
nndmakethemrendy Itill scoonddlreotlvel ,11
- o’eot-A-dire des fanatiques- “pour la *jahnd*
et de les tenir pr&s “on attendantde nouvelles
+struotlons.*
That is an order for reorultment, n deolnration of
C’est IA un ordre de recrutement, une deolaration
wnr. They nre only wniting for the proper tlme to
de guerre. Les Pakistannien’attendentque le mon.aroh onKnshmir.
ment opportunpour marohar sur le Caohomire.
20. The Foralgn Minister of Pnkistanho8takenprlde 20. Le Ministre desaffaires extirleuros du Pakl&an
in the wny the Governmentof Pnkistan hns trentod a pnrl8 nveo fie&3 de In façon dont le Couvernoment
its minorltles. Now,thero are varlous wnye of trentpakistanaisa trait6 BOBminorit6e. Or, il y a divorsos
ing minoritles, and one that Pakistanhns ndoptedls
maniAras do traiter 10s mlnorlt6s, et oollo cptola

perhaps the most effeotive one. It has driven out a11
but a few Iiindus from Weat Pakistan, and it 1s resorting to polioies whiob are gradually driving out
Hindus from East Pakictan. If the obleotive of Pakistan’s polioy was to have a State wiÜ; only men of one
religion living in it, that objective oould not be bettar
aohieved than by the aotions that Pakistan has been
taking sinoe its inoeption. And here may 1 say in
paseing that out of the 30,000-odd refugees who have
oroesed over from East Pakistan into one distriot
of Assam, alone-namely, Garo Hills, 3,000 are
Christians. SO it is net only the Hindus who do not
feel safe; it !s also the Christians, who are also a
minority in Pakistan,

Pakistan a adopt6e est sans doute la plus radicale.
Il a expuIs6 toÜ8 les hindous, & quelques rares excaptions pi%, du Pakistan occidental et il pratique
me politique qui tend k Eliminer graduellement les
hindous du Pakistan oriental, S’il avait pour objectif
de limiter sa population aux seuls adeptes d’une
religion dont&, il ne s’y prendrait pas autrement
qu’il ne le fait depuis sa or6ation. Je signale, en passant. aue sur les 30 000 et quelques r6fugibs qui
ont franohi la frontii3re du Pakistan oriental pour
venir s’installer dans un seul district de 1’Assam
- oelui de Garo Hi118 - 3 000 sont ohr&iens. Ainsi,
les hindous ne sont pas seuls h se sentir menao6s;
les ohrl%iens, qui oonstituent eux aussi une minorit8
au Pnkistan, ont le m6me sentiment.

21. It is, perhaps, easy and possible for Pakistan
to gRt rid of its minorities. For us, we look upon
the Muslims net as a minority but ns an important
and integral part of OUPnation. -Fifty million Musllms
live with their Hindu brethren in a11parts of the oountry, in every village, town and oity. TO us the very
thought. of an exohange of Hindus and Muslims is
abhorrent, We realize that India would break up and
distntegrate if it oannot give a11 the oommunities
which live in it proteotion and full rights.

21. Il est peut-6tre facile et possible au Pakistan
de se d6barrasser de ses minorit68, Pour notre part,
nous oonsid6rons les musulmans non oomme‘ une
minorit8. mais oomme un Ument important faisant
partie integrante de notre nation. Cinquantemillions
de musulmansvivent aveo leurs fr6res hindousdans
toutes les parties du pays - villages, bourgset villes.
La seule id6e d%ohannerdes hindous contre des
musulmansnousest odieuse.Noussavonsquel’Inde
se briserait et se dDsint6greraitsi elle ne parvenalt
pas il assurer la proteotlonde toutesles oommunaut88 qui vivent sur son sol et h leur garantir le plein
exeroioede leurs droits,

22. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan does not like
oold statistioal faots. He prefers to rely on his fanoy
and his imagination. 1 am not going into the figures
whioh 1 gavs in my earlier stajement on the sübject
of the illegal movements of persons from East Pakistan aorosa the bordera into India [1088th meeting].
The patent faot remains, whioh has not been disputed
and oannot be disputed by Pakistan, chat while the
population of Muslims in East Pakistan has inoreased
by 26 per oent during the oensus period 1961-1961,
the Hindu population has remained stationary and that
the Muslim population in West Bengal has inoreased
muoh more than the natural rate, The Foreign Minister
is surprised that any Muslim from East Pakistan
should want to go to India. Perhaps even the Muslims
of East Pakistan find India’ a better and a more peaceful oountry in whioh they oan enjoy demooratic and
fhidamental rights. Forty thousand Pakistan Muslim
nationals today are working and earning their living
in India on a proper visa. Besides, about a quarter
of a million Muslims from Pakistan visited India
durinn 1963 on short-term Indinn visas. If Muslims
wereinseoure
in India, would suoh a large number
of Muslims from Pakistan be travelling to India? The
Foreign Minister also suggested that wlth striot pnssoort rezulations imposed by India, it would be impossible for Pakistan national6 to migrate into India.
He forzets that there 1s an open frontier of 2,000
miles between enstern India and eastern Pakistan,
an2 no passport regulations and not the strictest police
surveillnnce in the world crin urevent oeoole from
crossing the frontler. I-le also quoted The Tirnez of
London, Let me quote from a dispntch in an equally
important English periodical, The Eoonomist, of
5 October 1963 hy a correspondent who clnims to
have heen in Pakistan lutely:

22. Le Ministre des affaires ext6rieures duPakistan
n’aime pas la rigueur des chiffres. Il pr6f6re SIen
remettre h sa fantaisie et B son imagination.Je ne
reviendrai pas sur les chiffres que je vous ai cit6s
dans ma premibre intervention [10888me86anoel
au sujet des groupesde personnesqui passentolandestinement du Pakistan oriental en Inde. Le fait
demeure- et le Pakistan s’est bien gardI3 de le
contester - que, alors que la populationmusulmane
du Pakistan oriental a auament6de 26 P. 100entre
1961 et 1961, la population hindoue est demeur8e
stationnaire et que le taux d’augmentationde la
population musulmanedu Dengaleoooidentala et8
tr8s sup6rieur au taux dtaocroissementnaturel.
Le Ministre desaffaires extbrieures se d6olare surpris qu’unmusulmandu Pakistanoriental puissesouhaiter aller en Inde. Peut-Dtre l’lnde apparaft-elle,
m8meaux musulmansdu Pakistanoriental,oommeun
pays plus accueillant et plus pacifiqueoh ils puvent
jouir des libert6s d$mocratiqueset desdroits fondamentaux de l’homme.A l’heure aotuelle, 40 000ressortissants pakistanais musulmanstitulaires d’un
visa en r6gle travaillent et gagnentleur vie en Inde.
En outre, pr8s de 260000musulmans
venantduPakistan se sont rendusen Inde en 1963avecdesvisas
indiens de courte dur0e. Si les musulmansne se
trouvaient pas en 86ourit0 en Inde, seraient-ils aussi
nombreux il voyager dans ce pays? Le Ministre des
affaires ext6rieures a Bgalementlaies6entendrequ’en
raison de la striote r6glementntionrelative aux passeports appliqu6epar l’Inde il serait impossiblek
des ressortissants pakistannlsd%migrer dans ce
pnys. Il oublie qu”‘il y a 2 000 milles de frontibre
ouverte entre l’Inde orientale et le Pakistanoriental
et qu’auounrbglementrelatif auxpaeseportsni auoune
surveillance de police, si rigoureusesoit-elle, ne
peuvent emp6oherles gensde franchir la frontibre.
Il a Ogalementoit6 le m
de Londres.Je voudrais
citer &Imon tour un article paru dan8un p6riodique
anglaisnon moinsimportant, I’Eoonomist,du6octobre

“The suboontinen
hfw reoeived its latc
East Pakistan fronti
Of linfiltrationsl frc
somesay, up tohalfa
is prob,bly more an
than a oold oolitioal
Whenthe sad-‘emigr
tier, Pakistan protef
depopulateAssamof

23. Mr. Riohard Critc
eign Minister of Paki~
this about Pa istan in
of I January 1. ‘14:
“West Pakistan sti
national bu.Iget but
Central Government
foroes.

* East Pakistan,wit
populationbut nof 18 :
70 per cent of the ex;
received only a thirc
fifth of UnitedStates
developmentmoney.

“It

is these Pakis

aonoeptionof Pakist
Restorationof adult
Press, speeohand a
in Pakistan-“oould hc
Ayub oannot form tl
nesdson hatred of InS

Aooording to Mr. Critc
that Pakistan ha8 for i
what1 said in my earlie
of India.
24, With suoh a situat
anywonderthat the peol
opportunitieselsewhere
oreated a nroblem not
alsofor BÜrma,whiohi
bouring East Pakistan
dioate that the numbe:
Burma is of the order o

26. There hns beenno
ing migrations from P,
and on humaniturian61
a11faoilities and exped
Wie exnminntion of ap,
tifi,oates from East Pr
as you are nwnre, givi
to Wiarequest of refu8
0uti011.1t is ritlloulous
ment by our Home Mi:

~~,:.-_._. - -._______
_^__.__^

1969, 8ou8la plume d’un oorreepondantcluia%me
avoir r&emment eQourn4au Pakietan:
“The suboontinental strat-egy of irritating India
“La taotique d(exasp6ration de 1Wie pratiqu&a
has reoeived ite latest expression on the Aesamdans la p6nlneulea tout sboemmentBti appli@e
East Pakistan frontier. India has long oomplained
A la frontïbre entre 1’Aeeamet le Pakistan orlsnof ‘infiltrations’
from East Pakistan, numbering,
tal. L’Inde se pletnt depuis longt8mpsd’ *infiltraaorne aay, up to half a million einoe 1961. The exodus
tion@ en provenanoedu Pakistan oriental, qui se
is probcbly more an index of East Pakistan1misery
solderaient- selon oertains - par l~entrbe olanthan a oold politioal oaloulationfrom Rawalpindi.
destine d’un demi-million de peraonneaenviron
Whenthe sad‘emigrW are returned over the frondepuis 1961. Cet exode est probablementdQplus
A la miebre qui existe au Pakistan oriental qulA
tier, Pakietan protesta that India is attempting to
depopulateAssamof its Mualims.”
un oaloul politÏque d&ib$r0 de la part de Radialpindi. Lorsque 088 pitoyablesBmigr0seont reoondults A la frontibre, le Pakietanproteste en disant
que l’Inde essaie de d$peupler ltA88am de se6
musulmane.n
23. Mr. Richard Critohfield, whoseartiole the For23. M. Rlohard Critohfield, dont le Ministre
des
eign Minister of Pakistanquotedwith approval, says affaires exti3rieuresdu Pakietana invoqu8le tbmoithie about PD :istan in the NewYork Herald Tribune gnage, dit oeoi A propos du Pakistan dan8 le New
of 1 January 1. 94:
-York Herald Tribune-duler janvier 19641
“West Pakistan still reoeives 61 per oent of the
“Le Pakistan occidental 88 voit enoore allouer
national budget but provides DOper oent of the
61 P. 100 des reasouroesbud&aires de IlEtat.
Central Governmentstaff and almosta11the armed
maië il fournit 90 p. 100 des-agentsde lWn&
foroes.
nistration centrale et la presquetotalit.4 deeforces
armaes,
“East Pakistan,with more thanhalf the oountryls
*Le Paldetan oriental, ott vit plus de la moitlb
populationbut not 16per oentof its land nrea, earna
de la population du pays mais dont la superfioie
70 per oentof the export inoome,but until reoently
ne repr6sente que 16p. 100de la superficie totale,
reoeived only a third of expenditureallooations,a
fournit 70 p. 100 des reoettes d~eaportatîon,maia
fifth of UnitedStateaaid andalmoetno newprivate
tout rboemmentenooreil ne ae voyait attribuer que
developmentmoney.
le tiers desre88ouroesbud@airee et le oinquibme
de l’aide des Etats-Unisi quantAl’apport de oapitaux priv8s pour le d&eloppement,il y Btait pratiquementinexietant.
“It iti these Pakistanis who have not found the
“Ce sont oe8 Pakistanaie- aul n’ont pastrouvt3
oonoeptionof Pakistan a really oaptivating ides.
partioulibrement s&luisante I~i& de donner au
Restorationof adult suffrage andthe rinhts of free
Pakistan la forme qu’il a aotuellement.Le retour
Prem, speeohand as8embïy1t-whiohdi net exist
au suffrage des adültee et la reoonnaiasanr~de
in Pakistan-“oould help to remedythis. , . President
la liberu) de la presse, de la libeti de parole et
Ayub oannot form the durable politioal base he
du droit de r4union” - toutee ohoeeequi n’exianeedson hatred of India alone.”
tent pas au Pakietan- npaurraient oontribuer A
aeeainir la situation, , , La haine de l’Inde ne peut
pae A elle seule fournir au pr&eidentAyub la bae.e
politiquedurable dont il a besoin,n
Aooordlngto Mr. Critohfield, the only durablebaee Selon M. Critohfield. la seule base durable dur
that Pakistan has for its foreign polioy-and this is
laquelle repose la pëlitlque Btrangbre du Pakietan
what1 said in my earlier statementaleo-isthe hatred - et oela je l’ai d0jA dit dan6 ma premi8re interof India.
vention - est la hainede l%de.
24. With suoha situation in Ealt Pakistan,1sthere
24. Est-il surprenant, dan8 08~ oonditione,que la
anywonderthat the peopleehouldbeleavingfor better
population du Pakletan oriental veuille 8’en aller
opportunitieselaewhere?Infiltration of Pakistanlefias pour oheroher ailleurs de meilleures oonditlonr
oreated a problem not only for fndia but apparently de vie? Le8 infiltrations de Pakistanaie or4ent un
alsofor Burma, whiohle theonly otheroountry neigb- probltime non paseeulementpour l’Inde, maie auooi,
bouring Eaet Pakistan. Burmeaepreee reporta lnsemble-t-il, pour la Birmanie, qui est le seul autre
dioate that the number of 81;3hillegal entrante in
paye limitrophe du Pakistan oriental, La prenne
Burmais of tbe order of a quarter of a million.
birmane signale l’entrde en fraude d’environ
260000personnesen Birmanie.
26. There hnebeenno ohangein OUP
polloy oonoern- 26. Notre politique oonoernant le6 migrations en
ing migrations from Pakistan, but on oompneslonnto provenance du Pakistan n’a pris ohang8,mais nous
andon humanitariangroundsWQrira obllgedto offpi
sommea oblig&s, pour des raisons do oharit6 et
a11fncllltles and expaclltethe procaesosooncernmg d’humaniti, d’nesouplir et dtnoc818rer,dans le aa
the exnmlnntion of npplloatIons
Or migration cerdes personnes arrivant du Pakistan oriental en
tlîl,cntes from I3atJt Pnlcl8tan lnto India. Al1 States,
Inde, la proo8durerolativa A l’examendes demandes
na you rire aware, give oompnselonate oonslderntlon
ot aux oertiflonts de migration, T~U#les Etats, vous
to the request of refugees fleeing in fear of persale Bavez, Btudiont aveo blenveillnnoeles demnndee
outlon. It la rldioulous to suggest that the announoedes r8fugi6efuyant devant la pera0outlon.Il est ridlment by OUI* Home Mlnlster of better faolllties for
oule de laisser entendre que In d&cisionannono0o
D

migration of the Hîndu minority from East Pakistan
to Weat Bengal would aggravate oommunal feelings.
If there are riote in East Pakistan whioh oause muoh
loes af life. if the tension oontinues. if the Prees
kwps up iti unoeasing propaganda, is- it surprieing
that the Hbdu minority ehould be in a state of wanio
and should wtmt to migrate to India where it would
have euoh &&y?
‘26. In thie oonnexion, 1 should like to menti n that
the following report has been reoeived from th Qov\ rowernment of the St& of AssamlnIndls.It is a ha
ing tale, and 1 am sorry 1have got to read it before
this Counoil. While a batoh of refugeesnumbering
about 1.000 w0re oroseina into Assam from East
Pakie& on the eveningof BFebruary, theEast Pakietan Riflee, a auaisi-militaru foroe of the Pakistan
mvernme&, op&ed fire on -them. Eleven refugees,
inoludingsomawomen,were injured andtwo ohildren
were kllled by this fire. The injured personaandthe
deadbodleswere broughtby the refugeesintoAssam,
The Assam Qovernment has lpdgeda protest with
the East Pakistan Governmentand hae appealedto
the Pakistau authorities to put a stopto the shooting
downof unarmedpersoneseekingrefuge in India.
27. 1 am surprised at the suggestionmadeby the
Foreign Ministor of Pakistan that there shouldbe
an inqulry by an impartial tribunal to deoidewhether
the Muslims who have been evioted were Indiansor
Pakistan nationale. The representative of Pakistan
hasstatedthat the maintenanceof oommunal
harmony
was a domestioproblem for India snd Pakistan. 1s
it less of a domeotio problem for Xndlato deoide
whether a partioular psrson 1s or is not an Indian
national? May 1 ask, with a11rsapeot, whether any
of the oountrieswhiohbave the honourof heingmembers of the Seourity Counoil,andwhoserepresentatives are sitting around this table, would agree to
abdioatetheir sole eovereignright of deoidingwhioh
aliens they shouldadmit or permit to resideon thelr
territory or of determining who ie a national and
who le an alien? 1 bave said before that we do not
throw people out arbitrarily and we bave done our
bert md we are doingour best to give a fair hearing
ta anyonewho bas beenaggrlevedby the quit notioe.

28. The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan has madean
unworthy attuok on the Hindu sooiety and religion.
1 oannotoxpe& him to understfmdthe philosophyor
the tenets of that religion. Slmilar attaoksbavebeen
madeby the Preeident of Pakistanduring bisgoodwill
tour of oountriee of South and IJouthEast Asia, Apparently goqdwill was to be advanoedby attaoking
the Hindu reiigion. It roquiros broadmindedness
and
toleranoo to appreoiats a faitb whioh ie not one’
own. It le truc that the oaete oyetem still exiets in
India, but wo are pledgedto aohleveII oastelessEOoiety and we ara oenselesslyworking townrds thnt
end. It is not ensy to ohangeinstitutions thnt have
existed for oenturiee.As the representativeof Pakistan has hlmself admitted, we bave prosoribed untouohabillty, it is illegal. We hnve mudeit a penal
offenoe for nny poreonto denyto onewhowua known
aa untouohableany pub110rigilt, nnd whenwe mnke
our appointments,frame ouf polioies, and develop

par le Minietre
de Nnt&ieur de faoilitar l’entr6e au
Bennale oooidental de la mlnorit6 hindoue venant
ti &kistan oriental risque d’exaosrberles passions
religieuses,Si deutroublea se produisentaupakistan
Driental et oausentla mort de nombreusesviotimes,
ei la tensionne se relllohe pas, si la presses’obstine
dans sa propagandeinoëas~ts, faut-il e%tonnsr
sue la minoria hindouesoit dansun Btat de panique
& veuille 6migrer vere l’Inde, d elle trouvera-la
s8ouritb?
26. A aet bgard, Je me permettrai de mentionner
quenousavonerepu du Qouwrnementde 1’Etat d’Assam en Inde le rapport suivant, qui est un dooument
pbnible A lire et dont Je regrette d’avoir d donner
oonnaissanoe
aù Conseil,Alors qu%.ngroups
d’environ
1 000 r6fugi6s en provenanoe du Pakistan oriental
traversait la frontibre dellAsaam,le 6f6vrler au soir,
les East PakistanRifles, unit4 paramilitaire du ~OUvernement palzistanals,ont ouvert le feu sur eux
Onee rbfugMf3, et parmi eux quelquesfemmes, ont
&A bless&set deux enfants ont 6t6 tu68 par cetta
fusillade, Les bless4set les deux oadavreè ont BtB
transport66 en Assampar les r6fugi6s. Le Gavernementde 1’Assamaprotest6aupr8sduGouvernement
du Pakistanoriental et a demand6auxautoritie pakistanaiaesde mettre fin aux massaoresde personnes
sanaarmes oherohantrew en Inde.
27. Je m%onne que le Ministre des affaires ext&
rieures du Pakistanait sugg64 deohargeruntribunal
impartial de proo&er Bune enqu6teen vue de d&erminer si les musulmansqui ont Bt8 expuls88Btaient
Indiens ou Pakistands. Le reprdsentantdu Pakistan
a d6olar6 aue le maintien de la paix religieuse6tait
une affaire- intdrieure de l’Inde-et du Pakistan. La
reo~nnaissanae,ou la non-reoonnaissanoe,fl une
personne d6termin6ede la qualiti de ressortissant
indienn’est-elle pasBgalementune affaire 1ntBrisure
de l’Inde? Parmi les pays qui ont’l’honneur d9tre
membresdu Conseil de s6ourit4 et dont les repr&
sentant8 sibgent autour de oette table, y en a-t-il
un seul, je me permets de le demander,qui aoosptarait de renonoer A son droit souverain de d$oider
quels0trangers il entendadmettreouaocepteroomme
r4sidents sur son territnlre ou de d6termlner qui a
la qualit de ressortissant et qui ne l’a pas?J’ai
d&ll dit que nous n%xpulsonspas les gensarbltrairement et que nous avons fait et oontinuonsde faire
de notre mieux pour donner A quioonques’estime
1680par un arrbtd d’expulsion la possibilit8 de 6e
faire entemiredansdos oonditionsBqtdtables.
28. Le Mlnistrs de16
affairer extdrieures duPakistan
s’est livr4 B des attauuesindignesoontre la oommunautb et la rsllgioi hindouës, Mais je ne peux
pas lui demanderds oomprendrela philosophieou
les do es de oette religloa. De6attaquesanalogues
ont 6tr formul&asaar le Prbsldent du Pakirtan lor6
d’un voyage dQmi%i$dans les pays du sud et du
sud-est de l’Asie. 11 faut oroire que les attaques
contre la religion hindouesont de nature Afavoriser
l’amitib! Beauooupde largeur de vues et de tolbrance ost n&%ssnire pour oomprendreune foi clui
n’est pas la n6tre. Sansdoutele systime des oas@
existe-t-11 toujours en Inde, mais nouanoussomme6
engag h rf3aliser une eooi6t4 flan8 oaete et nous
travalllons san8 raltlohe A y parvenir, 11n’est pas
faoile de ohanrrerdesinstitutions el%ulairee,Comme
le repr6senta~t du Pakiotan l’a lui-m&mt, reoonnuO
nous avons orosorit la oondltiond’intouchable.Elle
dst i118gale.
*Lu101indiennepunit d6sormnîsquiconque

cur industries, I
even in eooial :
andmore tenuou

29. 1 do not en!
ohoioe of metapl
bad taste. He ha
showingNs falsc
far as freedom
tradition and bis
independenoe.
ha
andha8 launohed
the settinn of fi
They are &e tee
a8 an independen
90. The Fore@
PrlW that we shor
China. We do not
wfth a11oountrie
before it commit
Minister objeoted
PakiSt&s flirtat
ha8 serious matr
to and resent is
the Mme the Chi
bave thought thal
would bave said
Lve our differe
we Will not add t
ben a helpful atti
not standby us, bl
frlendly oountries
taotioswhioh it il
and lta threot afi
Aeia Treaty Org
Organisationwas1
wouldwak out of 1

91. The Foreign
hia oountry hae
thls oonnexion1 8
statementmadeb
1963to the Assoo’
ChouEn-Lai disol
bad assursd him
the Western mlliti
ad military aaoenl
hadno other motin
whrther the Foreil
mefrom my friand
u8 from strengthe
our peril, Pakietnr
today,ILpropagand
8Ugg0stothnt we
aggrievedparty. T.
of lUietan: alwny
qgression.

industries,
oaste plays no part whatscever, and
even in social matters, its hold le becoming more
and more tenuous.

refuse A une personne anthieurement oon8id6rbs
ccmme lntouohableun droit oivll quelconqueet, dans
les nominationsaux diverses fonotlone, dans l%labcration de la politique, dans les aotivit38 de d&eloppement industriel, la oaste ne joue auounr6le
quel qu’il soit, et m6me dans le domaine800181,
elle perd de plus en plus de terrain.
29. Je n’envie pas au repr6sentant du Pakistan
ail. 1 do not envy the repreaentativeof Pakistanhis
ohoioe of metaphors.1 tbink tbey are in extremely
le choix de ses Cnnriges.
Je les trouve de fort mauvais
bad taste. He has oomparedlndia to a senile person go& Il a compar0l’Inde h un vlelllard montrant ses
showingNs falae teeth. India le a Youngoountry a8 faussesdents. Mais la llbert0 de l’Inde ne date que
d’hier, enccre que ses traditions et son histoire
far a8 freedom le oonoorned,althoughit is old in
tradition and history. It le a oountry whioh, sinoeits
soient anciennes. Uest un pays qui, depuis son
lndependenoe,
ha8maintaineddemccratio institutions ind&endancs, est rest6 fidele aux institutions dBandilas launchedupcn its eoonomiodevelopmentin
mooratlques et qui s’est engag dans la voie du
d&eloppementboonomiquedb8 qulil a 6M libre. Ce
the settinn of freedom. These are not false tee&
They are ho teeth whioh we aoquiredwith our birth
ne sont pas 16 de faussesdents. Ce sont les dents
qu’il a aoqulsesapr686tre devenuind6pendsnt.
as anindependent
nation.
SO, The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan showedsur30. Le Ministre desaffaires exterleures duPakistan
prise tbat we shouldresent Pakistan’sfriendshipwith
a paru surpris quePamiM8du Pakistanaveo la Chine
China,We do not. We ourselvesbelieve in friendship puisse nousinspirer du ressentiment. En fait, elle
with a11oountriessnd we were friendly with China ne nous inspire rien de tel. Nous orcyons m-au+
before it oommittedaggressionon us, The Fore@
m8mes6 l’amiti6 aveo tous les payset nousentreMinister objeotedto my expressionwhen 1 spakeof
tenions des relations amioalesaveo la Chine avant
Pakistan’sflirtations with China. Perhaps Pakistan qUelle ne se rende oeupabled'SgrOSSiOn fl notre
has serious matrimonial intentions. What we objeot Egard, Le Ministre des affaires ext83rleuresa pris
to and ressnt is Paltistsn~sattitude tcwards us from
ombrage de mon allusion au flirt du Pakistan aveo
the time the Chineseaggressionbegan. One would la Chine. Serait-ce que le Pakistansonges&ieusehave thouirht that when China attaoked us Pakistan ment A consacrer ces relations par une alliancs?
would havë said to us1“We have our quarrels, we
Ce que nousd$plorons, ce qui nous innplre du resbave our differenoee, but we are neighbours and sentiment,otest ltattitude du PakistanAnotre Bgard
we will not add to your troublestl That wouldbave depuis le d8but de l(agression ohinoise.On aurait
beena helpful attitude. However,not only did Pakistan pu oroire que l.orsquela Chine nous a attaqu60,le
not standby us, but it ussdeveryargument to prevent Paktstnn nous aurait dit: nNcusavonsnosquerelles,
friendly oountriesfrom giving ua ai& It usedthe same nousavonsnos diff6rends. mais noussommesvoisins
taotloswhioh it is usingncw in the Seourity C~~il,
et nous ne viendrons pas aggraver vos dlffioult6s.a
and its tirent against its allies in the South-East C’eQt Bt4 18une attitude s&x3rsuse.Au lieu de cuoi
Aela Treaty Organization and the Central Treaty
le Pakistan, loin de se r&ger Anos06t8s, a US~de
Organizationwas that, if they gaveaid tous, Pakistan tous les moyenspossiblespour empeoherdes pays
wouldwalk out of tbe allianoes.
amis de nous venir en aide. Il a eu reccurs Ala
taoticme qu’il utilise maintenantaveo le Conseil de
s8ourit& èt il a menac6sesalUs de 1~OrganisaMon
du TraitB de l’Asie du Sud-Est et de 1~Orsanisaticn
du TraitB du Centre de se dssolldariser 8eux s’ils
nouaapportaientleur aide.
31, The Foreign Minister of Pakistan ha8said that
31. Le Ministre desaffaires ext&ieures duPakletan
hls oountry has alwaye been loyal tc its allies In
a dit que son pays avait tcujoure Bte loyal envers
thésconnexionI shall-oontentmyself with quotinga
ses alli6s. A cst Egard, Je me oontenbral de citer
statementmadeby Premier ChcuEn-lai on 10April
une dsolaration quele premier ministre ChouEn-lai
1883tc the AasooiatedPreas of Pakistan, Premier
a faite le 10 avril 1963 A 1’AssoolatedPros8 du
ChouEn-Lai disolosedthat the leaders of Pakistan Pakistan Le premier ministre ChouEn-lai a r6v6l6
had assursdhim in 1964 that Pakistan had joined qu’en1964les dîri ants du Palclstanl’avaient asour6
que le Pakistann’r tait entd dansles alliancesmilitheWestern militarv allianoesonlu to sain nolitioal
andmilitary asoend&oyover India andchat“Pakistan tairez oocidentalesqu’envue de z’assurer la prbponhadnocther motivation in Joiningthepaotsa.1wonder dbrancs pclltique et militaire sur l’Inde ct que
whrther the Fore@ Minlster ls gcing tc say: Qave
ale Paldstan n’avait pas d’autre motif d%dhSrer A
mefrom my friendsla Havingtriecl its bestto prevent
ces paates~.Je me demandesi le Ministre des affaius from strengtbeningour defenoosin the heur of
res exterieures va dire: nProtOgez-moldemesamis.*
Aprbs avoir fait de son mieux pour nous emp6oher
Ourperil, Pakistan oarried on, and oarries on 6tlll
today,a propagandain supportof Chinaandseriously de renforcer 110sdsfensesA l’heure du danger, le
aaggeststhat we are the aggressorsand China the Pal&&an a entreprls et poursuit enoore aujourd’hui
aggrievedparty. This seemsto betheîavourite gambit une oampagnede propagandeen faveur de la Cblne
of Pakistan:always to aoousethe innooentparty of
et Pr&end le plus s6rieusementdu mondequenous
sommesles agresseurset quela Chineestla vlotlmo.
aggression.
Cela semble Btre la taotique favorite du Pakistan
de toujours attribuer 1Ynltiative de l’agression A
la pnrtie lnnooente.
32. The F01wig11 Minister of mkistnn
has insinuatcd 32. Le Ministre desaffaires ext6rioures duPakistan
niat it 1snot only with Chinabutwlth otber neighbcur- a insinu6 que 08 n’est pas seulementavec la Cblne,
our

ing Rates bordering on India that we have strained
relations. The motives and objeota of this unoalled
for and malioious propaganda-whioh Pakistan has
been oarrying on against us are a11too obvious.Cur
non-aligned polioy is based on friendship with a11
oountries,whatever their ideologyandwhatever their
polltioal or eoonomiostructure. Wehaveveryfriendly
relations with our immediateneighbours,
Afghanistan,
Nepal,Burma andCeylon.We were onequallyfriendly
terme with China, but China attaoked us and took
violent and unlawful possessionof a part of our territory.
39. Pakistan bas gone to the length of oomparing
us with South Afrioa. 1 vividly remember the year
of 1046,when1wasat theUnitedNationsas a member
of the Indian delegationand1 handledthe draft resolution againstSoutbAfrioa whiohIndia had submitted
and whioh India suooeededin getting adoptedin the
United Nations General Assembly by a Iwo-thirds
majority as resolution 44 (1). We were the first to
lead the orusade against racial dlsoriminntion and
SOU~Afrioa’s raoial polioies. Pakistanla orude attemut to set us at oddswith our Afrioan brethren
Will-not uuooeed.1 supposewhat Afrioans sayie more
authentiothanwhat the distinguishedForeignMinister
of Pakistanalleges. Permit me to quote,as an example, what Albert Luthuli has saidin his reoent book,
Let My PeopleQo,U As the Counoilis aware, Chief
Luthuli of South Afrioa is an outstandingAfrioan
leader: he was awardedthe Nobel Peaoe Prise and
wrote his book in 1062. Cn page 210 of his bookha
statesr
“The way in whioh India at U.N.O. has takenup
the oudgelson behalf of the oppressedSouthhfrioan
majority, anddraggedthe whole soandalof apartheid
into the open, has heartenedus immeaeurably,, .”
34. If any parallel exists, it is betweenthe polioies
of Pakistan and South Afrioa. The Governmentof
South Afrioa. instead of puttins down raoialism and
apartheid, supports it, glories in it and gives it a
lena1 and offioial baoking. Pakistan too, instead of
w&king for a multi-oommunal sooiety, preaohes
hatred of one oommunity againstthe other and exhibite intoleranoe and fanatioism in every aspeot
of its polioy. Here 1 may mention that the General
Assembly at its seventeenthsessionadoptedresolution 1781 (XVII), whioh oalled upon Member Rates,
among other things, to oease a11trade with South
Afrioa. As le well known,India hashad no trade with
South Afrioa for the last seventeenyears.. In spite
of the adoptionof thar reeolution, andin spite’wîits
oo-sponsoringandvoting for the resolution, Paki&
oontinuedto oarry on trade with South Afrioa, and
here 1 wouldlike to quotefrom aUnitedNationsdooument of 22November1063,whioh oontainsthe replies
reoeivedfrom MemberStates in uursunnoeofacneral
Assembly resolution
1761 (XVfi) and tho Soourity
Council rasolution
of 7 Awust 1963.3/ The replies

were oontainodin oommuni&tioneto the SeoretnryGeneral

or to the Chairmnn

of the Spaoial Committos

on the Polioles of nl>nrtheid
of the Governmentof
-the Republioof SouthAfrion, or in stntementsbefore
i?/Naw

York,

McCras-Ill11

E@ok Cornpnny,

3/ OfflClPl 1(ccorda -~ of thc secec
mm,t Ier July. August and
-_- Septombar

hz.,

the General1
from the Pai
mentioneddo

“It has 1
goods into
arms, amn
and other a
oarrying OI
SouthAfrio
but is aotil
exports,“l/

The Qeneral
as long ago
1 have quoted

36. Pakistan
oountries wh
Portugal: no1
meroial and
diplomatio re
Suroly, it 1s
diseasedand
mir with An1
the questian
the question
Moeambique(
10~s.While J
Angola and M
ritories-spot
resolution 161
bave, undertl
right of indel:
of the people.

36. The For0
over the quef
thoughhe Üse
questionwhetl
of self-deterr
or to East F
oommonknow
oally, are dii
Pakistan,

37. Let me r
mination le a
and oannotbe
the fragmentat
the United Na1
oppose the sf

questionsthe
the Congoanc
further divîsio
CU’ position 1
my statement
fully endoree

and 1 repent:
dotermination.
o/ SOC OUlclnl
zk!gm,
agoodo

1962.

coulxll,
El~taanth
ycar,
1963, document
S/5306.

mais 6galementaveo d’autms Etats limitrophes que
l’Inde a des relations tendues. Les motif6 et les
objeotifs de oette propagandedOplao6eet malveillante que le Pakistanpoursuit Bnotreenoontrene sont
que trop Evidents.Notre politique de non-engagement
est fond$e sur Pamiti6 aveo tous les pays, quelles
sue soient leur id6olosie et leurs struotures poliGquos ou Boonomiques.-Nous
entretenonsdes relations tres cordiales aveo nos voisins imm6diat8,
ltAfghanistan, le NBpal, la Birmanie et Ceylan. NOUS
6tions Bgalementen termes amioauxaveo la Chine,
mals la Chine nous a attaqul3set s’est empar6epar
la violenoe et sansdroit d’une partie de notre torritoire.
33. Le Pakistan est a116fusau%nous oomparer B
PAfrique du Sud. Je me iappelle tr8s bien qu’en
1046- j’&sis alors membre de la d616gationindienneh IQganieation desNationsUnies- je mesufs
oooup6du projet de r6solution quel’Inde a pr6sentB
oontre l’Afrique du Sud et qu’elle a duesi k faire
adoater aar l~Assembl6eu6n0rale h la maforit6 des
de& tiers en tant que r6Ëolution 44 (1).N-ousavons
BtBles premiers B faire oampagnecontre la chsorimination raoiale et la politlque raoiale de l’Afrique
du Sud. La groeslbre manœuvre du Paldatan pour
nous brouiller aveo nos frbres afrloalns Bohouera.
B me sembleouconneut aooorderalus de or6dit aux
afflrmatione d& Afrloains qu% oëlles du Premier
Ministre du Pakistan. Or. voioi. B titre d’exemple,
oe qu’Albert Luthuli bo& dans son rboent livre,
Let MY Peoale CIo% Je rappelle aux membresdu
Conseil que le ohef Luthuli, d’Afrique du Sud, est
un Eminentdirigeant afrioain, titulaire du prix Nobel
de la paix, et que son livre a paru en 1062.A la
page210,il d6olare;
“La mani&%dont, aux NationsUnies, l’Inde aPris
fait et oausepour la majorit.6 opprimaed’Afrique
du Sud et a expos6au grand jour tout le soandals
de l’apartheid, nous a infiniment r$oonfort6s., .”
34. Si l’on veut faire un parallble, olest entre la
politique du Pakistan et oelle de 1tAfrlque du Sud
qu’il faut lq3tablir. Le Qouvernementsud-africain,
au lieu de renonoBr A sa aolitiaue de raoiemeet
d”apartheid, s’en glorifie et lui donneune sanotion
luridiuue et offioielle. Le Pakistanlui ausst, au lieu
de tr&ailler A or6ei une soolOt6multioommunale,
prOohe la haine entre oommunaut&et fait montre
dYntol6rancaet defanatismedanstoute sa politique.
Je me permettrai de rappeler ioi que l’Assembl6e
g6n6rale a, A sa dix-septibme session, adoptOla
r6solUtion 1761 (XVII), d elle prie notamment108
Etats Membresde oessertout oommeroeaveoPAfrique du Su& commeon le sait, voila 17 ansquePInde
n’a eu auounerelation oommeroialeaveo 1’Afriqua
du Sud. Malgrd l’adoptionde oette tisolution, dont il
avait 6t0 Ilun despromoteurset enfaveur de lEqUelle
il avait vo& le Pakistan a poursuivi ses Bohangee
oommeroiauxavaol’Afrique du Sud,Je voudraisoiter
A a0 propos un documantdes Nations Uniesen date
du 22 novembre 1963. qui contient les rf3ponaesreçues d%tate Membres Gommesuite A la r6solutioil
1761 (XVlI) do l’Assembl0eg6n6raleet h la rihOlution du Conseilde s6ourit6 on date du7 aofit 1063y.
Ces rOponsessont extraitos de oommuniontions
envoy6es au Seor6taire gBn6ral ou au Pr6eident

su&ple-

Re
1 ta

the General Assembly or the Seourlty Counoll. 1quote
from the Pakistan statement oontalned in the aforementloned dooument:

du Comlte epëolal char@ d%tudler la politique
d’apartheid du Qouvernementde la RB~bliqus
sudafrloalne, 091de d6olaratlons faites B 1rAssemblbe
gbn6rale et au Conseilde 86ourlt8. Je olte un passagede la d6olaratlondu Pakistantelle qu’elle figure
dansle documentsusmention.n&
“It hns prohlblted the lmport of South Afrloan
“Le Pakistan interdit ltlmportatlon sur sontergoode lnto Pakistan, and ha8 banned the sale of
rltoire de produits sud-afrloalnsalnsl quela vente
arms, ammunitlon and a11types of mllitary vehlole
B l’Afrique du Sud d’armes, de munitions, de
v&loules mllftalres de tout type et d’autres proand other strateglo goods to South Afrioa. It 1s stlll
oarrylng on a oertaln amount of expert trade wltb
duits ayantune valeur strat&lque. Certainesautres
South Afrlon in pursuanoe of earller oommltments,
marohandlsessont enoore exportses & destination
but 1s aotlvely oonslderlng the termlnatlon of suoh
de 1’Afrique du Sudoonform6ment
h desengagements
exports.“V
am&leurS, mals le Pakistan envisagede mettre
fin h 0Bsexportatl0nsti.a
The Qeneral Assembly adopted resolution 1761 (XVII)
L’AssemblBe g6n6rale a adopt0 la r0solution I761
as long ago as 1962, and thls reply of Pakistan mat
(XVII) en 1962,et la r6ponsedu Pakistanqueje viens
1 have quoted was submltted on 22 November 1963.
de alter n’a 0tB uommunlqu6eque \e 22 novembre
1963.
36. Pakistan 1s one of the few Afrloan and Aslan
36. Le Pakistan est l’un des rares pays afrooountrles whioh stlll has dlplomatlo relations wlth
asiatiques qui entretiennent enoore dea relations
Portugal: not only that-it has had extensive oomdlplomatlquesaveo le Portugal: bien plus, 11a eu des
meroial and air trafflo relations. Indla broke off
liens importants aveooe pays 8ur le plan des Bohandlplomatio relations wlth Portugal a long tlme ago.
ges oommeroiauxet des oommunioatlons
a0rlennes.
Surely, lt 1s not merely a vlvid imagination but a
L’Inde, au contraire, a rompu depuis longtemps
diseased and perverted one whioh oan oompare Kashses relations diplomatiquesaveo le Portugal, Vralmlr wlth Angola and Moeamblque. Agaln, to equate ment, 11 ne suffit pas d’avoir une imaglnatlontr&s
the question of eelf-determlnatlon in Kashmlr wlth
vive, mals enoore un esprit maladif et pervers
the question of self-determlnatlon in Angola and pour songer 8 oompaserle Caohemirea l’Angola et
Moeamblque or in other Afrloan territories 1s ridiouau Moramblque,Enooreune fols, mettre sur le m8me
10~s. Whlle Jammu and Kashmlr le a part of Indla,
plan la questionde 11autod6termlnation
au Cachemire
Angola and Moaamblque are non-self-governlng teret celle de l~autod&ermlnatlonde l’Angola et du
ritories-speolfloally
sodeolared in General Assembly
Moaamblque au d’autres territoires africains est
resolution 1642 (XV) adopted in 1960-whose people
tout simplementrldioule. L’Etat de Jammuet Caohebave, under the Unlted Nations Charter, the lnallenable < mire fait partie de l’Inde, tandis que l’Angola et le
rlght of lndependenoe in aooordanoe wltb the wlshes
Mozambiquesont desterritoires nonautonomes,exof the people.
press6mentd6slgnI3scommetels dans la r6solutlon
1642 (XV) de PAssembMeg6n0raleadopt6een 1960,
et dont les populationsont, aux termes de la Charte
des Nations Unies, un droit lnali0nablell lttn&pendanoe,oonform6mentaux vœux de la populatlon.
36. The Forelgn Mini&er of Pakistan waxed eloquent
36. Le Mlnlstre desaffaires ext&leures duPakistan
over the question of self-determlnatlon. 1 note that
a mls toute son Bloquenoeau servloe du drolt des
though he used many words he had no answer to the
peuplesIl dlsposerd’eux-m6mes.Bfen qu’il ait par16
question whether he was prepared to oonoedethe rlght
fort longuement,le note qu’il n’a pas pr8oisd 15’11
of self-determlnatlon to the Pakhtuns, the Baluohis
Btait dlspos$ 9 aooorder le droit de Ilbre dateror to East Pakistan whose people, as a matter of
mlnatlon aux Pakhtouns,aux BaIoutohisou aux habloommon knowledge, raolally, ethnloally and llgulstltant6 du Pakistan oriental qui, oommeohaounSalt,
oally, are dlfferent from the people of the rest of
dlffbrent, tant sur le p&n raolal que sur les plans
Pakistan.
ethnique et Ilngulstique, du reste de la population
du Pakistan.
37. Let me repeat that the prinolple of self-deter37. Je r6p&e que le prinolpe de l~autod&ermlmlnatlon la applloable to nations and nation States
nation est applloable aux natlons et aux Etats et
and oannot be used for the breaklng up of a State or
qu’il ne dolt pas pouvoir 6tre lnvoqu6 pour moroethe fragmentationof peoplee.It 1sthlsprlnolplewhloh ler un Etat ou dlvlser despopulations.C%etde oette
the Unlted Nations and a11Afrloan States lnvokedto ld6e que 1’Organlsatlondes NationsUnieset toue les
opposethe self-determinatlon of Katanga, No one Etats afrloalns sont partis pour refuser l~autod&erquestionsthe rlghtnese of thls deolslonwhlohsaved mlnntlon au Katanga,Nul ne oontesb la justessede
the Congoand perhnpsa large pnrt of Afrloa from ce choix, qui a 6vlt6 au Congoet peut-&re Bune
further division andfragmentationandohnos.1repent partie importantede l’Afrique de souffrir plusenoore
our position whloh 1 think 1 alrendy made olonr in despartages,des moroellementset du ohaoe.Je d0flmy stntement of 6 Februnry 11088thmeeting]. Wo nie h nouveau notre position que j’nvais d6jh, me
fully ondorse tha prlnclple of self-determinatlot~, semble-t-il, clairement expo&e dansrnti d6olaratlon
and 1 repent: we fully endorsethe prlnolpla of self- du 6 f6vrler 11088eme
&ance]. Noussousorivons~ftns
determlnation. But no Member of the UnltedNations reserve au prlnolpe de l’autod6termlnatlon;JerJ3p&e:

r/ Sao &.tc&~Recotxls
of the Chsrnl
Assamlly,
Elghtoonth
&umum,
Wcdr
Item 30,
A/SPC/94,
pu-a. 2 !p 6).

dcoumout

SB~ulon~

q Voir gocumontB
OfflClOlS do I’AssemblQe
ghlhlc,
dix-llultldmu
rosrlon,
Annexas,
point 30 do l’ordre
du Jour, documant
~/Sfx/94,
par. 2, P 6.

Will aooept it as nn instrument for the fragmentation
of Statesaminations,

nous sousorivenssanstiserve au prinoipe de l’autod$termination Mais auounMembre de POrganisation
des Nations 1Jniesne peut aocepter que l’on se r&
olame de oe principe pour dhmembrerdes Etats et
des nations.
38. As a Member of the United Nations India hns 38. L’Inde a eu lloooasiond’appliquer le principe
already exeroieed the right of self-determinntion. de l~auto&%erminationdepuis qu’elle fait partie da
Through a Constituent Assembly of eleoted reprePCrganisation des Nations Unies, Par Ifentremise
sentatives in whioh the representatives of the State d’une assembl0econstituante Blue qui oomprenait
of JammuandKashmirpartioipated, the Indianpeople des repr6sentantsde 1’Etat de Jammuet Cnohemire,
le peupleindien s’est donn6une oonstitutionqui est
gave themselves a Constitution whioh has been in
foroe for fourteen years. Under that Constitution en vigueur depuis14QXIS.
ConformOment
Boetteoonstitution, des 6leotions gOn8ralesau suffrageuniversel
three general eleotionsbased on universal adult suffrage have beenheld, in the last of whiohti are was des adultes ont 6t6 OrganisOes.!I trois rePriSes;
dans le dernier oas, le oollege Oleotoral groupait
an eleotorate of 210 million-the largest known in
history. The Indian people inhabiting Jammu and - fait sans prOo$dent- 210 millions df81eateurs.
Kashmirbave fully sharedin that self-determination. La populationindiennede 1’Etat de Jammuet CaoheTheV bave alreadv exeroised their right of Self-- mire a pleinementpartloip6 h oe libre ohoix. El10
determination, but- when it is suggestedthat there
a d6jft fait usagede-sondroit h l’autod&ermination,
shouldbe self-determination for the peopleof Kash- mais eue la population du Caohemire, oonsid$rOe
mir, as distinot from the people of‘lndia, thia is a
oomme~distînote
de la populationdel’Inde, puissediaproposition whioh we oannot aooept, as indeedany poser d’elle-marne, olest une ohose que nous ne
nouvons aooepter, pas plus d’ailleurs eue nousne
other suggestionbasedonthepremisethat themajority
of the peopleof JammuandKashmirhappento profess &uvons aooepter-de proposition fondde‘sur le fait
eue la majorit6 de la aopulalionde 1IEtat de Jammu
a partioulnr religion.
et Cachemire se trouve avoir une religion distinote.
39. Le Pakistan a-t-il permis h la populationdes
39, Did Pakistanpermit the peopleof the prinoely
Etats prinoiers qui font partie de son territoire
Statesin Pakistanto exeroisethe right of self-determination after the Ruler nooededto Pakistan?As de faire usagedu droit h Ifautod6terminatfonaurgs
was disolosedin the West PakistanHigh Court II few que le Souve?rainde oes Etats eut proolam6le-ratyears ngo, the nooessionof a Bahawalpurhad been taohementau Pakistan?Commeon l’a r6vOl6 ‘il Ya
foroecl on the Ruler of that State. The Khanof Kalat quelquesannaesdevantla Cour supr6medu Pakistan
revolted agninst aooessionand was arrested and oooldental, le rattaohement du Bahawalpur a 0t6
detalned in 1968.In netther oasewas tho prinoiple impos6 au souverain de oet Etat, Le khan de Kalat
a refus9 d’aooepter le rattaohement au Pakistan
of self-determination applied, When Pakistan purohased-and1 emphasieethe word *lpurohasedn-the et il a 6tB arr&8 et mie en dOtentionen 1968,Dans
territory of Cwadnrfrom the Sultanof Musoat, whnt auoun de oes deux oas, le prinoipe de 11autod6termination n’a 6tg appliqu8. Lorsque le Pakistan a
happedto Pakistan8 solioitousregardfor thepeople’s
- le terright to self-determination?No opportunitywas giVen aohet6- et j%isiste sur le mot waohet6m
the people of Cwadarto say whethar in the seoond ritoire du Qwadar au sultan de Masoate, qu’a-t-il
half of this, the twentieth oentury, they wishedto be fait de son profond respeotpour le droit de la population Bl’autod&ermination?La populationduQwadar
boughtlike ohattel.
n’a pas eu la possibilitg de dire si, en plein XXBme
sibole, il lui convenait d%tre vendue comme du
b&ail.
40. Le Ministre desaffaires exfirieures duPakistan,
40, The Foreign Minister of Pakistaneoughttooounter my argumentwith regard to aooessionwhen1 said revenant sur mon argumentation touohant le ratthat the questionof religious oomplexiondid not enter tsohement des Etats, a essay6de oontester que la
into the legal validity of the Instrument of Aooession questionde la r8partition des religionsMt, dupoint
exeoutedby the Ruler of Kashmir. He relied on the de vue juridique, sanseffet sur InvaliditO de l’instruinstanoe of Junagadh.Now in that oase, a00eSSion ment proolamant le rattaohementratifie par le souverain du Caohemire. Il a invoau6 l’exemple du
would have oontravenedthe prinoiple of oontiguity,
;~R&Iadh. Mais, dans oe oas, le ra&ohement‘aurait
apart from the faot that the large majority of the
“% Penoontredu prinoipe de la oontiguit6, ind0peopleof Junagadh-andthat is beyonddispute-were
totally opposecito the Ruler aooedingtu Pakistan. pendammentdu fait que 18 grande maforit8 de la
You have only to look at the mapof that part of India wuulation du Junaaadh6tait inoontestablementtout
L iait oppos&3a 6s que le souverainproolamele
to realize howabsurdJunagadh’saooessiont0 Pakisrattaohement au Pakistan, Il suffit de regarder une
tan would havebeen.In the oaseof Knshmir, not only
oarte de oette ri3glonde l’Inde pour comprendreg
bave we a le& inoonditlonnlaooessl~n,but wo ds0
quel point le rattuohementdu Junagadhau Pakistan
bave the princlple of oortiguity snti6fied; nndeven if
we were to tnke into oonsiderationthe wishesof the aurait &tb absurde. Dans le oas du Cachemire,non
seulementle rattaohementest inconditionnelet juripeople of Kashmir, at the time of nooession,there
diquementvalable, mais le prinoipe de la contigolti
oan be no doubt that the NntionalConferenoe-whlcfi,
as 1 nlready pointed out in my earlier statoment, est egalement reepaotî3,et si nous tenonscompte
wne tho party represen!ing the large mnjority of the des vœux de In populationdu Cachemireau moment
peopleof Kashmir-wns olonrly and emphnticnlly in du rattachement, il ne fait auoun doute que la
fnvour of ncoessionto Indin. In the on88of Hytlarnbnd ConfBrenoenationnle qui, ainsi que je l’ai cl6jilinand Jodhpur as well, the prinoiple of contiguity ap- diqu0 dansmonintervention prdobdente,roprOsontait
plied, arrd the puople of those stntoe were in fnvour l’oplulon de la grande majorit6 de la populationdu
0n
of aooesslonto India. 1 do not wish to repent whnt Caohemire, 6talt manifestementet r~BOh~nellt

1 have alr
Kashmir e
the Qovem
also pointa
Prime M~I
oonsulting
oontext of
understand
gations 80
vaoateits L

41. During
Commissio
Minister of
cite propor
beoamethe
of the Prim

“The P:
the Qovex
missiOnls
taken in I
Commissi
tu$*;;P
aooepted(
of the rof
ment’s no
as in any1

This 1swhal
oember1941
UPtoday in
it oiear tha
Commission
implementec
India would:
1s no diffel
the Prime
taking at thi

42. Dr. Lo;
oeptedthe pc
in paragrapl
in the Comr
Oopalaswarf.
ter of Pakist
Assemblyof
I’ r’he aoc
it wns acc
time I,. 1t
The ~00~88

Dan
lb
iet
I
E
Iv.8
ait
%l,
tst
cile1
zt
:ET.
ie110
?n8
43s
!O,ne

ne
ait

h-lu
te.
les
cm
$3s
Fr+
‘Lt
bte

tlat
tan
ulf3
srI a
brt-i1

PUdar
bme
dU

im

Batl la
oint
rui”:u
%f 3 la
tout
e le
une
“3 3
stnn
non
hriuiti
npte
nont
3 la
in,1tnit
1 du
: en

1 have already said about the effeot of the Ruler of
Kashmir e%eoXtingtbe Instrument of Aooessionand
the Governor-Qeneral of Indla aooeptingit. 1 bave
also pointed out that various fitatementsmadeby the
Prime Minister of India and others with regard to
oonsultingthe wishes of the peoplewere madein the
oontext of the situation then existing andon the olear
understandingthat Pakistanwoulddisohargeits obligations solemnly given to the Seourity Counoil and
vaonteits aggression.

faveur du rattaohement h PInde. Dsne le oas
d%yderabad et de Jodhpur, le principe de la oontiguR.66tait 6galementapplioable,et la populationde
088 Etats Btait favorable au rattaohementB PInde.
Je ne veux pas r0p6ter oe que J’ai delàdit sur le6
cons0quenoes
de la ratification par le souverain du
Cachemiredel’instrumentproolamantle rattaohement
et de son acceptationpar le Qcuverneur g6n6ral de
l’Inde. J’ai Egalementsoulign8que diverses dbolarations du Premier Ministre de l%nle ot d’autres
personnalitis en ce qui oonoerneune Qventuelle
oonsultationde la populationavaient Bt6 faitee compte
tenu de la situationqui existait alors et 11la oondition
expresse que le Pakistan s’aoquitterait des oblîgations qu’il avnit solennellementaaoepteesdevant
le Coneeilde s6ourlt6et mettrait fin B sonagreseion.
41. During the disoussionbetweenthe UnitedNations 41. Au ooursdesoonversationsqui ont eu lieu entre
Commissionfor Xndia and Pakistan and the Prime
la Commissiondes Nations Unies pour PInde et le
Minister of Indin regardingtrie Commission~s
plebisPakistan et le Premier Ministre de l’Inde au sujet
oite proposa1of 11 Deoember1948,a whioh later
de la proposition de pl6bisoitefaite par la Commiebeoamethe resolutionof 6January1949,gthe position sion le 11 deoembre194W, et uIt6rieurement reof A&ePrime Minister of India wasthe following:
prise dans sa r&solution du 6 janvier 19490/, la
position du Premier Ministre de IfInde Btait oelle-oi:
“The Prime Minister emphasieedfirstly thnt, if
‘Le Premier Ministre inslete sur les trois pointe
the Governmentof Indin were to nooeptthe Comsuivants: 1) si le Qouvernomentde l’Inde aooepta
missionlsplebkoite proposale,no aotion ûouldbe
les propositions de la Commissionau oufet du
taken in regard to them until parts 1 andII of tbe
pl6bisoite, auounemesurene pourra Btre prise 8
Commissiontsresolution of 13 August had been
oe sujet tant queles premibre et deuxibmeparttee
fully implemented: seoondly that, in the event of
de la r6solution adopt& par la Commisalonle
Pakistan not aooeptingthese proposa16or, having
13 aoat
n‘auront pas BtB entibrement mises B
aooeptedthem, of not implementingparts 1 andII
ex6outioni2) si le Pakistanrejette 088propositions
of the resolution of 13 August, the Indkn Governou, les ayant aooeptees,ne met pas en œuvre les
menVs aooeptanoeof them shouldnot be regarded
premi&e et deuxibmeparties de la tisolution du
os in ~y wfiy bindinguponthem. , , .n7/
13 aotlt, lfaooeptationde 088 m8mee propositions
par le Gouvernementde l’Inde devra Btre coneid6r0e oomme n’engageant pas oe gcmernement.,.uR
This 1swhatthe Prime Minister of Indiasaid on 21 DeVoilB oe quele Premier Ministre de l’Inde a dgolalie
oember1948,andthis is theexaotposition1am taking le 21 d6oembre 1948, et o’est tr8s exaotementla
up today in the year 1964.The Prime Minister made position que je d6fends aujourd’hui, en 1964. Ls
it oiear tbat unlessthe terms of parts 1 andII of the Premier Ministre a olairement dit qu*Amoins que
Commission’sresolution of 13 August 194381were las premibre et deuxibmepartie8 de la tisolution
implemented,the aooeptanoeof the Governmentof
de la Commissionen date du 13 aoQt1948u ne soient
India wouldnot be regardeda8bindinguponus.There misesBex&ution, lfaooeptationdu Gouvernementin1s no differenoe whatever in the position taken by dien ne devrait pas Btre oonaid8r6eoommeengathe Prime Minister in 1948and the position 1 a;n geant 08 gouvernement. Il n’y a pas la moindre
taking at this table in 1964.
divergenoe entre la position prise en 1948par le
Premier Ministre et celle que je dl!fendeII cette
table en 1964.
42. Dr. Lozano, Chairman of the Commission,ao- 42. M. Lozano, pr&ident de la Commission,a aooeptb
oeptedthe pointemadeby the PrimeMinister of India, les d&olarationsfaites par le Premier Ministre de
in paragraphs2 and 3 of aide mamoire1 oontained l’Inde aux paragraphes2 et 3 de l’aide-m6moire 1
in the Commission~s
seoondinterim report. Mr. N.
oontenu dans le deuxibmerapport provisoire de la
Gopalaswami
Ayyangar, whomalsothe Fore@ MinieCommission,M. N. GopalaewamiAyyangar, que le
ter of Pakistanhas quoted,eaidthis in the Constituent Ministre des affaire6 exthieuree duPakietana @leAssemblyof India on 27 May 1949:
ment cite, a dit oe qui suit, le 27 mai 1049,devant
l’Assembl6econstituantede l’Inde:
I’ I’he nooessionwaa offered by tba Maharajnnnd
it wns ucoopted by tba Govorncr-General of the
time . , , It ie an absolutelyunoonditionaloffer . , ,
The nooesoionis oomplete.”
-/Sao Offtclnl Ilocordo of dl0 socur1ty
for January

y&&,

document

S/1196,

pars.

15.

albld;.

documetlt

S/lI96,

annex

4, alda-mbtnolrc

! ! / tbld,,
Iltlrd
s/1100, para. 75.

1949, document

Yoar,

S/1196,

counc11, Fourd1
atuwx 3.

plollmt

Supplon~ont

for

Novembor

YOPP, sup-

7.
192,

documotlt

“Le rattnobomenta 6t6 offert par le Maharajah
et aooeptbpar le gouverneurg8nbraldel%poque, . .
C’est une offre absolumentinoonditionnalle, , , Le
rattaobementest oomplet.*

43. The position is quite olear, namely, that India
itself offered, not as a part or pre-oondition or postoondition of aooesoion,- but unilaterally to the sople
of Jammu and Kaehmir, that after the soi1 OI Kashmir
was oleared of the iniaders and law arld order had
been restored, the wishes of th- people would be aaoertained. It 1s in this limited Jense that aooession
wns said at that time to be subjeot to the wishes of
the people. This did not and oould not affeot the legality of aooession, whioh, as 1 said in my statement
and as 1 maintain, was absolute. The Indian Independenoe Aot of 1947, whioh surely the Fore@ Minister
of Pakistan would not repudiate, does not speak of
oonditional aooeosion or any right of seoession of a
oonstituent State. Can hs tel1 ua if under that Aot
aooession oould be anythinghut oomplste and absolute?
Doee the Aot oontain any provision even remotely
oontemplatingpartial, temporary, inohoate,o- oon-.
ditional aooession?
Are there anywordain therelti.rant,
provisionsof the Aot dealingwith aooession
whiol*are
other than plain, straightfo-;lurd andunamhiguc~u?

48. Il est tout B fait clair que l’Inde elle-m6mea
offert 3 la populationdu Jammuet Caohemire- non
pas en tant qu’616ment
aooessoiredu oonditionpr6alable ou B posteriori du rattaohement,mais de façon
unilat&ale - d’organiser une oonsultationpopulaire
une fois le sol du Caohemirwlib6r6 des envahisseurs et l’ordre public restaur6. C’estdansoe sens
restreint que l’on adit, Rl%poque,quele rattaohement
Atait subordonneaux vaux de la population.Mais
cela n’avait et ne pouvait avoir auouneffet sur la
validit6 du rattaohement qui, comme je l’ai dit
dans ma d6olaration et oommeje tiens B le r6p6ter,
Btait d6finitif. Dansla loi de 1947sur lfind6pendanoa
de l’Inde, loi quele Ministre desaffaires ext6rieures
du Pakistanne voudrait sûrementpas renier, il n’est
pas questionde rattaohementoonditionnelni du droit
d’un Etat oonstitutif de faire e6oession.Le Ministre
peut-il nous dire si, aux termes de cette loi, le
rattachementpourrait ne pas6tre completet d6finitifP
Est-il pr6vu quelque part dans la loi, m6me de
façon lointaine, que le rattaohement puisse 6tre
partiel, temporaire, imparfait ou oonditionnel?Lea
dispositions de la loi relatives au rattaohementne
sont-elles pas r6dig6es en termes simples, direote
et non ambigus?
44. The Prime Minister of India reaffirmed the same 44. Le Premier Ministre de l’Inde a r6affirm6 oette
position whlle speakingto Parliament on 8 August mdme positionlorsque, le 8 aoQt1063,il a dit devant
1963:
le Parlement:
“Al1 the Statesin India aooededin July or August
“Tous les Etats de l’Inde se sont pronono6sau
or later that year (1947)on thesethree basiosubsujet du rattaohement,en juillet, en aoat ou plus
jeots-foreign affaira, oommunioationanddefenoe.
tard au oours de oette ann6e(194% pour oe qui
Can anybody say that aooes?ionof any State wa8
est des trois domainesfondamentauxci-apr8s:
not oomplete in August or Septemberor later in
flaires 6tran&es, oommunioationset d6fense.
1047beoauseit oamein only on these three subPeut-on pri3tendre que !e rattsohementd’un Etat
quelconqueBtait inoomplet, en aoQt, en septembre
jeots? Of oourse not. It was a oompleteaooeesion
in Iaw and in faot. SOthe aooessionof Jammuand
ou plus tard en 1047,souspr6texte qu’il ne portait
Kashmir was oompletein law andin faot on a oerque sur 088 trois domaines?Certainement pas.
tain date in Ootober , . , There the matter resta and
En droit oomme en fait, le rattaohement 6tart
it is not opento doubtor ohallenge.”
oomplet. Ainsi le rattaohementdu Jammuet Caohemire est devenuoomplet, en droit oommeen fait,
B une oertaine data du mois dlootobre., , Telle
est la situation et elle ne ‘laisseplaoeni au doute
ni Bla ooatastation.*
Therefore, we have never ohangedour position. Our Notre position n’a donojamaisvari& Elle est rest8e
positionhas remainedthe s.amefrom 1941until today. la m6mede 1041jusqu’8maintenant,
46. When1 eaidthat the two reeolutioneof the United
Nations Commissionfor India and Pakistanwhioh
we had aooeptedhad beoomeobsolete,1 did not say
it out of any disrespeotfor the Seourity Counoil.We
are a founder Member of the UnitedNationsandwe
bave the greateot respeot for that Organizatlon and
oartioularlv for the Seouritu Counoil. But how else
ian you oharaoteriee a res~lutionwhiohwaaadopted
sixteen yeare ago and whiohhaenot heenaotedupon
by Pakistan, exoept as obeolete7It ie obaofetein
the eeneethat the very bottomha6 heenknookedout
of it by the oonduotof Pakistan itaelf. The Foreign
Minister lias very wlealy not referred to the fnlse
etatemantsmadeby Pakiatunwith regnrd to its prasenoe in Kashmir, He hns tried to get rid of those
inoonvanient faots hy ouggeetingthat they are irrelevant, beonusetheee evontshnppenecl
prlor to the
arrangementsrrived at hehveenourseives, Pakistan
and the Seo,irity Counoil. T%ut la n total misrencling
of tho CommlsslonVs
resolutione.1 hnve snld it hefore
nnd 1 repent that thase rooolutionaw(3roaondîtionnl
and the oonditionwas tho vaoation of nggroeslonhy
Paldstnn, a oonditionwhiohwnsnot aatlsfied andbas
not boensatisfiodup to tbis dny.

46. Lorsque j’ai dit que les deux r6eolutions de la
CommlssiondesNationsUniespour 1’Indeetle Pakiatan que nous avions aooept0esavaient perdude leur
aotualit6, je n’ai pas voulu manquerde respeot au
Conseil de e6ourit.6.Noussomme6l’un desMembres
fondateursde IlOrganisationdesNationsUnieset nou8
avons le plus grand respeot pour l’Organisationet
pour le Conseil de s6ourit6 en partloulfer. M~is
oommentd6finir autrement queoomme“ayant perdu
de son aotualit& une rdsolutfon qui, adopt6eil y a
16 ans,n’a jamais0t8 miseenoeuvrepar le Pakistan?
Elle a perdu de son aotualft6 du fait quela conduite
du Pakistan lui-m6me l’a priv0 de tout fondement.
Le Ministre des affaires oxt8rieuree a trBs sngelnent
omis de faire montiondes d6olarationemaneongbres
du Pakistan oonoernantsa pr6senoeau Caohemire.
Il a oheroh6 h se d6hnrrnseer de faits gbnultsen
pr6tendnntqu’ils n’avaient rion Bvoir aveola questioll
du fntt que les 6v6nementsen oauaes%taientproduits
rivant la mise au point de ;‘arrnngementarr&6 entre
le Paldntnn, le Conseilde s6ourlt0 et nous-m&mes.
C’est lh une interprbtation totalement erron6e des
r6solutions de la Commission,Je l’ai dit et je 10
r6p8te: ce8 r6solutionsEtalent suhordonn6es
h Uno

46. Pak
its unIaH
ter has I
by sayinl
n. *I
aooeptl
on06 a
the oon
meetin
47. 1t i,
agreedtc
the ooml
ditions h
strange
plana wil
oould ont
of disous
made. TI
oepted. 1
an offer
mentsd,
olear on
nowàofq

48. At n
the Rate
agreed b
questione
se0that
Sion’8 re
1949 is
Prepared
aooepted
modifioat
subsequel
“balanoed
hy the CO

49. 1hav
1948 ha8
knookedI
May 1 bric
of the ter]
(1) Cont
mdstan ]
by Pakists
(2) Intrc
ha0 oooq
by Pakfsto
(3) cona
th3 oreat

gering its
(4) cons
=‘en of J
there oan1
6) usiq
orense PR

4
10 a
non
%lywn
Kire
hismn8
rient
y?ttiS

LFla
, dit

iter,
art00
tires
l’est
boit
xstre

d, le
kitif?
b de
8tre
’ Les
it ne
:eots
‘O&te
svant

)a au

plus
te qui
prim
ense.

Etat
(mbre
Drtait
pas.
~taart
aohe-

i fait,
Telle
clouta
X3St60

de la
balde0 leur
sot au
mbres
btno118
Ion et
, Mais
,Perdu
l$;t~;
bnduite

sment.
kernent
ngbree
pmir0.
pts en
lostiol~
no11uita
3 ontl~
1QmeB.
40 dQf
31;je 1f
a unf

.
oondition, 6 savoir que le Pakistan mette fin 6 son
agression: oette oondition, qui n’a pas 6te remplie
par la suite, ne l’est toujours pasaujourd’hui.
46, Pakistan apparently finds it diffioult to explain 46. Le Pakistan a apparemmentdes diffioult4s &
its unlawfulpresenoein Kashmir. The Fore@ Minisexpliquer sa pr6senoe illegale au Caohemire. Le
ter has soughtto disposeof this inoonvenientquestion Ministre des affaires ext$rfeures a oheroh8h Eluder
by sayingthat:
cette questionenbarrassanteen df3olarant06 qui suit:
11
” * the oontroversies whioh existed before the
, , . les controverses qui existaient avant l’aoaooeptanoeof an agreementoannotbe revived , , .
oeptationd’un accord ne peuvent 8tre Soulev8esa
Cnoean agreementia reaohed, you oannot revive
nouveau.. . Une fois l’aooord oonolu,il est imposthe oontroversy whiohled totheagreement.”[1089th
sible de faire renaftre la oontroverse 6 laquelle
meeting,para. 66.1
l’aooord a mis fin.” [1089Bmeseanoe,par. 66.1
47. It is a strange argumentthat becausewe had 47. C’est Ht lin argumentBtrange: sou8pr9texte que
agreedto a oompromiseformulaonoertainoonditions, nous avons aooeptB,6 certainesoonditione,uneforthe oompromisebeoomessaorosanoteven if the oon- mulede compromis,08oompromisdeviendraitsaoroditions have not beensatisfied. It wouldindeedbe a saint quandbien mbme les oonditionen’en auraient
strange situation if one oould not disousstentative pas 6tB remplies. On se trouverait dansunesituation
plans without beingqboundby them for a11time. How bien oudeusesi l’on ne pouvait disouter de projets
oould one then carry on negotiations?In the oourse provisoires sans se trouver 116s3 tout jamais par
of disoussionsmany offers and suggestionsmay be 08s projets. Commentserait-il possible dans oes
made,These offers beoomebinding if they are aoconditionsde mener des n8gooiations7Au oour8 de
oepted. If they are not aooepted,they terminate. If
pourparlers, bien des offres et bien dessuggestions
an offer is madeandit is not aooeptedor not imple- peuvent 6tre formul6es. Ces offres prennent foroe
mented,it oannotstand forever. We have madethis obligatoire si elles sont aooept&s, sinon elles deolear on numerousoooasionsin the past andwe are viennent oaduques.Si une offre n’est pas aOot)pti
nowdoing SOonceagain.
ou n’est pas suivie d*effets, elle ne reste pae4tarnellementvalable. Nousavonsolairementpr8ois8oela
il maintes oooaeionset nous le soulignonsune fois
de plus.
48. At no time did we abandonour sovereigntyover 48. Jamaisnousn’avonsrenono 6notre souverainetb
the State of Jammu andKashmlr, andwe have never sur PEtat de Jammuet Caohemireet Jamaisnous
agreed to any resolution whioh even by implioation n’avons aooept8 de résolution mettant Oette SOUquestionedthis sovereignty. We have taken painsto veraine en oause, Mt-ee implioitement, Nous
sec that this basio position, adoptedin the Commis- avons veill6 6 08 que oette position de prinoipe,
sion’s resolutionsof 13 August 1948and 6 January oonsaor8e par les r8solutions de la Commission
1949 is not departed from. We were naturally not en date du 13 aoQt 1948 et du 6 janvier 1949,8oi.t
prepared to rnodify theseresolutionawhiohhadbeen striotement maintenue.Nousn%#onsnaturellement
aooeptedby both parties, partioularly asthe suggested pas dispos88B modifier 088 r$solutions qui avaient
modifioationswere only in favour of Pakistan,Al1 the Bt6 aooept$espar les deux parties, d’autantquele8
subsequenttalks about “synohronieationnand about
modifioatione sugg0r6esBtaient toutes 6 l’avantage
“balanoedforoes” and SOon were not oontemplated du Pakietan. Il n’btait pas question,dans les rt3soby the Commissionin its resolutions.
lutions de la Commiesion,de la Qynohronisationfl
de V6quilibre des foroesn, etc., dont on a par14
au oours desconversationsult9rieures.
49, 1 have just statedthat the resolutionof 13August
1948has beoomeohsoleteand the bottom has been
knookedout of it by the oonduotof Pakistanitself.
May 1 briefly enumeratesomeof the major violations
of the terms of this resolutionby Pakistan:

49. Je viens de dire que la r6solution du 13 adit
1948 avait perdu de son aotualft8 et qulelle S’&ait
trouv6 priv0e de tout fondementdu fait de la oonduite
du Pakistan lui-m0me. Permettes-moi d%num@rer
bribvement quelques-unesdes prlnoipaleeviolations
de oette rt3solutiondont le Pakistans’est rendu ooupable:
(1) Continuing presenoe of Pakistan foroes snd
1) Maintien des foross pakistanaiseset du perPakistanpersonnelin Kashmir. This is not disputed sonnel pakietanais au Caohemire.- Ce fait n’est
by Pakistan.
pas oontest0par le Pakistan.
(a) Introduction of additional military equipment
2) Envoi de mat&iel militaire de renfort dansle
into oooupiedterritory. This againoannotbe dispute territoire oocu~. - C0 fait ne peut pafi non plus
by Pakistan.
Btre oontestepar le Pakistan.
(3) Construotionof airfielda in oooupiedterritory,
3) Construotiondtu6rodromes en territoire ooouph,
tirus oreating bases for attaok against India, endan- oonstituantdesbasesd’attaque contrel’Inde et mettant
en danger sa s6ourft6. - C’est Bgalement16 un fait
gering its seourity. Again, this 1san undisputedfact.
inoontesti.

(4) Consolidationand incorporationof the ocoupied
area of Jammu and Kashmir into Pakistan. Again,
tberecari be no disputeaboutthis.
(G)Using its membershipof military pacts to inarenseYakisian’s military potentinl in Kashmir, and

4) IntBgration et inotirporation de la zoneoocup$e
du Jamtnu et Caohomireau Pakistan, - Autre fait
incontestable,
6) Adoption par le Pakistan, mettant 6 profit
h ootte oocasion son oppurtenanoea des paotes

to strengthen the so-oulled “asad” Forces, offioered,
trained and equipped by Pakistan. 1 do net think this
can be challenged either.
(6) Ccoupatlon of Northern areas. They have been
ocoupied by Pakistan,
(7) Continuous threats of foroe and the oreation of
a &ar atmosphere, which are a constant menaoe to
the oease-fire line. 1 have aiven the Security Council
innumerable instances of these throats of force and
the creation of a war atmosphere.
(6) Organieing and financing of subversion and
sabotage in Jnmmu and Kashmir. Almost every month
in Kaihmir there are instanoes of subversion and
sabotage organized and financed from Pakistan,
(9) Havinrr no common border with the People’s
Republio of China, Pakistan has neverthelsss negctiated witb it Kashmir’s border with Sinkiang, thus
disruptlng the territorial unity of the State of Jammu
and Kashmîr. This is the mcst reoent violation, giving
away over 2,000 square miles of Kashmir to China
in a SO-aalled treaty reotifying the border between
Pakistan and China. Pakistan has no border with
China, The only border is our border, the border of
Kashmir. They are in unlawful possession of that
part of Kushmir and they try to give away scmebody
else’s property.
60. The Fore@ Minister of Pakistan has referred
to oertain statements alleged to have been made by
Bakshi Qhulam Mohammed, who until recently was
the Prime Minister of Kashmir. 1 do not know the
souroe from whioh he has obtained them. My instruotions are that these statements are not gt~ine, and
this is borne out by a olear-cut straightforw
i statement made by Bakshi Chulam Mohammed, k I tsident
of the National Conferenoe, on 6 February 1964. IIe
appealed to “a11 patriotio elemenW in the State as
well as in other parts of the oountry to join hsnds in
defendlng the oountry’s freedom against inoreasing
threats from Pakistan. He drew attention to the everinoreasing threats from Pakistan to the seourity of
the State and: “the malicious hate-India oampaign
unleashed by Pakistan Press and radio.” And he added:
*The need to close our ranks and forge unity
among a11 those who believe in democratio seoularism and planned eoonomto progress of the nation
has beoome paramount. It is time to forget and sink
our past differences.”
1 quote agoin:
“Our representative in the Seourity CounoW-he
is referring to my humble self-vhas volced the
truc feelings of tic peoplo of Jnmmu and Kashmir
by asseT.+% onoe again thnt sinoe the people of the
Stata hr
.ready thrice expressed their verdict to
beoome ~1 integral part of Indin, the question of
holding a plebisoite muet be trented as olosed. He”
-that in, myself-V~as curreotly stated that Jammu
and Kashmir îs as good a part of India aa nny other
State. Therefore, Pakistan has no right to meddlo
:.

.,

militaires,
de mesur
de renforcement de son
potentiel militaire au Cachemire et des forces “azadfl
ptiz;E
enoadr&s, entrafh6es et BquipBes par le
. - Sur 043 point non plus, Je ne orois pas
qu’il y ait de contestation possible.
6) Oooupation des r$gions du Nord, - Ces r6gions
ont et6 effectivement occup6es par le Pakistan.
7) Entretien d’une menaos perp6tuelle de reoours
h la force et or6ation d’un olimat de guerre tel que
la ligne de cesses-le-feu risque oonstamment d%tre
viol0e. - J’ai apport6 au Conseil de s6ourit0 des
preuves innombrableb de cette menace et de oe
allmat de guerre,
8) Organisation et financement de la subversion
et du sabotage dans 1IEtat de Jammu et Cachemire.
Au Cachemire, on d6couvre presque chaque mois de
nouveaux actes de subversion et de sabotage organ.is& et financ6s par le Pakistan.
9) Bien que n’ayant pas de frcntibre commune aveo
la RBpublique populaire de Cblne, le Pakistan n’en
a pas moins n6goOi6 aveo elle un aooord relatif h
la frontibre entre le Caohemire et le Sin-kiang,
d&ruisant ainsi Ilunit territoriale
de IlEtat dé
Jammu et Cachemire. Cette violation, la derni8re
en date, livre !î la Chine plus de 2 000 milles carr6s
du Caohemire par un pr6tendu trait6 reotifiant la
frontibre entre le Pakistan et la Chine. Or, le
Pakistan n’a aucune frontibre oommune avecla Chine,
C’est avec nous, aveo le Cachemire, que la Chine
a une frontibre commune. Le Pakistan a pria illagalement possession de oette partie du Cachemire-et il
oherche B oflder un bien qui ne lui appartient pas.
60. Le Ministre des dfaires ext6rieures duPakistan
s’est r6fW B certains propos qui auraient 6t6 tenus
par Bakshi Qhulam Mohammed, ticemment enoore
Premier Ministre du Caohemire. Je ne sais pas
d’oh il a tir6 ses informations. Selon mes instruoMons, oes propos ne sont pas authentiques et c’est
ce que oonfirme une d6olaration tr%s nette faits
le 6 f6vrier 1964 par Bakshi Qhulam Mohammed,
pr6sident de la Conf0renoe nationale, dans laquelle
il a adress6 un appel B %US les 616ments patrictiques”, de 1’Etat et des autres r6gions du pays,
pour qu’ils s%nissent afin de defendre la libert8
du pays centre le danger oroiseant repr6sent6 par
Ie Pakistan, et attir6 l’attention sur le p6ril de plus
en plus grave que le Pakistan faisait oourir A la
s9ourit6 de llEtat, et sur *la oampagne insidieuse
de haine oontre l’Inde msn6e par la presse et la
radio pakistanaises”. Il ajoutait:
West aulourd’hui une n6cessit6 imp6rieuse de
resserrer
les rangs et de r6aliser liunit6 entra
tous oeux qui ont foi dans la d6mocratie laique
et dans le prcgrbs Boanomique syst6matique de la
nation, Il est tempe de surmonteret d’oublier no8
divergence8pa~&s,~
Je le cite Anou-(eau:
“Notre repr6sentant au Conseil de s6curit8”
- c’est F, moi qu’il fait allusion- “a exprlm6
les sentiments v6ritables du peuple du JamInu
et Caohemire en reaffirmant aue nuiscue cette
population a d6jA manifeste par trois- fois 80.
voIonM de faire nartie int&rante de l’Inde, la
questionde ltorgai&ation dl& plbbiscite doit OtiW
oonsidOr6ecommeclose, 11”- i.1 s’agit de moi “a dit fort justement que le Jammuet Caohemim
fait partie de l’Inde au mOmetitre que ntimports
18
... .. ..,,,,,:, .C,,~

,. ,I

b

in (
mai
of I
med
cnly
Se01
that
this
61. 1
a tele
whioh
desor:
Baksh
orude
staten
oil, 01
they a
relied
we ha
forger
Mchan
uponb

62. T:
It may
PakMl
States
that ic
India Y
that ha
for Pw
Nationr
bothof
of the
refern
him th:
be mec
of sot?
ereignt
it to 6
it is 80

63. Wt
stationa
tary set
wheren
for the
Our
pe
E$s;
Of Chfn
measur’
late Mr
oation
ment

t
111

64. 1 d
Calcutta
WIlly i
allowed

1

Le son
” uzad”
par le
lie pas
;Bgions
BOOW8

tel que
Ci’Btre
,te des
de 08
mreion
Lemire.
nois
do
1 orga-

ne aveo
bn n’en
,elatif h
*-kiang,
Etat
de
erni8re
oarras
eE:t
ii
P C&e,
B Chine
UBgalsre et il

tas.
J&lkmun
$6 tenus
en0028
ais pas
lnstruoet o’eet
lte

faite

.ammed,
,laquelle
patrioZu pavl
liberfi
3ntd par
i de plus
trir A la
8idieUas

we et la
ieuse de
t$ entm
8 laibue
g,te de la
>lier nos

143curitB”
,expriin8
Jaminu
yo cette
foia 80
‘Inde, 18
doit 0tm
10 moi lohemil’a
\firnpor@

in our interna1 affaire. The issue whioh etill remains unresolved is tho oontinued illegal oooupation
of a large part of our territory by Pakistan. Immediate vacation of Pakistan’8 aggression is the
only relevant subjeot needing aonsideration by the
Seourity Counoil. It is, therefore, earnestly hoped
chat no further delay will be permitted in resolving
this basio point.”

quel autre Et& Le Pakistan n’a dono auoundroit
do s%g6rer dans nos affairea intbrieures. La
question qui reste A rbgler eet colle que pose
lloooupaMoni116galed’une grandepartie de notre
territoire par le Pakistan, Le seul problbme qui
mI3rite d%tre exatnin6 par le Conseilde s8ourit8
est oolui de la cessationimm6diat.ade ltagression
pakistanaise. Nous esp6rons dono fermement
qu’auounretard ne sera plus apport6A la solution
de oette questionessentielle.”
61. 1 miRht noint out thatI reoeivedthisverv mornine
61. Je dois peut-0tre signaler que J’ai reçu 08
a telegraÏn from Delhi saying that tlie st&ement ot
matin m8meun t81Bgrftmmede Delhi selonlequel la
whioh the Pakistan Foreign Minister had relied 1s d6olaration sur laquelle s’est fond6 le Ministre des
desoribed by offioml oiroles in New Delhi and by
affaires ext&ieures du Pakistan est oonsid&$enar
Bakshi Qhulam Mohammed himself in Srinarrar as a le8 milieux offioiels de New Delhi et par Bakéhi
orude forgery. 1 really think that when one ralies on Qhulam Mohammedlui-marne, A Srinagar, oomma
statements and flourishos them in the Seourity Counforgbe de toutes pi8oes. Il me semblevraiment que
oil, one might take a little oare and flnd out whether
lorsqu’on se fonde sur des d0olarationset qu’onles
they are uuthentio and genuine. A false atatement was
oite Bveoemphaseau Conseilde s6ourit6, onpourrait
relied upon by the Fore@ Minister of Pakistan and se montrer un peu plus oiroonspeot et s’as8urer
we have Just reoeived a telegram that it 1s a orude
de leur authentioit8et de leur exactitude. Le Ministre
forgery and we have the stntement of Bakshi Uhulnm
des affaires ext&ieures du Pakistanolest fond8sur
Mohammed himself oontradioting the stntement relied
une d6olaration erron6e; nous venons de reoevoir
upon by the Fore@ Minister.
un t610grammepraoisant qu’elle a 8th forgbe de
toutes pi8oes et nous avons d’autre part la dbolaration de Bakshi Qhulam
Mohammsd
lui-tnbme
qui
est en oontradiotion aveo 00110sur laquelle s’est
appuyale Ministre desaffaires.exCBrieures.
62. There is a minor matter, thnt 1 must olear UR. 62. Il Y a un point seoo;daire sue ltaimorais nr&
It mny be true that as betweenthe United Kingdom, oiser. Ïl se peut que dans le8 rapports entre le
PakistanandIndia, India and Pakistanweresuooessor Royaume-Uni, le Pakistan et l’Inde, l’Indo et le
Stntes to the Unitéd Kingdom,but there is no doubt Pakistan aient suoo3d6au Royaume-Uni, mais il
that internntlonally Pakistan was a new State and ne 4nlt nuoun doute que, sur le plan international,
India was the sucoessorState to undivided India, If ‘le Pakistan oonstituait un Etat nouveau,et queolest
that had not beenSO,it wouldnethave beennecsesary l’Inde qui 6tait 1’Etat suooesaeurpour l’ensemble
for Pakistanto bendmittedas a Memberof the United du territoire indien. Dansle oasoontraire, iln’aurait
Nations. If both of us were suooessorStates, then pas et6 n0oessaired’admettre le Pakistan comme
botb of uswouldhave nutomationllybeoomeMembers Membre de l’Organisation des NationsUnies. Si nos
of the UnitedNations.The Foreign Minister hRsalso deux Etats avaient Bt8 suocesseurs,
tousdeuxseraient
referred
to medintion
nnd arbitration.
Need 1 tel1
devenusautomatiquement
MembresdeltOrganisation.
him that in the matter of sovereignty, there oannot Le Ministre des affaires ext&ieures a Egalement
be mediationor arbitration? It is the olear insignia fait allusion A la m&iiation et A l’arbitrage. Est-il
of sovereignty that the oountry whioh olaims sovbesoin de lui rappeler qu’enmatibre de souverain&
ereignty oannotpermit adjudioationaboutit or leave il n’y a pas plade pour .la m&llation ou l’arbitr e?
it to some other oountry to deoidewhether in faot La souverainefi 88 manifestep&ois$mentdansleY ait
it is soveretgnor not.
que le pays qui la revendique ne peut pas tol6mr
qu’elle soit soumiseA un jugement ni permettre
A un autre pays de dboider si oette souverain&
existe ou non,
63. We have been told that four Indian divisionsare 63. On nous a dit que quatre divisions indienne8
stationedin Kashmir, 1 amnot here to disolosemiliBtaient stationn8esau Ctrohetnire. Jo ne suis pas
tary seorets.As In other sovereignStntes, our army, ;oi pour r6v8ler des seorets militaires. Comme
whorever stationedwithout our borders, is intended dans le8 autres Etats eouverains,notre armhe, oti
for the defenoeandssourity of our landandour people. qu’elle se trouve A lYnt6rieur de nos frontibres,
Our people in Kashmir have nothing to fear from
a pour missiond’assurer la ddfoneeet la ebouritb
their‘owi army. Indeed, aggressionh Kashmir, by de notre territoire et de sa population.NosoompaPakistanon the one side and the PeoPle’eRepublio triotes du Caohemi.‘on’ont rien A redouter de leur
of China on the other, oompelsus to- take adèquate arm6e. C’est en r8a.itB les aotesd’agressionoommis
measuresin self-defenoo. This le exnotly whnt the A ltenoontre du Caoh3mire,d’un o0t0par le Pakistan
late Mr. JohnStruolrey, M.P., from whosooommuni- et de Pautre par la R8publiquepopulG:z de Chine,
oation to --The Observer 1 quotedin my enrlier stato- qui nous obligent A jrandre des mesure8udfonoivos
ment [1088th
meeting],
folt nbout our notion.
ad6quntos.C’est 8) aotemsntainei que feu M. John
Straoheg,

membre

lu

Parlemunt,

dant

J’ai oit6

dans

ma dbolnrationpr&Jdente [1088&nes&noo] la oommunioation A 1tObstrver, a oomprie notre attitude.
64. 1 do not wnnt to po nrraininto the nusstionof the
Calouttn riots. 1 lmve-n&ndy dealtwiih it, But it is
blally fnlse to euggest. thnt the lnndlordehnvobeon
allowed
t0 innke profit out of the property of poor

64. Jo ne VOIIX p’.s revenir
sur la question des
Bmeuteo
de C~~O~(CU.
J’en ai dbjh par%
Mais il est
totalornent
fdux
‘63 pr6tondro
que les propri6talres
ont pu tirer
pro :it de l%noondiedes biens appar-

b
Muslims whioh was burnt clown. Bath the Chief Minister of West Bengalandour HomeMinister have made
it olear that no one will be permitted to benefit by
the troubles and misary whioh hns beensuffered bý
our Muslim fellow oitieens. The HomeMinister went
further than that: if neoessary,even the Constitution
would be ohangedto prevent landlords from making
money out of the misery of the poor. Already the
West Bengal Covernmentbas promulgatedan ordinanoeto denlwith this situation.

;enantB des musulmanspauvres. Le Ministre prin,ipal du Bengaleoccidental,toutoommenotre ministre
le lYnt.&ieur, a bien pr8ois6 que nul ne serait
nutorise B tirer profit des dhsordreset des SO&
Iranoes dont nos oonoitoyensmusulmansont Bt4
victimes. Le Ministre de llint&ieur, allant plus loin
enoore, a dit que,s’il le fallait, la Constitutionellem8meserait modifibe pour Bvlter que les propri&
taires ne tirent profit de la misbre des pauvres.
Le Gouvernementdu Bsngaleoooidentala d6ja promulgu6 uneordonnanceiI oe sujet.
66. TOsumup, PakistananmetotheSeourityCounoi1 66. En r6sum8, le Pakistan a fond8 sa requ&e au
Conseilde s6ourit6 sur deuxaoousations.
Lapremlbre
on two speoifiooharges.Cnewasthat we were trying
to integrate Kashmlr further into India, andtheseoond est que nous oherohonsh integrer plus oompli3was that there is a grave situationin Kaehmirwhioh tement le Cachemire B l’Inde, et la secondequ’il
oalled for some aotion by the Counoil. In my sub- existe au Cachemire une sftuation grave qui exige
misslon, the Fore@ Mi&ter of Pakistanhasfailsd IlIntervention du Conseil de s&ourit& Selon moi,
le Ministre des affaires extbrieures du Pakistan
to substantiateeither of theseallegations,andtherefore there is nothing before the Counoil on whiohit
n’a r6ussi h &ayer de fapon probante ni l’une
ni l’autre de oes aoousations, et le Conseil de
needtake notion,
s&ourit& n’est donosaisi d’auounequestionqui justifie l’adoptionde mesuresqueloonques.
66. In oonolusion,may 1 end & the 8‘.menote tint
66. Je voudrais terminer oette dbclaration dansle
1 did in my earlier statement,Thesereoriminations, m8meosprit que la pr%%dente.Ces r&oriminations,
this unendingdebate, this making and answsringof
oe d&at sans fin, oes aoousatlonset oes justlfloharaesleadus nowhere.We are preparedto disouss oations ne nous mbnenth rien, Noussommespr&s
a11&r outstandingdifferenoes with Pakistan, inh dlsoutar avoo le Pakistan de tous les d&aooords
oluding Kaahmir, onoe the bitter feelings and the
qui subsistententre nous, y oompris de la question
oommunalpassionshave subsided.Pakistanoanhelp du Caohemire, lorsque l’animosit8 et les passions
in this by esohewingpropagandaat homeandabroad rellgleuses se seront att8nu8es. Le Pakistan peut
contribuer B oe r6sultat en stabstenantde toute proand by taking every measureto prevent inoitementto
oommunalpassionin its Press andonIts radio. I wish pagandeintbrieure et extdrieure, et en prenant les
to assure the Fore@ Minister of Pakistan,with a11 mesures voulues pour emp@ahersa presse et sa
radio dtattlser les passionsreligieuses. Je tiens
the emphasisat my oommand,chatPakistanhasnothB assurer le Ministre des affaires ext4rieures du
ing to fear from India. We have no aggressivelntentions. We tee1 that in the prosperity of Pakistanlies
Pakistan, aveo toute l’autorit dont je dispose,que
the prosperity of the wholesuboontinentof India, and le Pakistann’a rien B craindredel’Inde, Nousn’avons
this prosperity, both of India andof Pakistan,depends pas @intentions agressives, Nous estimonsque la
upon Hindus and Muslims in both oountries living
pmsp6rit.6du Paklstan oonditlonneoelle de toute la
peaoefully aide by slde. Let us makeevery effort to
p&insule lndlenneet que l’Inde oommele Pakistan
ne seront urospbresqueai les hindouset les musuloome together and sec whether we oannottake the
neoessarystepstawardsthis end. This is easentially mans vlv&t enpaix dansles deuxpays. Faisonstout
a matter for us to deoide: Pakistan and ourselves. uotre possiblepour IX)UQrhunir afin de voir si nous
No intervention of a third party oanbs of muohhelp.
saurois prendrë les mesuresqui s’imposent.Par sa
nature m8me, oette questionne peut 8tre tranoh&e
There are aertaln matters whiohoan only be settled
bilaterally, and the questionof oommunalpsaoeand que par le Pakistan ët l’Inde. L’intervention d’une
tierce partie n’aurait pas grande utilit8. CertainGs
harmonyIn India and Pakistanis oneof them.
questionsne se pr6tent qu’8 un rbglementbilatiral,
et la questionde la paix et del’harmonie religieuse
en Inde et au Pakistanest de oelles-18.
57. Mr ‘JlnI BABA (Moroooo) (translated from
Frenoh): My delegationhas listened wilh partioular
attention to the statementsmadeto the Counollby
tbs distînguishhedrepresentatives of Pakistan and
India.

67. M. SIDI BABA (Mm): Ma d&l&gatIona boOut6
aveo unepartioulibre attentionles d6olarationsfaitSs
devant le Conseil par les repr6eentantsdu Pakisitan
et de l’Inde.

58. Relationsbebveenthesetwo great oountrieswith
respeot to the thoruy questionw3 are oonsiderlng
have beonhighly unsatisfnotoryfor nnumberofyears,
and thie is indisputablyone of the problemswhloh
oausesmy oountry most oonoern.My Covernmenl
has very oloee relations with the Covornmente01
hotb Pakistan nnd Indin, baeed on strong tics ol
brotherhoodnndfriendship andon the lofty prlnclples
of Afro-Asian solidarity. As 111sMajesty the King
of Moroooohnssnid on vnriousooonsions,theeeprinoiples, Iargely inspirod by the thinking of gront mer
like Gandhiand Prime Minister Pandit Nehru,oonstitute the @ding idoe wl:.oh underllus OUToonoent01

63. L%tat profond8mentdbplorabledans lequel 60
trouvent, depuisde nombreusesannees,les rapports
etltre 08sdeux grandspays h proposdeoette question
Epineuse,oonstitue inoontestnblementl’un des problbmes qui pr6oooupentle plus mon pays, En effet,
mongouvernemententretient desrelationstr8.3&roites h la fois aveo le Gouvernementdu Pakistanst
aveo oelui de l’Inde, relatlons fond4essur dosliens
nrofondp de frnternit6 et d’amltib, ainsi que sur
im nobles prinoipes de la tiolidarlti- afroasiatique. Ainsi que Sa MnJestB 10 roi du Maroc
l’a d4olarb h diffkentes oooasions,oes prinolpes,
largement lnsplr& par In penskede grandshommes

non-alignmentand
sphere.

68. My oountry \
help whioh thëse
Our struuule for
oontribut& whio:
beoomlngindepen
the other peoples
frf3edOmand indep
60. 1 a180 take
was In this anmei
like 80 many othe.
of its decision to
in the enolaveof C
81. This belng 6
extent we, as fric
sione of this aout
be if the two pal
reaoh a Solution
henoeoapableof <
inoluding the pop
Kashmir.
62. In that waythc
goodof their peol
relations, establîs
neasandfriendly E
based, moreover,
clvllieation andon
We shall not oeas

63. In the interesi
problem and of 1
muohas possible,
deslrablo for the
frain. from talcing
mlght give rise tc
aall in questionthf
ail has already ta
aonoernedand in tl
at oneUrne, ta oo64. We feel that,
0Urity in thls 881
the parties to the d
to lessan the dan
whioh is essential
by negotiation. Th
minimum whioh, :
shouldask for,

66. The gravity 0
lmwoonoiderin~at
nothing new. The
reoentïy to hnve
result of intensive
and this, unfortun
sltustlon even mo
faot that tlme, in
tonsion, ns might
servedonly to wide

non-alignment and all our aotivities in the international
ephere.
60. My oountry will always remember the effeotive
help whioh these two great sister nation8 gave to
our struggle for national liberation and the major
oontribution whioh they were oble to make, ofter
heooming independent, to the struggle oorried on by
the other peoples oi Afrioa and Asia in the name of
freedom and independenoe.
60. 1 also take pleasure in reoalling here that it
WBRin this same spirit of solidarity chat my oountry,
lika SOmany others, fully supported India at the time
of its decision to terminate Portuguese oolonial rule
in the enolave of QOA.
81. This being 80, 1 need hardly tel1 you to whst
extent we, AS friends, are affeoted by the reporousaions of this aouto orisis and how relievod we would
be if the two parties to the dispute should one day
reaoh a solution whioh was just and equitable and
henoe oapable of Qiving Patisfaotion to a11oonoerned,
inoluding the population of the state of Jammu snd
Kashmir.
62. In that way the twooountries oould, for the greater
good of their peoples, inaugurate a new era in their
relations, establishing a polioy of gvod-neighhourliness and friendly and fraternal oo-operation-a polioy
based, moreover, on a oommunity of oulture and
civilieation and on partioularly strong bonds of kinship.
We shall not oease to hope and pray for this result.

63. In the interests of finding a solution tothis grave
problem and of limiting the soope of the orisis as
muoh as possible, my delegation oonsiders it highly
deeirablo for the two Qovernments henoeforth to refrain. from taking any kind of unilateral aotion that
might give rise to new oomplioetions or in any way
oall in queetion the deoisions whioh the Seourity Counoil has already taken in agreement with the parties
oonoerned and in the applioation of whioh they agreed,
at one Mme, to oo-operate.
84. We tee1 that, in the interests of peaoe and seourity in this sensitive part of the world, eaoh of
the parties to the dispute should do what le neoossary
to lersen the danger and bring ahout the md&ente”
whioh is essential if the problem is to he resolved
by ne@iation. That, in my delegation’s view, le the
minimum whioh, in the oiroumetanoes, the Counoil
should ask for.
66. The grnvity of the problem whioh the Counoil is
now oonaidering nt the request of Pakistan 1soertainly
nothlng new. Tho stakes, on the other hand, seem
reoently to havo aeeumed Inrgar proportlone as a
result of intensive milltnry and diplomntlo efforts,
and this, unfortunntely, nppears to hnve madethe
situation even mord oomplex. Finnlly, there 1sthe
fnot thnt Urne, instend of holping ta deorensethe
tonalon,ns mlgbt hnvo boon hopednt the outset,hns
servedonly to widenthegnpbotweonthutwo posltlons.

oomme Qandhi et le Premier Ministre, le pandit
Nehru, oonstituentl’id&~foroe sur laquellereposent
notre aonoept de non-alignement et notre aotion
oonstantedansle domaineinternational.
GO. Monpays garderatoujours le souvenir del’appui
sffioaoe que oes deux grandes nations sœurs ont
don& B notre lutte de lib&ation nationale, ainsi
que de la oontribution trbs importante qu’elles ont
pu apporter, depuisleur aooessionB l’ind6pendanoe,
B la lutte que les autrespeuplesd’Afrique et d’Asie
ont engag8eau nom de la Iibert8 et de l’ind&penœ
danoe.
60. Il me plaft d’ailleurs de rappeler ioi queolest
dans le oadre de cette m&ne solidarit4 que mon
pays, oommetant. d’autres, avait pleinementsoutenu
l’Inde au momentoh oe pays avait d6oid6de mettre
fin B la dominationcolonialeportugaisesur l’enclave
de Qoa,
61. Autant vous dire, comptetenu de oe qui prbobde,
B quel point, en tant qu’amis, noussommesaffeot&
par les r8poroussionsde cette crise aiguë,et B quel
point nousserions soulag0ssi, un jour, les deux parties en oause parvenaient B une solution juste et
Equitable,et pouvant, de oe fait, donnersatisfaction
h tous les int&ess&?., y compris la populationde
l%tat de Jammuet Caohemire.
62. Ainsi les deux pays pourraient, pour le plus
grand bien de leurs peuples, inaugurer une Bre
nouvelledansleurs relations en BtabIlssantentre eux
une politique de bon voisinage, de ooop&ation amioale et fraternelle - politique fontie, du reste, sur
une oommunaut6de culture et de oivillsation ainsi
que sur desliens de parenUpartioulibrementsolides,
En vue de oe rbsultat, nousne oesseronsd’adresser
des pribres et de formuler les vœux les plus sinobres.
63. Dans la perspeotive d’une solution B oe grave
problbme et pour limiter autant quepoesibleles dlmensionsde la orise, ma &%ge.tion estime qu’il
serait extrdmementsouhaitablequeles deuxgouvernementss’abstiennentdbs B prhsent d’entreprendre
une aotion unflatbrale de queiquenature queoe soit,
susoeptiblede or& de nouvellesoomplioationsoude
mettrè en oause, d’une fagon ou d’une autre, les
d8oieionsque le Conseil de atlourit.4 a dbjh prises
en aooord aveo les partiea int&ess&ea, et B l’applioation desquelles oellee-ci ont, B un moment
do&, aooeptede ooop&er.
64. Nous estimons,en effet, quel~intir& de In paix
et de la e8ourit4dansoetta r&ion sensibledu monde
demande h ohaoune des parties en litige qu’elle
apporte la oontribution nboeseaire afin de airconaorire le danmr et de orber, enfin. un climat de
d&ente indispenàble en vue dhk~ rolütion n&ooibe
du problbme. C’est, de l’avis de ma d616gation.le
minimum de oe qu’il serait peut&re poseibleau
Conseilde demanderdans les oiroonstanoes
actuelles.
6s. LA gravit8 du problbme dont le Conseil est
actuellement saisi h la demandedu Pakistan n’est
certes pas un fait nouveau. Mais, pnr oontre, olest
1Vmjou du diff6rend qui, aembit++il, a pris oea
derniers tempn, du fnit des efforts intenses EU les
plans militaire et diplomatique, de nouvelle8 proportions, ce qui, mnlheurausoment,paraft avoir
donn8h la situation un oaraotbre onooro plus cornœ
plexe. Il fnut njoutor h cet &nt de ohoriesle fait que
le temps, nu lieu de contribuer 8. la diminutionde
la tension, aine1 qu’on pouvait l’esp6rer au ddhut,

n’a fait, au oontraire, qu%loigner davantagel’une
de l’autre les thbsesen pr6senoe.
66. Nousestimons, dans oesoonditions,quele mo66. In these oiroumstanoes, we believe that the time
ment est maintenant venu pour ohaounde prendre
has oome for one ami a11ta realise the danger whioh
oonsoienoedu danger qui menaoela paix, de peser
threatens peaoe and to weigh thelr full responsibilitout le poidsdes responsabilitesqui sont les siennes,
tics. My delegation, for its part, 1s oonvinoed that
Ma delegationest oonveinoue,quant A elle, que les
the statesmen of Karaohl and New Delhl, beoause of
dirigeants de Karaohi et de New Delhi sauront dBthe great moral and spiritual valueswhiohtheyrepresent and whioh are built up of toleranoe,justioe and couvrir toutes les vertus du dialogue grlloe aux
patienoc, will realice the advantagesof disoussion grandes valeurs morales et spirituelles qu’ils rebetween them and will undertakethe searohfor a pr0sentent et qui sont faites de tol6ranoe, de justioe
peaoefulsolutionto this problemwith a11therequisite et de patience, et arriveront k entreprendre, aveo
toute la passion et toute l%nergie nf3oessaires,la
eeal nnd energy. In this wny they will sparetheir
peoplesthe seriousoonsequenoes
of a tensionwhioh, reoherohe d’une solution pacifique 8 oe probl8me.
despite a11the efforts madeby the United Nations, Ils Bpargneront ainsi k leurs peuples les graves
oons6quenoesd’une tension devenuepermanenteen
has beoomepermanent,At the sameUrne they will
eliminate the threat of a tragedy whoseoonsequenoes, d$pit des eiforts de toutes sortes faits par les
not only for their own oountriesbut surely for man- Nations Unies, Ils Blîmineront, en m6metemps, la
kînd as a whole, would be inoaloul8ble.
menace d’une trag4die aux oons6quenoes
inoaloulablesnonseulementpour leurs pays, maiss8nsdoute
aussipour l’ensemblede l’humanit6.
$7. In this matter, mvolving as it does a oonfliot 67. Dans WY% affaire, s~agiss8ntd’un oonflit qui
behveonRo sister StateS,it goéswithout sayingthat opposedeuxBtata ifires, il va sansdire quedo nommany oountries, inoludingmy own, wouldprefer not breux pays, dont le mien, pr6fBrent Eviter de prendre
to take aides-oonsideringit the part of wisdomand aarti, oonsid6rantque la sagesseet le bon sens
good sens8for the oommonfriands of Pakistanand exigent des amis oommunsdÜ Pakistan et de l’Inde
India to do everything possibleta enablethe dispute qu’ils mettent tout en œuvre afin que le diff6rend
eventually to be settled throughpeaoefulnegotiations puisseun Jour 6tre rBgl6 par desnbgooiationspaoiin a spirit whioh is one of mutu81oonaession
andof fiques dans un esprit de oonoesslonr0oiproqueet
oonformity with the earlicr resolutions.My Qovern- aussi dansun esprit conformeaux r6solutionsant&
mentis determination to leave no atone unturned in rieures. La volant6 ferme de mon gouvernementde
its efforts to help overoome the uiffioulties arising ne rien nbgliger pour que soient Blimin6eotoutes
from this oonfliot is equalledonly by our desire that les diffioult6s nbes de oe oonflit, n’a d%gal que
the two pnrties shouldagreeto ait downtogether and notre d6sir de voir les deux parties se mettre dIaoreaoha solutionbasedon respectfor rights, inoluding oord pour se retrouver autour d’une table et parthe right of peoplesto deoidet.hi*ir ownfuture, It is venir B une solutionfond6e sur le respeot du droit
interesting to note, indeed, thut the parties to the et notammentoelui des peuples8 disposer de leur
dispute have on numerousoiroasionssud in various propre avenir, Il y a dtailleurs lieu de noter aveo
oiroumstanoesdefined, eaohas oonoernsitself, posi- int6rbt que les parties en litige avaient, en de nomdiverses,
tions favourable to a fOrmulEwhiohwouldpermit the breusesoooasionset dansdesoiroonst8noes
dOfini, ohaouneen 01)qui la oonoerne,des positions
peopleinvolved to deoideits owndestiny.
favorables A une formule permettant 8 la population
intbressbede d&ider elle-m6medasonpropredestin.
66. In my delegation’sview, it le only on this basis, 68, Ma d(il$gationestime que olest peut-8tre seuleperhaps, that 8 valid and at the snmetime laeting ment sur ostte base que pourra 6tre troude une
solution oan bs fwnd for this seriousdisputewhioh solution valable et en m8me temps dbfinitive A oe
bar, unfortunately, developedfrùm aspeoifiosituation grave diffbrend qui a malheureusementpris naisreoocmicedbv a11as havinrr Pttvenrlse to serious sanoeA partir d%mesituation spAoifique,queohaoun
oontgoversy.-Thus the two pa?ties, assistedby a11 raoonnaft, du reste, oommeayant Bt43d’une nature
their friends and with the help of the United Nations, s6rieusementoontrovers8e. Ainsi les deux parties,
will suooesd in terminating the existenceof a prob8id6es par tous leurs amis et aveo le oonouirs des
lem-that of the State of Jammuand Kashmir-whioh NationsUnies,parviendront Amettre fin Al’existenos
1s80 prejudioial to a11ofus. Theywill thereby remove d’un problbme aussi prbjudioiable pour tous que
a souroeof tensionwhiohfor more thansixteen yearr
oeluf de 1’Etat de Jammuet Caohemire.Elles feront
bar been sn obstaoleto rapproohement
betweentheir
de OI frit dfrparaftrs
un foyer de tensionqui depuis
two sieter and neighbouroountries.
plus de 16 8nsse dressesur la voie du rapprochement
entre deux pays fibres et voisins.
60, Mr. USHER (Ivory Toast) (translated from
60. M. USHER(C&e-d%oire): Le Conseilde860tirit8
F’renoh):The Seourity Counoil is meetingto disouss est r8uni pour examiner A nouveau,sur plainte du
onoe ngnln the so-onlled question of Jammu and Pakistan,l’affaire dite du Jammuet Caohemire.
Kashmir at the requestof Pakistan.
70. In order to estnblishthe faots of the problem 70. Pour Etablir les donneesuotuellesdu probl8m0,
nous disposonsde la lettre du Ministre des affairoo
as thev nnwstand.we hnvo before us the lettor datecl
1.6 January 1964.from the Minister for External oxtbrieures du Pakistan. en data du 16fanvler 1964
A&irs of PakistanIS/66171u andthe lotter from the [S/6617wj, et de oelle du repreaentantp&tmmentde
PermanentRepres&.ative of Jndiadnted 24 January l’Inde, en date du 24 janvier 1964(S/66220/],qui noua
1064 [S/60223Y lnformlng us that the ohnrgesoon- apprend que les aoousationsportees dans lu lettre
--

tained in the l(
with

tn

thre8

D

Representative-(
of the Seourity C
71. It le olear
events whioh ho
Pakist8n is noat
latkg the Seour
1961and 24 Jan
United Nations
dated 13August
ing ta annexthe 1
mir whiohis helc
Pakistan refera
ohangeswhioh tl
bring about.
72. Without, ap
hidia replies tha
integral part of
the British SO-C
1036, as amend
that the question
73. The Seouriq
portunities to def
in well-known re
invalidate them.
this stage to pre
oondemn.That w
delegation’8 undc
measuresto brin
honourablesolutic

74. However, be:
my delegationWI
ment81prinoiples
of the Seourity c
dynamionature: I
to the saorednri
we also oonde&
Tl~t is the spiril
seeing for ourse
the distressing x
ooourredandwhic
or passion.

76, In view of t
possibility of a de
bility of settling
ehould be thorou(
onoe that there i
whiohalready exi
a little dimmer fi
fluid. But it is s
in the interest of
rather than glve WI

76. The peoples
the same people.
goodtorms sideb
QndHindus in Pnl
forent physiologiol
anatholst?Andyol

tained in the letter of 16 January have been dealt
with in three previous lettere from the Permanent
Representative of India addressed to the President
of the Seourity Counoil.
71. It is olear from those documentsnnd from the
events whioh have just been reoounted to us that
Pakietan 1s aoouelngthe Covernmentof India of violatiug the Seourity Counoil resolutionsof 30 Maroh
1061and 24 Jnnuary 1067,0/ as well as thoseof the
United Nations Commissionfor India and Pakistan
dated 13 August1948and6 January 1040,~ by seekin to annexthe part of the Rate of JammuandKashJ r whioh1sheld by India. In supportof lb argument,
Pakistanretors to the legislative and oonstitutional
ohangeswhioh the Indian Covernmentis seekingto
bring about.
72. Without, apparently, rejeoting those oharges,
India replies that Jammuand Kashmir has betrn an
integral part of India sinoe 27 Cotober 1047under
the British SO-oalledCovernment of India Aot of
1036, as amendedin 1047.It is argued, therefore,
that the question1sa purely interna1one.
73. The Seourlty Counoil, alas, has had many opportunities to deflneits position.Its views are stated
in well-known resolutions.We are not beingaskedto
invalidate them, any more than we oan be askedat
thls stage to prepare an indiotment, to judgeandto
oondemn,That would be futile: moreover, it is my
delegation’sunderstandingthat our task 1s to take
measuresto bring aboutprogresstowardsa just and
honourablesolutionof the problem.

du 16 janvier ont Bt4I r6fut&a dans trois lettreo
adreeebee antbrieurement par le repr4sentant permanent de l’Inde au Pr6sident du Conseil de s6ourit&

71. Il r6oulte de oes dooumentset desbv5nemente
que l’on vient de nousrelater que le Pakistanreproohe au Gouvernementde l’Inde de violer les r&olutiens du Consellde s6ourit6en date du 30 mars 1061
et du 24janvier 1057l!V, ainsi quecelles de la Commission des Nations Uniespour l’Inde et le Pakistan
en date du 13 aotlt 1048 et du 6 janvier 1040La/,
en oherohantAintegrer la partie de 1’Etat de Jammu
et Cachemirequ%ooupel’Inde. A l’appui de sa thbse,
le Pakistanmentionneles tentatives de modifioations
16gielatives et oonetitutionnellesenvisa*s par le
Gouvernementde l’Inde.
72, A oesaoouaatione,qu’elle ne eemblepasrejeter,
l’Inde r6pondque le Jammuet Caohemireest partie
intdgrante de l’Inde depuisle 27ootobre1047,oonform6mentAla loi britanniquede 1036,dite Uovernment
of India Aat, amend6een 1047.Il s’ngirait en oone&
quenoed’unequestiond’ordre purementinterne,
‘73. Le Conseil de s6ourit5 a eu, h6las, de nombreuses oooasionsde definir aa ,posltion. Ses vues
sont oontenuesdans des r6solutions oonnues.On ne
nous demandepas de les infirmer, pas plus qu’on
ne saurait nousdemanderau stadeaotuelde dresser
un aote d’aoousation,de juger et de oondamner.Cela
ne servirait A rien, et ma d615gationoroit dlailleurs
oomprendre qu’on nous demandede prendre des
mesurespour assurePque le problbmeavanoevers
une solutionjuste et honorable,
74. However, before dealingwith the problemitself,
74, Mais avant de s’attaquer au probl5me, ma
my delegationwould like to restate certain funda- d618gationvoudrait invoquer oertains prinoipesfonmentalprinolples, First, we aooepta11theresolutions damentaux.PremiBrement,nou6admettonstoute6 les
of the Seourity Counoil and we also reoognleetbeir
tisolutions du Conseilde s8ourlt6, et nousreoonnaisdynamionaturel seoondly,we reaffirm our devotion sonsBgalementleur oaraotbre dynamiques
deuxibmeto the saoredprioiple of self-determination;thirdly,
ment, nousr$affirmone notre attaohementauprincipe
we alsooondemnraoial andreligious disorlmination. saoti de 11autod6terminat~on;
troisl&mement, noua
Tbat is the epirit in whioh we approaohthis debate, oondamnons
Bgalemsnttoute disoriminationraoialeet
seeingfor ourselves with great sorrow and regret
religieuse, C’est dans oet esprit que nous voulons
the distressing results of the violenoe whioh has entrer dans le pr6eent ddbat, en oonstatant, aveo
ooourredandwhiohoannotbeexplainednwayby reason oombiende regret et de douleur, le triste rbeultat
or passion,
des vlolenoes que ne saurait expliquer nulle raison
ni passion,
76. In view of the gravity of me questionandthe 76. Devant la gravltb du probl6me et devant
possibility of a deadlookin the Counoil,every possi- l~impaseeoh pourrait se trouver le Conseil, il y a
bility of settling the matter whioh oomesto mind Heu d’exploiter A fond toutes les possibllit5s de
ehouldbe thoroughly explored and we must say at
rbglement qui s’offrent Anotre esprit, et nousdisons
cnoe that there le a gllmmer of hope, Thie hope, tout de suite qu’il y a une lueur d’espoir. Cette
whiohalready exieted in 1061and 1067,has beoome lueur, qui existait d6jA en 1061et 1957,a un peu~Pli
a little dimmer in 1084beoausethe situatlon ie 80 en 1964, en raison du oaraot6remouvantde la rituafluid. But it 1s etill somethingto hold on to sinoe, tien. Mais elle reste enoore une oooaeionA saisir,
in the interert of peaoe,we must oling to Bornehope attendu que lW&& be la paix nousfrit obli tion
ramer than give way to deepair,
de tenir bon plut& que de nous laisser a1Per au
dbrespolr.
76, The peoplesof Pakistan and India are one and 76. Les peuplesdu Pakistanet de l’Inde oonstltuent
the same poople. For oenturieo they lrnve lived on un seul et mBme peuple. Pendantdos sieolas, ils
gondtorms sideby side. There are Muelime in India ont v6ou 8’1bonneintelllgenou. Desmusulmnnssont
aatl ilindus in Pnklstnn. Surely u Muslirn is no difen Inde, des hlndous uu Pakistan. Un musulmun
farent physiologIonllyfrom a Iiindu, n Christian or
seralt-il physiologiquement
dîff6rent d’unhtndou,d%n
anathelst?Andyot, wholeoommunitlesrise upngainst ohr&len, d’un ath6e7Et oependnntdescommun&&
Lo/Ibld.,
Slxth Yaar, Suma
forlJamry,
Fcbruary
snd
..- Mwch
J&
document
S/2017/Rev.l;
nndIblrl.,
‘Ikolfth
Yoar. Suodomont
for
J~nuaty, Pobrwry
rnd Mat-ch lY57, document S/377Y.
m Ibld,, Thlrd Y.%-, Supplomont
for Nowmber
1943, docuIymyt
S/llDD , para. 75 ard lbld., Pourth Yoar, buçplomont
for rnuary
,
dWtmcnt S/1196, par*. 15.

L.,
-Y=--..-

--~---cii-*-

23
.;-r>~~-~7*T:<<~.-~pg7

.!P/ Ibid.,

dowmut
vler,fbvrior

slxldlllc

Rlln60

su

Iomont

dB allvler

fQvrloretll1arl

S/2m&,
doWnie
~nna’e, ,%wnt
at nw8 1957, document S/3779.

u IlrI&, trolrldmo
wr80,
Snnvlbmant
S/llW
par. 73: ot lbld,,A uptrldme
annk,
document S/IIY6, par. 1s.

do novembre
SupplBmont

IY51
do ~a,,!

194% document
da JanvIor 1949,

ae dressent les unes oontre les autres: elles se
massacrent:folles qui se traduisentpar des dizaines,
des oentalnes,des milliers de morts, Les mlnorlt8s
zont des otages, elles vivent dans une ins6ourit8
Derp8tuellequi s’aggrave aveo l%tat des relations
entre les deux pays, Rien soolologiquement
nejustifie
oette trag6die humaine 81 oe n’est qu’elle est la
tisultante d’interventions extbrieures. L’humanit6
ne doit pas s’aooommoderde oela et le Conseilde
sbourit8 non plus. Les dirigeants de oes deux pays
IrCes en sontmeurtris,
17. Le P&i(lent de l’Inde a demandeau PrBsident
77. The Presldent of Indla ha8 asked the Presldent
du Pakistande sejoindre B lui pouradresserun appel
of Pakistan to joln wlth hlm in appealing to the people
aux oonulationsdes deux pays en leur demandantde
of the two oountrles to malntain peaoe and harmony,
malite& la paix et l’h&onle. Le PrBsident du
The Presldent of Pakistan is also asking the Indlan
Pnkistan demandeBrralementaux autorlt88 de l’Inde
authoritles to take effeotive measures to restore
de prendre des meiures effeotives susoeptiblesde
peaoe and order and to give the Mualim minorltles
restaurer l’ordre et la paix et de ramener un sentiR feeling of fleourlty on00 again.
ment de e&urlte dnnsl’esprit desmlnorit8s musulmanes,
78. Nous ne pouvonspas ne pas rapporter l’appel
78, We oannot fall to note the patbetio appeal made
pathhtiquedu PrBsidentdu Pakistanau Ptisldent de
by the President of Pakistan to the Presldent of Indin,
l’Inde, que nous a lu le Ministre des affaires ext8whloh WAS read to us by the Minlster for External
rieures du Pakistan,Je oiter
Affalrs of Pakistan, and I quote:
“En proolamant- 08 qui revient lmplioitement
“By blaming and thus lmplledly oondoning oomA 108exouser- que les meurtres et les destruomun&l killingtr and destruotlon in one oountry on
tione dontune oommunaut6
est vlotime dansunpays
slmilar lnstanoes in the other, we might unwlttingly
sont dus A des agissementsanaloguesqui se sont
lend enoouragement preolsely to these evll foroes
produitsdansl’autre, nous risquerionsdtenoOUraKer
whioh lt le Qovernment’s duty ~0ourb , . . Let leaders
sanz le vouloir oes feroes du mal qu’un gouverin eaoh oountry look lnto thelr ownhearts andrenementP pr6ois8mentpour devoir de maftriaer , , ,
8OlVeta put thelr own house in order.” [lO87th
Que lee dirigeants de ohaoundes pays fassentleur
meeting,para, 70.1
propre examende oonsolenoeet prennentla r&olution de remettre de l’ordre ohez eux.” [1087Bme
sf3ano8,par. 70.1
70. La preuve est faite que les deux pays sont si
70. lt ha8 been proved thnt the two oountries are
SO oloeely boundtogether that nothlng that happens intimement libs que tout oe qui se passe ohez
in one oan fail to be of oonoernto the other. It ha8 l’un n’est pas sansint&esser l’autre, La preuve est
faite que ohaouna besoin de la oaution moralede
been proved that eaoh needsmoral guaranteesfrom
the other in order to maintain geaoewlthin its own l’autre pour maintenir la paix ohez lui. Enfin, la
preuve, s’il en 6talt besoin, est faite que 088
border& Lastly, lt has been prowed-if euohproof
deux paye souffrent moralement et mat8riellement
were nsoessary-that the two oountriesare suffering
de oet Btat de orise latente.
morally ‘andmaterially from thie stateof latent orisis.
80, Consequently,theimmediateprnotloalaotionopen 80. Ainsi dono, ee quenouspouvonsfaire depratique
dan6 l’imm8diat, otest aider les Gouvernementsde
to us ie to assist the Governmentsof India andPakisl’Inde et du Pakistan A orBer, ohaoundhnssonpay&
tan to establish the oonditionsfor interna1 peaaein
thelr respeotiveoountries. For this they must do two lee conditionsde la paix infirieure, qui se rI3sunlent
en deux ooints. En premier lieu, ils doivent r&ablir
thi.@r firat, reetore a olimate of undérstandlngbeun olimai d’entente-entre les deuxpuys et reetauror
tween the two oountrles and peaoeandharmony between the oommunitiesby putting an end to the war
la naix et l’harmonie entre les oommunaut68,en
being wagedin the Pressand over the air whiohoan meitant fin A la guerre des ondes et de la presse,
only foster hatred Bnd exaoerbatetensionsbetween qui n’est propre quIAentretenir la haineet la teneton
entre les populations,aveo les risques d’exploeton
them with a11the rieks of open oonfliot lnherent in
suoh a situation; seoondly, use the influence of the que oela comporte. En seoondlieu, il leur faut user
eleatedauthorltles 8’ leaders to 8888the mlndsof
de l’influenoe du pouvotr et des pereonnallt6sBlUez
pour apaiser les esprits, surtout les mnjorit88, afin
the people,partioularly the majorltles, andthus prevent a reourrenoe of violenoeandensurethe seourlty d’emp6ober nlnsi le renouvellementdes notes ds
violenoe et d’assurer la s6ourit6 des oommunaut6z.
of tho oommunlties.

eaoh other and elaughter eaoh other-aots of madness
whioh olaim tens, hundreds and thousands of llves.
The mlnorltles are hostages; they llve in oonstant
inseourlty whloh beoomes more aoute as relations
between the two oountrles deteriorate. Neither the
world nor the Seourlty Counoll should aooept thls
state of affalrs. It has made the leaders of the two
slster nations slok at heart.

81. We bellevo that if eaohpurty took Uose eteps
withln Ils own territory it would be furnisblng the
beat proof of lts doslro to 80011n penoefulsolution
to the dlepute we are ooneldorlng.It must, howover,
bt3 reoognizedthnt thesoare only tentntlve solutions,
npplionblo only to tbo immadinte preeent, nnd thnt
Kashmlr must oaaeoto be a oonstantsubjeotof tonsion in Indo-Pakletan ralntions-musl oenso to be
thc onuseof interna1dieorcler it hnsboenslnoe1647.

61. Noua censonaquo obacun,~‘11prenait oesmesures dans son pays, donnerait la meilleure preuve
de son d6slr de rechercher uneeolutlonpacifiqueRu
diff6rend soumls h notre examen. Il faut convenir
oesendnnt«uo cc ne sont18enoorequedos solutions
dlnpproohe,~bonnae
seulementpour l~imm6diat,et que
le Caohsmlredoit oesser d’btre 08 perp&uel sujet
de teneion yu’ll cst dans les relations lndo-paklstanalsee; yu’ll doit cesser do Jouer cw râbledlugeetde
d&&pIilibro Interne qu’il Jouedoputs194’7.

82. The disir
notice that an
mir not only ti
betweenIndfa
inseourity In ;
those whioh bl
been sald, tr:
duty, out of f.
the lnterest OI
ourity in that
fundumontnl1s
8% TO thnt e
of leaderswho
of 26January,
dent Radhakris
serted his des
nnd statedthat
the Indian ao1
reach a peaoe
rions in disput
CovernmentOI:
Pakistan to JO~
bringing to an
dentsanddistu
betweentho tw(
84, The repre
before the Se01
oussion, in thr
oonferenoes,B
Pakistanto sit
[1088thmeeting

8ü. Al1 these
bility of R rapl
somethingwe
throughoutthls
tlmes hnve wor
of one nartv c
we nowieel”thR
with the methoc
Statesand Cave
by thema8 doot
of Afrlonn Unit
1sa positive rel
86. We would
attitudewlth tha
nnd that vlrtue
whiohit hasshl
andKashmlr fi,
hzsnot eliminat
Ing the hvo 001
endof their roi
and frlendship
their long oomn
for External A:
Seourity Counoi:
meaneto live :
llve In peaoencl
[
87, Thesa stnts
“juat”) * hOllOU1’1
conformlty with
pnrticulnr, wlth
Churter.
In ttw
llgh
hdhl fllld pnki6
lt tc thom to ac
01’Of somo em
-%l

nofd nnd tho dot

The dlsintereated,
neutrnl observer oannot but
notice that any oomplioation, any Instabllity in Kaahmir not only has an immediote effeot on the relations
betweon Indin and Paklstnn, but orentes a feeling of
Inseourity In both oountries.My delegatlonis among
thoeewhloh belleve that thougheverything may have
heen said, trled nnd done in the matter, it 1sour
duty, out of frlendshlp Corthe two oountrtes and1n
the interest of averting the threat to peaoeandaeourity in that part of the wosld, not to sidestepthe
fundamuntalIssue.
83. TO that end, we shall ùeginwith the statements
of leaderswhosewordsnre to betrusted. In his speeoh
of 26 Jnnuary, onthe eveof thenationalholiday, President RadhakrIehnnn.
aooordinrrto Franoe-Presse,aeserted bis desire to bring agout peaoein the world
nndstatodthat in its relationswlthChinaandPakistan
the lndlon Qovernmentwaa gutdedhy the deslre to
reaoh a peaoefuland honournhlesettlementof questions in dispute.In its letter of 24 Jnnuary the Indian
Covernmentonoeagainnppealsto the Covernmentof
Pakistan to Join wlth lt to devise ways andmeansof
brlnging to an end the reourring oyole of suohinoidentsanddisturbanoeswhiohwerepoisoningrelations
betweenthe two oountrles.
84. The ropresentative of India likewise relterated
before the Seourity Counoilthat he helieved in dlsoussion, In the solution of differenoas by meanaof
oonferenoes, and he added: “., . we will weloome
Pakistanto sit with us andresolve our differenoes*
(1088thmeeting,para, 871.

82, En effet, l’observateur dbslntbressbet neutre
ne manquepas de s’aperoerolr que touts oomplloatlon, que toute lnstabllltb au Caohemlrs a non
seulementun effet immbdiat sur les rapports entre
l’Inde et le Pakistan,maie enooreorbe uneinsbourltb
a lclntbrieur de Ilun et l’autre pays. Et ma dblbgation est de oelles qui pensentque, bien quetout
att btb dit, tentb et fait a oe eujet,l~amltlbpour 08s
pays, la pal%et la ebouritb menaobeedans cette
partie ou monde noue dictent de ne pre bluder le
problbmequantau fond.
83. Pour oe faire, nous partirons de dbclaratlons
d’hommes digne8 de foi. Dans son discours du
26 janvier, B la veille dela fbte nationale,le prbsldent
Radhakrlshnan aurait affirmb, rapporte 1’Agenos
Franoe-Presse, aa volont d’instaurer la paix dans
le mondeet que, dans sesrapports aveo la Chineet
le Pakistan, tl aurait dbolarb que le Qmvernemsnt
indien btait guldb par Ia volontb de parvenir R un
rbglement pacifique et honorable des questionsen
iltige. Dans sa lettre du 24 janvler, le Qouvernement
de l’Inde demandeenooreau Gouvernementdu Paklstan de se ooncerter pour oonvenlr des moyensde
briser le oerole violeux d’lnoidenteet de troubles
qui dbgradenttee relations entre les deux pays,
84, D’autre part, le reprbsentantde l’Inde a rbpbtb
devant le Conseilde sbouritb qVi1 oroit a la vertu
de la dlsoueslon,au rbglement des dlffbrende par
une oonfbrenoe,et il a ajcutb; “, , . noua aerlons
heureux que le Pakistan vienne a’asseolr aveonous
A une mbmetable pour quenouspufeeionsvider nos
querellean[1088bmeebanoe,par, 87).
8G. Al1 these admisdonsconvinoeUP of the possi- 86. Autant de confessionsqui nous lalsaent croire
bility of a rapproohement.And that, in our view, is
B la poeslbllitb d’un rapproohement.Il Y a la. pour
somethlngwe onn work wlth. Whlle It is true that
nous,‘matîbre B exploit& En effet, si, t&t auooure
throughoutthis long Kashmirepisodewe may some- de la longueMstoIre du Caohemlre, nousavons pu
Urneshnve wonderëdahout the‘underlyingIntentions quelquefois nous interroger sur les fntentlone proof one party or the other, inoludingthese friends, fondes des uns et desautres, oes amisentre autos,
we nowfeelthat the statementsquotedare in keeping il nousapparahaujourdlhuiqüelesdbolarationroitbes
wtth tho methodslaid downby the Iieads of Afrioan
stsooolylc)ntaveo les mbthodesdbfinies Dar le8 ohefr
StatesandCovernmentrat AddisAbabaandproolaimed dlEtat et de gouvernementafrioatns AÀddir-Ahbba
by them as dootrineIn the Charter ofthe Organlaatîon et brlgbes par eux en dogme dans la Charte de
of Afrionn Unity: the ultimate purposeof a dialogue POrganlsatlon de Punitb afrloainel la ffnalltb du
1sa positive reeult.
dialogueest un rbsultat poaltlf,
813.We would hope that Pakistanwouldreaot to that
88. A oette attitude, nous sottbdtmîono que le
attitudewlth thnt oonstantoonoernfor aooommodation Pakistan rbponde awo ce oonrtant rouai de Varand that virtue of wlllingneseto make oonoeseîons rangementet oette vertu de la oonoesslon
quenous
whfohit hnsehownever dnoe the prohlemof Jummu lui oonnalesonsdepuis que se pose le problbmedu
andKashmir firet arose. For that matter, Pnklstan Jammu et Caohemfre.Du reste, le Paklrtan n’a pas
haenot ellmlnatedthat poeslbllity asameansof bringboartb oette porslbtlltb, qui doit amenerlesdeuxpays
ing the two oountrles to the Inexorable and logloal au terme fatal et loafquedeleurbvolutlon, otort-A-dire
endof their rond, namely, the goodneighhourllnese le bon voisinage et l’amltlb, auxquels les destine
and friendship to whioh they have beendestlnedby
une longuehistoire oommune.D’ailleurs, le Ministre
their long oommonhietory. Moreover,
the Minister
des affaires extbrleureerdu Pakfstana bgalemeatdbfor External Affalre of Pakistan aleo stated in the olarb devant le Consell de sbourltbr “11ert en notlw
Ssourity Counoilr*It is within our power to flnd the pouvoir de trouver le moyen de vivre en pafx rf
meaneto Hve in peaoe,provlded there te a wtll to
noue sommes rbeolus A vivre en pa1x.s [lOb?bme
Ilve in peaoe.”(1087thmeeting,para, 97.1
sbanoe,par. 97.1
87. Thesa statementsin whioh the words lspeaoell, 8’7. Ces d0olaratIanedans leeyuellesreviennentles
“juflt” ) nhonourablenare usedngalnand agninare in
mots, “paix”, “juste”, *honorables*,sont oonformas
oonformlty with the PurposesandPrlnolplos, andIn
A la Charte desNationsUnlesdanssesbyte et prlnl~artloula
I’, with Chaptor VI. of tha United Nations oipe~, et oh0issenten partioulier A sonohapltre VI.
Charter.
88. In tho light of a11thfs, we are temptodto ask
88. A la lumlbre do tout Oela, noussommestent0s
I11d1a
and Pnkistan to rusurnenogotlations,lenving de demander A l’Inde et au Pakistan de reprendre
11to them to soolctho good offloes clthor of a State les t@ooiations, libre A eux de solllolter les bons
01’of somc emlnent person If they shouldfeel tha offioos soit d’un puys, solt d’une hauk personaaedand ths deslru to do 80. OCooume, thnt solution nalitb, s’ils en bprouventle besoinet s’ils le d0slrent.

does not fully
satisfy
the parties
oonoerned.
Cne of
tbem
18 merely
asking
for an appeal
to bring tbeir
mutual
relation5
into harmony,
for a negotiation
of
differenoes,
and no more.
The other
oonsiders
our
proposa15
too vague and wants
ua, in a reeolution,
to reaffirm
the Counoi115
previous
deoisio%s,
the
right
of self-determination
and mediation
by the
Seoretary-Qeneral.

Il est bwrtain
qu’une
telle
position
ne donne
pas
entibre
satisfaotion
aux parties
int6res56es.
En effet,
l’une d’elles
exige un simple
appel B l’harmonisation
de leurs
relation8
mutuelles,
3 la n6gooiotion
des
diff6rend5,
et @est tnut. L’autre
estime
nos propositions
trop
vagues
et demande
que, dans une r&olution,
soient
r6tiirm6s
les d6oieions
ant6rieures
du Conseil,
le droit
h l’autod6termination
et la
m6diation
du Seur&aire
g6n6ral.

80. The proposa15
of India and Pakistan
are 50 far
apurt
that they seem to be irraoonoilable.
The bonds
of friendehip
between
the Ivory
Coast and bath of
thoee oountries,
and its solidarity
with them within
the framework
of the Afrioan-Asian
group,
preoluded
it from siding with one againet
the other.

80.
Les propositions
de l’Inde
et du Pakistan
sont
si 0loign6es
qu’elles
nous semblent
inoonciliables,
L’ami#6
que la Cete-dIXvoire
Bprouve
pour l’un et
l’autre
pays,
la eolidarit43
qui la lie h eux dans le
oadre du groupe afrioano-asiatique,
ne lui permettent
pas de prendre
pnrti pour l’un oontrs
l’autre.

00. Nevertbeleas,
we wieh to disoharge
our responsibility
as a member
of the Counoil.
We have been
oonsidering
as one possible
solution
the proposa15
whioh
R number
of delegations
with whioh
we Rave
been in oontaot
sinoe the beginning
of our di5ou55ion5
of the subjeot have enoouraged
us to submit
to the
Counoil,

00. NBanmoins,
nous voulons
noue aoquittor
de nos
responsabilit&
-de membre5
du Conseiï.
Nous nvans
oonsid6r6
oomme
l’une des solutions
possibles
108
propositions
qu’un
oertain
nombre
de‘ d616gation5,
aveo
qui nous sommea demourlk
en oontaot
depuis
l’ouverture
de nos ddbats,
nous ont enoouragf38
B
pr65enter
au Conseil.

01. These proposale
mp.y be embodied
in n resolution,
or in an appeal
by the President
of the Counoil.
My
delegation
would
go along
with
a resolution
if the
majorlty
of the Counoil
80 desired,
but it prefers
an appeal.
We are therefore
prepared
to give fut1
support
to an appeal whioh would read as followst

01, Ce5 prOPOdtiOn5
peuvent
&Te OOntenUeS dAn5 une
r6EOlUtiOtr,
ou dM5
un appel du Pr68ident.
Mn d616gatlon
aooeptera
un0 r95olutIon
si tel est le vœu
de la majorit8
du Conseil,
mais elle pr6fBreun
appel,
Auesi sommes-nous
prbts
B apporter
notre
entibre
adh6eion
B un appel qui serait
r6diff6
de la manibre
5uIvants:
--

NThe Seourity
Counoil
requests
the two oountriesr
(1) to re-eetablish
a olimate
of understanding
t?etweeen
them
and to restore
peaoe
and harmony
behveen
the oommunities:
and (2) to prevent
the
reourrenoe
of aots of violence
and to ensure
the
seourity
of the oommunities.

“Le Conseil
de 86ourM
demande
aux deux pays:
1) de r&ablir
entre
eux un olimat
d’entente
et de
restaurer
la paix et Ilharmonie
entre les oommunautis;
et 2) d’emp6oher
le renouvellement
des
aotes
de violenoe
et d’assurer
la 86ourit6
des
oommunaut05,

“The Counoil
oalls upon the two parties
to resume
their negotiations
with a view to reaobing
n peaoeful
settlement
of a11 their
differenoes,
inoluding
the
question
of Kashmir,
taking intc aooount
past aotion
by the United Nations
and the wishes
of the peuple
oonoerned.

“Le Conseil
invite
les deux partie5
B reprendre
leurs
n@ooiations
en vue d’aboutir
B une solution
paoifique
de tous leurs
diffhends,
y oompris
la
question
du Caohemire,
en tenant oompte
de l’aotion
exerode
dans le pas86 par les Nations
Unies et des
vœux de la population
int8ress6e.

“The
Counoil
suggests
to the two oountriee
that
they
should
have
reoourse,
by agreement,
to the
good offioee of a oountry
or aperson of thelr ohoioe,
if they oonsider
it desirable
to do 80.~

“Le Conseil
euggbre
aux deux pays de reoourlr,
d’un oommun
aooord,
s’ils le jugent utile,
aux bons
offioes
d’un pays ou d’une personnalit6
de leur ohoix.”

02. Thoee
tbe Republio
the Seourity

are

the

proposa15

of the Ivory

whioh the delegation
Coast wished
to submit

of
to

Counoil.

02, Telles
sont les proposition5
de la RBpubliquo
de C&e-d’hoire
au Conseil
de sbourlt6.

que la d616gation
d85irnit
soumettre

03, Sir Patriok
DEAN
(United
Kingdom);
The statemente
whioh we have heard from the rspresentatives
of Pakistan
and India
have
revealed
yet again the
oomplexities
of the auestion
now before
the Counoil
and ‘the apparently
àomplete
inoompatibility
of the
pub110 attitudes
taken bv the two parties
to the Kash‘mir dispute.
This, 1 amafraid,
wis an outoome
whioh
my Clovernment
had oxpooted.
What WL) had hopod to
avoid bore WBB bltter
noousntion
nnd oountor-noouSAtIOlI.

93. Sir
Patrick
DEAN
(Royaume-Uni)
[traduit
de
l’anglaisl:
Le6 ddolaratlons
des repr65entants
du
Pakistanet de l’Inde
ont r4v616
une-fois
de lue la
oomplexiti
de la question
dont le Conseilde oBaurit
e8t saisi
et les diff6renoea apparemment
irr(lduotibles
entre
les positiona
offidellee des deux partie6
au diffhrend
relatif
au Cachemire.
C’est malheureusemont
18 le r05ultnt
auquel
mon gouvernement
s’nttendait.
M~is nous osp6rions
bvlter
un bohnnge
norimonieux
dlaoousatione
ut de oontro-aooueatlons.

04. My OovernmonV8
vlew on the settloment
of the
Knshmir
problem
wns stated intheD~~itishParliament
in Deoembar
lO66 by tho Uuder-Seoretnry
of State
for Commonwanlth
Relntionu
in the followlng
tortns:

94. Ln uositlon
de mon nouvernement
sur 10 rklement
de- la question
du Cnohemlre
a 0t0 exp&6e
devant
le Parlomont
britnnniouo.
en d6oernbre
1966,
par le Sou&SeorBtaire
d’Etat ,oir
les rolatlon8
ctitro
les membre5
du Commonwenlth
dnns les termes
aulvante:

“IIer
Mnjoety’s
that thls dleputa

&vernment
would
be

bave
settlod

always
boped
by ngreoment

“Le Gouvernement
que ce diffbrend

do SnMajostbutouJours~ap9r6
eeruit
r6gl6
par volo d’nooord

between
th
Meanwhile
t0 support
give offeot
Thls

remainr

06. We are
only from
OI
tween the ac
anxious
lest
should
preju
tien. Nevertl
m more beon bl
00. In thesc
that it 18 the

and If 1 may
tan, to do OUI
nnd negotiat
settlement
w
the Seourlty

07. My delel
whioh we und
ta find oomn
We should inc
by suoh mem
whioh
hnve r
oonsideratioe
should
kad 1
desired
by a
ennble the ne
bas been wo
on a basis thr
98, What
1
reoted
to m
the st4Itus
0:
my Uovernml
to disouss
KI
lng steps
wk
progress,
09. First,
11
lion on Fhe 8
self-determir
oently
by OUI
by the Seourl
oordlng
to tha

“Ireminde

oerbd of tl
of 21 Aprfl
30 Mnroh
1
for
Indin
n
1941) nnd B
of the Stntc
in aooordnn
tilrough
the
pdrtlal
pleb
ü1o Unitod b
My Covarnmo
oiatocl
In tbrl

bstween the hvo oountrfes. That is et111their hope.
Meanwhile Her Mafesty’s Covernment will oontlnue
to support efforts to reaoh ngreement whioh would
give effeot to the Resolutions of the United Nations.”

entre les deux pays, et il ne rsnono8pas ii oet
espoir. En attendant, il oontinuerad’appuyer les
efforts faite pour parvenir !i un aooord qui donnerait effet aux r6solutions de l’Organisation des
NationsUnies.”
Telle est toqours la politiquede mongouvernement.

Thls remains my ffovernment’s polioy.
06. We are still oonvinosd that a solutionoanemerge
only from oonstruotive and sinoere negotiations between the Qovernments of lndia and Pakistan. We are
anxious lest publio disoussion in thc Reourity Counoil
should prejudioe prospeots for suoh sinoere negotiaMon. Nevertheless, the problem of Kashmir bas onoe
more betin brought before us,

96. Nousdemouronsoonvainousque seulesdes negooiatfonsoonstruotiveset sinobresentre lesQouvernements do l’Inde et du Pakistan oonduirontB uns
solution et nous oraignans que des d6batspublioe
nu sein du Conseilde s6ourit6 ne soient pasfavorables B l’ouverture de telles ndgooiatlons.Quoi quIIl
en soit, nous noustrouvons saisis une fols de plus
de la questiondu Cachemire.

00. In theso oiroumstanoeomy delegatlonbeliaves
that it is the olear duty of a11membersof the Counoil,
andif 1 may sayBO,thedelegationsof Indin and Paklstnn, to do our beet t0 usethis Ooonsion
for disoussion
and negotiation with a view to moving towards the
settlementwhioh hnseludedthe oolleotivo wisdomof
the Seourity Counoilfor fifteen years.

96. Dansles olroonstanoesaotuellee,ma d610gation
estime qu’il est manifestementdu devoir de tous les
membres du Consellet, Je me permets de le dire,
des d81i3gatlone
de FInilé et dü Pakistan, de tirer
tout le parti possible de l’oooaslon qui leur est
offerts dé disoüter et de n6gooier en vüe d’arriver
au rbglement d’un probl8me que toute la sagesse
du Conseil de s8ourit.6se r6vble lmpulssanteh r0soudredepuis16 ans.

07. My delogationhastherefore weloomedtheefforts
whiohwe understandare belngmadebehindthe soenes
to find oommonground betweenIndla and Pnklstan.
We shouldindsedtbe well pleassdif n fresh approaoh
by suohmembersof the Counoilasbavespokentoday,
whioh hnve not prevlously haddireot oontnotwith the
oonsiderationoithis questionin the Soourity Counoil,
shouldlead to the break-throunhthnt is DOearnestlv
dosircd by a11memborsof thlË Counoil, and shouti
enablethe negotiationstowardswhiohmyCovernment
bas beenworking for many years to be undertaken
on A hasisthat holdspromis0 of a settlement.

97, Ma d818gatlonse f6lloite donc des efforts qui,
B oe qulelle orolt savoir, sont d8ployt3Boffioleusement en vue de trouver un terraln d’entente entre
l’Inde et le Pakistan, Nous serions en v6rit6 trbs
heureux ei oeuxdesorateurs quenousavonsentendus
et qui n’ont pas enoore eu 8 a’ooouperdlreotement
de oette questionau Conseil de sbourlt4 nous permettaient de sortir de lilmpasse ainsi que le souhaitent sino&rementtous les m6mbresdu Conseil,
et si les nbgoolatlonsquemongouvernement
prbooniee
depuis de nombreusesannbes s’ouvralent sur une
basepouvantoonduireAun tiglement.

06, What 1 have now to Bay, therefore. will be direoted to making plain my- &vernmuntls views on
the status of Kashmlr, to outllning action taken by
my Covernmentsinoe the Seourity Counoil last met
to disoussKashmir in lOR$ and flnnlly to suggesting steps whioh in 6ur opinionwould h?lp towurds
progress.

08. Mon propos est donode pr6oiBer la positionde
mon gouvernementsur le statut du Caohemlre,de
donnerun aperçudes effort8 qu’il a aooompllsdepuis
les dernfbres sbanoesque le Consellde sbcwltb a
oonsaorbesAla questionen 1962,et enfinde sugg4rer
des mesuresqui, selon nous,oondulralentAdes rbsultats positifs.

00, First, 1wish to relterate my Covernment’spsitlon on Ihe statue of Kashmir andon the questionof
self-determination. This was madeolenr most reoently by our sponsorshipof the resolution adoptod
by the Seourlty Counoll on 24 Jnnuary 1957,lr/ Aooordingto that resolution, the Counoll

09. Tout d’abord, je tiens A rbafflrmer la position
de mon gouvernementen oe qui aonœrne le statut
du Caohemlrset la questionde l’autodbterminatlon,
Nous Ilavons lndtqubetrbs olalrementen pr6sentant
rboemment aveo d’autres dblbnatlonsla rbrolutlon
qui a bu) adopt4epar le Cons%11
de sbourltb le 24
lanvier 1957~. Aux termes de oette rbsolutloa. le
Conseil$
n(remindsd]the Uovernmentsandauthoritlesoon*rappelalit] aux gouvernementset autorltir lndoerned of the prinoiple emhodledIn its res~lutions
ressbs le prlnoipe bnono8danssesrbsolutlonr des
of 21 Aprll 1948,3 June 1948,14 Mnroh 1960and
21 avril 1048,8 juin 1948,14 mars 1980et 80 mars
30 Ma& 1951,ind the United NationsCommission
1951, aine1 que dans ha rbsolutlons des 13 aobt
for Indln and Pakistan resolutiona of 13 Aurmst
1048st 6 janvier 1940dela Commlselon
deeNntlons
1048nnd G Jnnunry lD40, thnt tho îlnnl dlBposiiion
Unies pour l%da et le Pakistan, h Bnvoir quole
of the Ytnto of Jnmmu nnd Kashmlr wlll bo mnde
sort d6flnltlf de 1’Etnt de Jnmmuet Caohemiredolt
in nooordrrnoowith tlro Will of the pooplooxpreuood
6tro dboid0 oonfo?m&nontA la volontb dos popuUwoughtho domoorutio mothodof n freo nnd lmlations, exprIm6e uu moyende la proo6dured&mnpartla pleblsolto oonduotodundor tho auepioeo of
oratlquo d’ut) iJ16b!flOftO
libre et lmpartlal tenu sous
tho UnltodNations.”
l%gidede ltOrganlsatlondosNatlonsUnlefl”.
My Qovornmuntstnndsflrmly by tho prinolplus onun- Mon gouvernementdsmoura rbsolument fldble aux
olatod In thnt rosolution today.
prlnolpofl Bnonobsdanscette r6Bolutlon.

27

100. We oonsider it unrealistio to oonsider the statu8

of Kashmir purely in terms of the legal effeot of the

Maharajah’8 instrument of aooession.It is in our
vlew impossibleto leave out of oonsiderationfifteen
years of disoussionin this Counoilandthe deoisions
taken by it, In short, my Cfovernmentdoesnot aooept
the contention that no dispute now exists and that
there remains in Kashmir nothing to be negotiated.
Quite the oontrary. A disputedoesexist, whiohshould
be made subjeot of negotiationwith due regard to
previous Seourity Counoil resolutions and to the
wishesof the peoplemost direotly oonoerncul,,
namely
the peopleof Kashmir.
101, 1 nowturn to the aotiontakenby my aovorament
towards trying tu find a solutionof the Kashmir dispute in the period sinoe the Seourity Counoil~slast
disoussionof the matter in 1962.1 neednot explain
to momborsof tho Yeourity Counoilwhy my Glovernment hus felt oompelledto be native in this matter.
The Counoil is wpll awareof our historioal aseooiatien with the problem and the ‘tles of friendshlpnnd
Commonwoalthwith bath India and Pakistan, whloh
mnke tho oontinuntlon of thls dispute betweentho
two oountriosSOdistressingto my Qovernmont.

100. A notre avis, olest manquerde r0alisme que
de faire exolusivementd6pendrele statutduCaohemire
des offrets juridiques de l’instrument par lequel le
Maharajah a proclame le rattachement.Il est, selon
nous, impossiblode faire abstraotiondes disoussions
qui ont eu lieu pendant1Gans au seindu Conseilet
des d6olsionsqui y ont ht6 prises, En bref, mon gouvernement n’aooeptepas la th8se selon laquelle il
n’y a B l’heure aotuelle auoundiffhrend ni auoune
questionh r6gler en 08 qui oonoernele Cachemire.
Bien au oontraire, il existe un diff6rend qui doit faire
l’objet de n6gooiation8, oompte dament tenu de8
r$solutlons antarieuresdu Conseilde s6ourit6et des
vmux de la populationla plus direotementint0ress6a,
11savoir celle du Caohemire.
101. J’en viens maintenantauxefforts quemonPOUvernement a d6ploy0spour essayer de-trouver-une
solutionau differend du Caohemiredepuisladernibre
fois quele Conseilde s6ourit6a exanïin6 ‘1 question,
en 1982.Point n’est besoinde rappeler aux memhre8
du Conseilpourquoimongouvernementa estimaqu’il
&ait de son devoir de stooouperaotivementde oetb
question, Le Conseil sait qu’historiquementoe probl8me noustouohede pr8s et il n’ignore pasquenoua
sommesunis tant & l’Inde qu’au Pakistanpar les
liens de ltamlti6 et par notre oommunbappartenance
au Commonwealth, qui rendent partioull8rement
attristante pour mongouvernementla persistanoede
oe dlfftlrend,

102. It will be equally oloar to membersof this
Counoil and, 1 trust, to the delenationsof India and
Pakistan, that satisfaotory per&tnent politioal deEenoeandeoonomlaarranlfementsfor the Indian suboontinentoannever be rea‘ohed
until there 1san agreed
Kashmir settlement. My Qovernment is, therefore,
bound to regard thls aË the ultimate objeotive and
oonsBntly to seekways andmeansof movlngtowards
it. It wae in this spirit, that my çtovernmentwarmly
weloomed the joint statement issuedby Mr. Nehru
nnd President Ayub Khanon 29 November1962,whloh
rendsas follows:

102. Les membres du Conseil et, je l’espBre, le8
d616gationsde l’Inde et du Pakistan oomprendront
6galement qu‘il est impossible de parvenir h de8
arrangement86oonomlques
ouh desaooordsded6fense
politique durables et satisfaisantspour l’ensemble
de la pdninsuleindiennetant que la questiondu Caohemire n’aura na8 t3tB resolue. Il est dono normal
que mon gouvernementoonsicl&e.le rbglement de
oe problbme oommeVobjeotif ultime B atteindre et
reoherohe oonstammentles moyenspermettant d’y
parvenir. C’est dans oet esprit qu’il a aooueilli aveo
la plu8 grande satisfaotion la d6oldration oommune
publi6e le 29 novembre 1962par M, Nehru et par
le prhsident Ayub Khan, dans laquelle on lieait
notamment:
“The Presidentof Pakistanandthe Primo Minister
@LePrBsidentdu Pakistanet le Premier Minietn,
of India have agreed that a renewedeffort should
de l’Inde ont reoonnula n6oessit.6
de faire un nouvel effort en vue de r6gler les diff6rends qui oontibe made to resolve the outetandingdifferenoes
betweenthelr two oountries on Kashmir andother
nuent B oppoeer leur8 pays en oe qui oonoerne
le Caohemire ainsi que le8 autres question8
related matters, SOas to enableIndia andP,kistan
to Iive side by side in peaoeand friendship, In
oonnexes, pour que l’Inde et le Pakistanpuissent
vivre obte B obte dans la paix et l’amfti6. En
oonsequenoe
they have deoidedto start disoussions
at an early date wlth the objeot of reaohing an
oons&quenoe,
il8 ont d6oid4d’engagerde8oonversations B une date rapi>roohheen vue d’aboutir
honourable and equitable settlement. These will
be oonduotedinitlally at the ministerial level. At
B un r8gleménthonorableet Equitable,Ceeoonversationsauronttout d’abordlieu auniveauminist&iel.
the appropriate stage direot talks will be held behveenMr. Nehruand PresidentAyub,”
En tam$eUtile, de8pourparlers directs auront lieu
entre M. Nehruet le prbsidentAyub.”
We rogardod thls statomentof intention ns a major Cette dbolaration d’intention nous a pnru mnrquer
8tap forward andwe followodthe oourseof the mItlIa
un nrand I)roar8s et @est aveo 10plus vif int6rOt
terial moetlngs whioh were subseqrtentlyheld wllh
que- nous ‘nv&o suivi 10s rl3unionsminl8t~riellos
keenantlolpntion.
qui ont eu lleu par la sulte,
WOI’O
111 nll
ELlx roundti
!~f~~~;,,ll,lstol~iul
103. ‘I’horo
talIce. Ilnfortunntely, thoy oame to 1111’
&d on 16Mny
1903wlth ~III niu~oun00m0nt
thn5“110ngroemontoould
bo renchotl’~
, At thls stngo tny Uovornmontrovortod
to tho tron~l of thoughtwhlOlr:lntl booi~ propou~~dod
Iii
Lho Seourlty Counoll III lDO2, nnmely, that, In tho
faoe of the innblllly of the Lwooountrles to ngreo,

103. 11 Y n eu on tout six series de oonversations
mInist&ri-elles.Malheureusement,elles 88 @ontsold&es »ar la nublloation, le 16 mal 1963,d’un oommuniqû6indI&ant qu’ nil n’avnit pas 6tB possiblede
pnrvenlr Aun aooordw.A oe stade,mongouvernement
est revenu A l’idba, qui avait d0jA Qtb 0mieeau
Conseildo sEourit6en 1902,quepuisquelesdeux pays

801118 deg

searohfo

104. The
ing the s
and Brlti
when in
prese oon
that his
avenue”,
both Indir
oonsider
of medlati

106, ‘l’ho
1963,whe
were onoe
c0un011by
oOUrseof ’

106. Apnl
ptions of
etatemont
tention bel
oommuna
und the p
these two
regret exp
of 0ommL
taken by 1
to provent
qualified t
munfll outl
faots whio
on the mer
ments.

107. TO u
of hnndling
oountrieti i
ooncerned
table. We
In the wny I
are expose

108. My dc
mode by tl
of these pl
to take any
tan and tha
from both c
explainedn
before us
past elghtef
of the I<n&

109. 1 hnvi
rire taking
Qvory effor
gntion ~010
delegntions
no closlro t
rlgid lines
10wad.IIOW
Security CO

que
mire
Bl le
0101~
5ions
#il et
gOUle 11
,oune
‘nire.
Faire
des
1 des
wle,

some degroe of outslde
searoh for a solution.

,SOU> une
libre
ktion,
ihre&
Cpl’il
00tte
‘pronoua
r 10s
iance

106 There the matter rested until the autumn of
1963, when devolopments In lndo-Pakistan relations
were onoe more brought to the atiention of the Seourity
Counoll by the Government of Pakistan. The subsequent
oourse of avents 1s familial* to a11in this room.

Ment
30 cl0

, les
dront
t des
Pense
mble
roheIrtnal
nt de
re et
t d’y
aveo
mune
,t par
1’ sait
listre
noutonti3erne
itione
1;;
hltiF

iverbriel,
k lieu
rquor
1tmx
Lollas
tl;l0118
1: 801’
oonl-

110 do
p1rmt

,se auwY0

assistunoe might help in the

104. ‘I’he possibillty of meclintion wns disoussed during the summer of 1363 hy the Indian and Pakistan
and Brltish Governments nnct we were enoouraged
when in answering a question about mediation at a
press oonferenoe on 10 June, Mr. Nehru oonfirmed
thut bis Government was prepared “to explore any
avenueT’, Yubsequently, howËv&, the Governments of
both India nnd Pakistnn indionted that they did not
oonsider the time propitious for further dfsoussion
of medlation.

106, Apart from the question of Kashmir, the delegations of Pakistan and India hnve touohed in thefr
atatements to this Counoil on other subjeots of oontention between their hvo Govornments, notably, the
oommunal rioting in East Pakistan and West Eengal,
nnd the problem of population movements behveen
these two areas. My Government shared the profound
regret expressed by both delegations at the outbreaks
of oommunal violenoe, and weloomed the Stern aotion
taken by both Governments to put an end to them and
to provent their reourrenoo. My delegation in not
qua!ified to oomment on tho genesis of these oommunnl outbreaks, Equally we have not got suffioient
fnots whioh would enablo a judgement to be made
on the merlts of the oaso rolatmg to population movoments.
107. TO us, the most immediate nnd praotioal way
of hnndling these souroes of tension between the two
oountries is by representatlves of the Covornments
ooncerned getting together nround the oonferenoe
table. We deplore anything that is allowed to stand
in the way of suoh negotiations, whilo men and women
are exposed
to lnjury and death.
108. My delogation therefore weloomes the statement
made IJY the representative of Indin, In the oontext
of these problems, that bis Government 1s prepared
to take any and every step in oo-operationwith Pokistan and that Lt would weloome a meeting of Mfnisters
from both oountries to disouss
ways and means. 1 have
explalned my Government’s position on the problem
before us and the notion whioh it has taken in the
pnst eighteen monthe to try tobringnbout a settlement
of the Knshmir dispute.
109. 1 have strossod the fnot thnt, now that meetings
are taking place in this Counoil, WG must nll mnke
avery effort to fincl a oonstruotive solution. My delegntion waloomos the attompts belng mndo by oertain
dolegatlons to worlc for SUC~ a solution nnd we hnve
no doslre
to oompliooto tholr efforts by laying down
rigld Unes of aotion whioh in our view should be followocl. Ilowever, 1 shoultl Ilko tcj suggest thnt the
Soourity Counoll should beur two fnctore in mlnd.

@lent inoapobles de se mettre d’aooord une intervention exterîeure pourrait, jusqu’a un certain point,
faoiliter la recherche d’une solution,
104. La possibilit6 de recourir A la mcldiation a BU3
oxamtn6e au oours de lVXc3 1963 par les Gouvernements indien, pakistanais et britannique: et il nous
avait paru enoourageant qu’en r@onse A une question
qui lui Btait pos8e A oe sujet M, Nehm et% oonfirm0
~LU ooum
d’une oonf&enoe de presse, tenue le 16 juin,
que son gouvernement 6tait dispos8 A “explorer toutes
le8 voies posstbles”, Mais par la suite, les Gouvernements de l’Inde et du Pakistnn ont indiqu6 I%n
et l’autre que le momentne leur paraiSSaitpasbien
choisi pour 6tudier plus avant la possIbilit0dereoourir A la m6diation.
100.’ La questionen est rost8e 18jusqu’Al’automne
1963, 6poqueA laquelle les relations indo-pakietanaisesont $96une fois de plus soumisesA 1’attentiOn
du Conseilde sdourit8par le GouvernementduPakistan. La suite desBvtlnementsestbienconnuede ohaoun
d’entre nous.
106. En dehors de la questiondu Caohemtre,les
d81Anationsdu Pakistan et de l’Inde ont 8voau8
dans-les d6olarationsqu’elles ont faites toi d’au&6
questions litigieuses, notammentcelle des 8meutes
survenues entre oomncunaUtc3s
au Pakistan ortental
et au Bengaleoooidental,et le problbme des mouvements de populationentre oea deux r&lons. Mon
gouvernementa appris la nouvelle de oes conflits
violents entre oon4&naut8s aveo les marnessenttment8 de profondregret sui ont 0t4 exrwim6sPar les
deux dc31flgations
en- oauae, et il s%st felicit8 des
mesures8nergiquesqui ont c3tBprises par les deux
gouvernementspour y mettre fin et an emp&aherle
retour, Ma d818gationn’est pas qualifi8e pour pr&
senter des observationssur l’origine de oesoonfltts
religieux, Qui plus est, nousn’avonspasde donn8es
suffisantes pour porter un jugementde fond de la
questiondesmouvementsde population.
107. A notre avis, la façon la plus lmm&iiate et
la plus H3alistede fatre disparaftre les oausesde
tension entre les deux pays est de rhunir les repr&
sentant8des gouvernementsintires& autour d’une
table de oonft3renoe.Quel’ouverture de n&gooiations
puisse se heurter Adesobstaoleequelsqu’ils soient
nous paraIt daplorableen un momentnfl deshommes
et des femmes sont expos8s A la s&franoe et A
la mort,
108. Ma d&l&Iationse CBltoltedonode la d6olaration
par laquelle le reprbsentant de l’Inde a indiqu& au
sujet de oes problAmoa,que songatvernementkit
dispos8R faire tout sonpossibleen cootiration aveo
le Pakistan et qu’tl serait en faveur d’une r@union
des ministres des deux pays en vuede l’examendes
mesure6Aprendre.

109. J’ai expose la position de mon rrouvernement
sur le probl&ne dontengoue sommessdsis et d6orlt
les efforts qu’il a dtlploy6sau oours des18 derniers
mols
en vue d’un
rAglement du diffclrend relatif au
Caohemlre. J’ai soulign8 que, puisque nous nous
r8uniseonsici, nousdevonsfaire tout ooquiest en notre pouvoir ur parvenir A unesolutionoonstruotivo,
Nousnousf r lioitons desefforts d6ploy8spar oertainos
d818gationspour mettre au point une telle solution
ot noue nlavo;is auoundesir de leur oompllqtier In

110. The flrst 1s that the authorlty of thls Counoll,
whloh we are a11 here pledped to preserve, and the
prlnolples of the Charter, requlre that the deolslons
taken -by lhe Seourlty Counoll in the oourse of the
last flfteen years should not be lost to vlew.
111. The second is that the passage of resolutlons
whloh are lgnored by one of the parties takes us no
further forward and has not in the past led to the
oonstruotive solution whlch a11members of the CounoiI, SO1 presume, deslre.
112. The Seourlty Counoll~s attention ahould therefore
be dlreoted in the flrst instance to searohlng for.
oommon around between lndla and Pakistan. The
direotions- in whloh thls oommon ground mlght be
found appear to my delegatlon to be the following.
Flrst, both India nnd Pakistan should restore normal
conditions and inter-oommunal sharmony in their lwo
oountrles and forthwlth undertnke talks on thelr oommunal and related probIems wlth a vlew to preventlng
further outl.reaks. If the two parties belleve that the
exerolse of good offloes in thls oonnexlon would be
helpful, my delegation suggests that the Seourlty
Counoll should stand ready to dlsoussthls aspeot.In
the seoondplaoe, Indla and Pakistan shouldbe prepnred to resume negotlatlons on Kashmir and, as
neoessary,other related matters.
113. In thls oonnexlon 1 must emphasizethat my
Covernment’sexperienoe of the negotlatlonsundertaken between the two oountries Tn the oourse of
1962anc! 1963has oonvlnoedit that somedeareeof
outside help wlll beneoessaryif satisfactory results
are to be aohleved.It is for thls reasonthat we bave
favoured medlatlon, as both parties are awarefrom
dlsousslonswe hsvehad wlth themfrom time to tlme.
114. We reallze that nelther Governmentaooepted
this contention last August, largely on the grounds,
as 1 sald, that the tlme was not propltlous, although
our impressionwas that both agreed that mediatlon
wouldbe helpful at the rlght time. Wenowput forward
for consideratlonthe vlew that the extreme tension
whioh oharaoterizes Indo-Pakistan relations at the
oresent time, as rofleoted in the bloodshedof the
htst few months, renders urgent the needfor a bold
approaoh.
116. This, however, is a matter whloh we oannot
press if it is not aooeptableto bothIndla and Pakistan,
We shall therefore content ourselveswlth commendlng lt +o the urgent uttentlon of both delegntions.We
suggest that they oonsider nll posslblllties in thls
regard, lnoluding thnt of engaglngthe nsslstanoeof
the Secretnry-General of the UnltedNations.In oonoluslon, 1 would say thnt muoh olearly hangson the
efforts now belng made by certain delegatlonbehlnd
the soenes.Thelr wllllngness to aooeptthls roeponsiblllty, in splte of the Ëorry hlstory of the Seourlty
Counoll~epnst failure to resolve the Kashmlrdlspute,
1sndmiredby my delegatlon.We havenodesirewhatever to lnterfere wlth thelr efforts, but we wlsh them
to knowthat they have our full support.

tftohe en d6flnlssant de façon rigide les prinolpes
qui nous paraissent devoir Btre pr0vue. Mals fe
voudrais inviter le Conseilde s6ourlt6 A tenir compte
de deux idaes.
11G. La premlAre est que, sous peine de porter
atteinte A l’autorit du Conse!l de s6ourlt6 - que
nous nous sommes tous engng6sA sauvegarderet aux prlnoipes de la Charte, nous devonstenir
oompte des d6olslons adopt0esloi au oours des
16 dernibresann6es.
111. La secondeest que l’adoptionde r6solutlons
dont l’une des parttes ne fait aucun oas ne fait pas
avancer la questiond’un pas et n’n pas aboutidans
le pas& A la solution oonstruotlve que souhaitent,
me semble-t-il, tous les membresdu Conseil.
112. Le Conseilde s6ourit6 devrait donoavant tout
s’efforoer de trouver un terrain d’entente entre
l’Inde et le Pakistan, oe qui, de l’avis de ma dB&
gation, pourrait se faire de la façon suivante. Tout
d’abord, l’Inde et le Pakistan devraient r6tubllr
les conditions normales et l’harmonie entre les
oommunnut6sdes deux pays, puis engagerlmm&
diatementdes conversationsau sujet de leurs probl6mea religieux et autres en vue d%viter le retour
de nouveauxinoidents. Si les deux parties estiment
que les bonsoffioes d’unetleroe partie peuvent6tre
utiles A cet 6gard, ma d616gationpropose que le
Conseil de s6ourlt0 soit pr6t Aexaminer la question.
En seoondlieu, l’Inde et le Pakistan devraient se
montrer dispos& A reprendre les n6goolatlonssur
le Caohemireet, si besoinest, sur d’autresquestions
oonnexes.
113. Je dois souligner A oet Egard qu’ayant suivi
les n6gooiations qui se sont df3roul6esentre lez
deux pays pendunt lee ann6es 1962 et 1963, mon
gouvernementest oonvainouqu’uneintervention ext&
rieure sera nt3oessairesi l’on veut obtenir desr&sultats satisfaisants, C’est pour cette raison que nouo
nous sommespronono6sen faveur du reoours A la
m6dlation, ainsi que nous l’avons indiqu6 aux
deux parties lors des entretiens quenousavonseuz
A diverses reprises aveoelles.
114. Nous oomprenonsqu’auoundesdeux gcuvernemente n’ait aooept6oe point de vue au moisd’aotlt
dernier, motif pris, en partioulier, que,oommeje
l’ai indiqu6, le momentnt6talt pasbien ohoisi; mais
nous avonseu IYmpressionquel’un et l’autre reoonnaissaientque le reoours Ala m6diatlonserait utile
le momentvenu. Nousprbtendonsmaintenantquela
tension extr6me qui oaraoterise les relations lndopakistanaisesA l’heure aotuelle, et qui s’est traduite
par des effusions de sangaesderniers mois, oblige
A aborder sanstarder le problbme de façon hardie.
116. Mais olest IA uneid6e sur laquellenousn’insiaMons pas si elle ne renoontre pas l’agrhmenttant
de l’Inde que du Pakistan, Nousnous oontenterons
dono de la reoommanderlnstnmment A llattentloa
des deux d616gntions.
Nousleur sugg6rons
d’envisager
toutes les posslblllt& qu’elle offre et notamment
oelle d’un reoours Al’assistanoeduSeor6tairegt%raI
de ItOrganisntion des Nations Unies. En ooncluaion,
Je dirai que In solution du problbme d6pendpour
benuooupde l’notlon de oertalnes d616gatlonodans
le8 ooullsses. Nous rendonshommageA ces d616gntions qui veulent bien se oharger d’unetelle tdohe
ma&+6 le triste bilan dos efforts aooompllsen vala
dans le pas& par le Conseilde sGourlt6pour r6gler
le dlffbrend relatif au Caohemire.Nouen’avonsauoun

116. It 1
that my
endorsen
of approl
at the er
Ivory COI
117. Th<
my llst f(

118. Aft
of the CO
should r
question
mornlng.
the Count
It was d

noipes
ais je
compte

porter
,- que
ader I tenir
‘8 des
Lutions
ait pas
ti dans
ait&,
,nt tcut
entre
r del&I. Tout
Etablir
re les
imm&
8 pro-

retour
itiment
nt &re
que le
estion.
lent 88
ns sur
sstions
,t suivi
ce les
SS mon
n ext&
Ir6sul~3 noua
rs B la
a6 aux
>ns su8
werneI dIaoU
nme je
1; mais
reoonrit utile
t que la
s indoradulta
, obli@
hardie.
r’Wz&ent tant

nterons
ttontion
visager
~mment
@3n6ral
JlU8iO11,
Id pour
In Clan8
s di31610 Uiohs
on vain
I r8gler
wt aucun

d0sfr de nousimmiscer dansles efforts de oes d&$gations, mais nous tenons3 leur dire quWles ont
notre plein appui.
116. It will be olear, 1 think, from what 1have said, 116. Il ressort olairementje orols de oe quej’ai dit
that my delegation would be ready to give general que ma d616gationest pr6te h upprouverd’un0façon
endorsementto the form and oontent of the msthod gf3n6rale- tant pour la forme que pour le fond of approaohto a solution of this problem advooated la m&hode qu’a propos6e le representont de la
at the end of his speeohby the representative of the
COte-d’ivoire B la fin de sonIntervention.
Ivory Coast.
117. The PRESIDENT:1 have no other speakerson 117. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglais): Je n’ai
my list for this afternoon’smeeting.
pas d’autre orateur inscrit sur ma liste pour la
s6ancede oetaprbs-midi.
118. After havingoonsultedinformallywithmcmbers 118. Comptetenu des oonversationsoffioieuoesqua
of the Counoil,1 shouldlike to suggestthat the Counoil j’ai eues aveo les membresdu Conseil,je suggbre
shouldresume oonsideratlonof the India-Pakistan que nous reprenions l’examen de la questionIndequestionon Wednesday,la February, at 10,30in the Pakistan le meroredi 12 favrier, A 10 h 30. S’il
morning. If 1 hoar no objeotion, 1 will assumethat
n’y a pas d’objeotion,je oonsid6reraiquele Conseil
theCounoilagreeswith thie Auggestion.
aooegtema suggestion,
It was SO&0ldtxi,
Il en est ainsi d6oidtf.
Themeetinng
rose at 5.45 p,m.
La etfanoe est levtfe d 1T h 45.

WHERE
TQ f3UY UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
ADRESSES OU LES PUBL!CATIONS
DE L’ONU SONT EN VENTE
APRIOA/AFRIOUK

LIBI‘IIA
CAWAM7”lCANrL
Y*4u(uam4.
nlYlco
HWQU‘I
‘oI1o”IAL
,““Y‘*,
l,“W10
I .rm48’41.
uwuo,
0.7.
CAIIIW,
JO“
M‘N‘NC“
A@acu
,ri,WRYWI
a4 rubkac*n.,.
Aplltaa
POU. AS. “A, WI I IW
P4”.*n4.
MaABuAYI
AO‘HOIA
os LIB”‘“IA1
0‘ MLVAOO”
NI“A
ca
PIa. ,,,%a
KO. 4”.4‘,
AWlw6n.
nw
PiRYul
,I,“‘“1A
IH?‘“HAcIOW*t
O‘,
1417, UN.
dl “U< a A., CIlau
tI,“‘“IA
SIUDIUY
#. A.
AmaII”,I
.,a
AnNu*
PIla
tmw.
w&.uuA",
,,O"‘"IA
"AIAIt
BA""‘?l
nun6n
Anada
40'0,
Ywu*vl4w.
"‘P"‘"IvAcION
0‘ ‘01101111‘0,
C"OI.
Plu.
lJa+aWM
IMI,
1' PI". Mrn(tv!aa.
vwcwctA,
LIB"‘"lA
"‘1
‘81‘
A", MIlu,
Na Y, ‘41. OmPal,
cuu*1
YIooLL
,nMJ,
Abhm

8A8Y/YOYKN.ORIEN
Y‘“”
Lb44

AVIN
Avwu4.

0. A.

H.

0“LlA

T

“OOWIHOP
IIlahM.

l“AQp’
YAC ‘Y‘I‘O .00Y,““C.
““hd.d.
,s”wt/,Mf.utI
.,UU,?‘lN’,
,00”,?0”‘b
6, MaaD” “d. b 4” N~hf.1 L”““U”
U..
14 AW.

NOIIIH
AMERICA/
AY~IIOUK
DU NORD
CAHABA, il“ QU‘IN’,
0o.R. Onl~lW.

Pluu‘”

bALIO ,‘C11ON V!U?‘0 NAllOHI. Km” VU~<
M
loœl PXN AY‘“ICAH WOY CO.
,.“.B.n,‘11
S.nJtmI7.
p.t&‘,
UIII”‘“Y?V
OI Pu‘“?0 “IW

OILANIA/OC~ANIO
AJJIl&UlAlAU8W”Ll”I
U, N. A,,,CIAYIOU OI AUIlRbtM
Ma‘IMlw”
YItIwIwI**u..w~wo.1.v)o.
W‘A Bcaadw.
unm<uv. W.ld.. a*.
UNIY‘IIOIYV Mo”U<OP. ‘1. LW,, Bw~.“.. Ou.
1°C ,oUOA’I!cMAt AK0 Y‘oHHIOAt WOY AO‘NCV

canwr, rwnn. H.?.
O‘POI C?V. LlO.
“Ni
um.,k UlWY,,, w*wun
“wd. cwm. vu.
OOttIN~ WI, O‘POI C?V. L?O.
U‘ twtn,trn 4u”,, UllbwtH. va
A‘ uIII”‘“u*v
Boo*woc. llMlmd1. W.A.
U”IVL”U?V BOONIOOU
IJWU,” a, UUMUIW. C,<hnu N.P. vv.
u”,v‘“*,,v
co.oP‘“A?lY‘
.00”,“0C
tIY1?‘0
“analna “ad “M<U,, al wmr. n.rw.
