Genenl Auembly-Thfrty-fourtb Session

22

9. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the Security Council periodically on the development of
the situation and to submit to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fifth session a report covering, in all their aspects, the developments in the Middle East.
92nd plenary meeting
6 December 1979

34/92.

Question of Namibia35
A

PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS
COUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia86 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and

Peoples, 87

Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal Administering Authority of Namibia until independence,
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain selfdetermination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Convinced of the urgent need to intensify consultations with the South West Africa People's Organization
in the formulation and implementation of the programme of work of the Council as well as in any matter
of interest to the Namibian people,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the dischar~e of the
responsibilities entrusted to it under resolution 2248
(S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating to Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, including the recommendations contained therein, and decides to make adequate financial
provisions for their implementation;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in the discharge of its responsibilities as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence and as policy-making organ of the United
Nations, shall:
(a) Denounce all fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through which South Africa may attempt
to ~tuate its system of colonial oppression and explo1tat1on of the people and resources of Namibia;
(b) Endeavour to ensure non-recognition of any administration or entity installed in Windhoek not issuing
from free elections in Namibia, conducted on a territorywide basis, under the supervision and control of the
United Nations, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976 and subsequent resolutions in their entirety;
as See also sect. I, foot-note 6, and sect. X.B.6, decision
34/421.
as Of/icitJl Records of the General .Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Seulon, Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24 and Corr.I).
u Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. I-ID,
V and IX.

(c) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as a
unitary State comprising, inter alia, the total area of
Walvis Bay;
(d) Counter the policies of South Africa a~ainst the
Namibian people and against the United Nat~o!ls and
the legal Administering Authority for Nanub1a, the
United Nations Council for Namibia;
(e) Continue to mobilize international political support in order to press for the withdrawal of the illegal
South African administration from Namibia in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations relating
to Namibia;
(f) Hold a series of plenary meetings in Africa in
1980 at the highest possible level, as required for the
further proper discharge of its functions, and requ~st t~e
Secretary-General to defray the cost of those mee_tmgs m
Africa and provide the necessary staff and services for
them;
(g) Inform leading opinion makers, media leaders,
political and academic institutions and other concerned
non-governmental organizations of Member States about
the objectives and functions of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the struggle of the Namibian people
under the leadership of the South West Africa People's
Organization and also hold consultations with, and seek
the co-operation of, thos~ persona~ities and in_st_itutio~s
by inviting them on special occasions to participate m
the deliberations of the Council, thereby ensunng the
most effective mobilization of public opinion in support
of the cause of the Namibian people;
(h) Represent Namibia to ensure that the rights .and
interests of Namibia shall be protected, as appropnate,
in all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences;
(z) Take all appropriate measures to ensure the full
application of, and compliance with, the provisions of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974, 38 and such other measures as may be necessary to assist in the protection of
the natural resources of Namibia;
(j) Formulate policies of assistance to Namibians
and co-ordinate aid for Namibia provided by the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies
within the United Nations system;
(k) Act as trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and, in this capacity, administer and manage
the Fund;
(l) Co-ordinate, plan and direct the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia in consultation with the South
West Africa People's Organization;
(m) Provide broad guidelines and formulate the
principles and policies for the United Nations Institute
for Namibia at Lusaka;
(n) Continue to consult with the South West Africa
People's Organization, as appropriate, in the formulation and implementation of its programme of work as
well as in any matter of interest to the Namibian people;
(o) Continue to entrust such executive and administrative duties as it deems necessary to the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia, who, in the performance of
his tasks, shall report to the Council;
3. Decides to increase the financial provision in the
budget of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
finance the Office of the South West Africa People's
as Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 24A. (A/
9624/ Add.1), para. 84. The Decree has been issued in final
form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Organization in New York, in order to ensure appropriate representation of the people of Namibia through
the South West Africa People's Organization at the
United Nations;
4. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of
representatives of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for Namibia so requires;
5. Declares that the United Nations is committed to
genuine self-determination and national independence
for Namibia and that all United Nations programmes
for the benefit of the Namibian people will be carried
out in accordance with the resolutions of the General
Assembly in support of the struggle of the Namibian
people under the leadership of the South West Africa
People's Organization, their sole and authentic liberation movement, to achieve genuine self-determination
and national independence for Namibia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to review the requirements of the units which
service the Council so that they may fully discharge all
additional tasks and functions arising out of the new
situation concerning Namibia.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
B
INTENSIFICATION AND CO-ORDINATION OF
UNITED NATIONS ACTION IN SUPPORT OF NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia39 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,' 0
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as its subsequent resolutions relating to Namibia,
Recalling also the Declaration on Namibia and Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination and
National Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly resolution S-9 /2 of 3 May 1978,
Affirming that the natural resources of Namibia are
the birthright of the Namibian people and that the depletion of those resources by foreign economic interests
under the protection of the repressive illegal South
African administration is in violation of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971,41 continue to maintain diplomatic,
economic, consular and other relations with South
Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning
Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration,
89 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24
and Corr.1).
40 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. I-III,
V and IX.
41
Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
I.CJ. Reports 1971, p. 16.

23

all of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging
South Africa in its defiance of the United Nations,
Strongly condemning the support which the illegal
South African administration continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financial and other interests
which are collaborating with it in its exploitation of the
human and natural resources of, and in the further entrenchment of its illegal and racialist domination over,
the international Territory of Namibia,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation
of the human and natural resources of Namibia, which
contributes to the perpetuation of the illegal South
African occupation of Namibia,
1. Calls upon those States which have not yet done
so to comply with the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
relating to Namibia and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971;
2. Urges those States which have not yet done so to
break off economic relations with South Africa that concern Namibia and to take measures with a view to
compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw
immediately from Namibia in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V), as
well as subsequent resolutions of the Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia;
3. Declares that the natural resources of Namibia
are the birthright of the Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by foreign economic interests under the protection of the repressive racist
colonial administration, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, of the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and of Decree
No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of
Namibia enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974, 42 is illegal and contributes to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime;
4. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign
corporations operating in Namibia under the illegal
South African administration which are exploiting the
human and natural resources of the Territory, and demands that such exploitation cease forthwith;
5. Appeals to Governments to discourage private
investors from their countries from participating in business ventures in Namibia which benefit the South African
regime by making available additional resources to meet
the military costs of its repressive policies in Namibia;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to communicate with corporations supplying arms and
ammunition to South Africa and urge them to cease
such activities;
7. Requests once again all Member States to take
all appropriate measures to ensure the full application of,
and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
and such other measures as may be necessary to assist
in the protection of the natural resources of Namibia;
8. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue its efforts to implement Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia;
9. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to examine the exploitation of and trade in
Namibian uranium by foreign economic interests and to
42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-nintli
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/Add.1), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gat.ette No. I.

General Aaembly-'lblrty-founll Selllon

24

report on its findings to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
10. Requests.the United Nations Council for Namibia to notify the Governments of States whose corporations, whether fublic or private, operate in Namibia of
the illegality o such operations and of the position of
the Council in this regard;
11. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to contact administering and managing bodies
of foreign corporations operating in Namibia to warn
them of the illegal basis on which they are operating in
Namibia and of the position of the Council in this regard.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
C
ACTION BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND NON-GOVERN•
MENTAL ORGANIZATIONS WITH RESPECT TO NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia43 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,''
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia to administer the Territory until independence,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 46 adopted by the International Conference
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and Programme
of Action in Support of Self-Determination and National
Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly resolution S-9 /2 of 3 May 1978,
Taking into account the statement of the representative of the South West Africa People's Organization' 8
and conscious of the urgent and pressing need of
Namibians outside Namibia for concrete assistance from
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized a,encies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take all effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and
speedy implementation of the resolutions of the United
Nations relating to Namibia, particularly in the provision
of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to
the people of Namibia and their sole and authentic
liberation movement, the South West Africa People's
Organization,
1. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences within the United Nations
system to grant full membership to the United Nations
Council for Namibia so that it may participate in that ea43 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24
and Corr.1).
44 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. I-ID,
V and IX.
u A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 91st meeting, paras. 38-73.

pacity as the Administering Authority for Namibia in the
work of those agencies, organizations and conferences;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to grant a
waiver of the assessment of Namibia during the period in
which Namibia is represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
3. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental or,anizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the nghts and interests of Namibia shall be protected and to invite the United Nations Council for
Namibia to participate, in its capacity as the Administering Authority for Namibia, as a full member whenever
such rights and interests are involved;
4. Decides, in accordance with section I of its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, by which it
established the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as an organ of the General Assembly,
to grant full membership in the Conference to Namibia,
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia;
5. Decides, in accordance with paragraph 8 (b) of
its resolution 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, by
which it convened the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea, to grant full membership in the
Conference to Namibia, represented by the Umted Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering
Authority for Namibia.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
D
NATIONHOOD PROGRAMME FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia,' 1
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided that the United Nations would
assume direct responsibility for Namibia, as well as its
resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, by which it
established the United Nations Council for Namibia to
administer the Territory until independence,
Recalling also the Declaration on Namibia and Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination and
National Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly resolution S-9/2 of 3 May 1978,
RecalUng further its resolution 31/153 of 20 December 1976, by which it decided to launch a comprehensive assistance programme within the United Nations
system, covering both the period of struggle for independence and the initial years of independence of
Namibia,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibian people for self-determination, freedom
and independence under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility for assisting the
people of Namibia morally and matenally,
Recalling its resolution 2619 (XXV) of 9 December
1970, by which it decided to establish the United Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
• 1 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplem11nt No. 24 (A/34/24
and Corr.]), vol. I, chap. VI, sect. B; and ibid., Suppl11m11nt
No. 24A (A/34/24/ Add. I).

25

U. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to
provide assistance to Namibia in the framework of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia,
Noting with appreciation the contribution of the
United Nations Development Programme in the implementation of projects related to the Nationhood Programme for Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until independence, to continue to direct and
co-ordinate, in consultation with the South West Africa
People's Organization, the planning and implementation
of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia, with the
aim of consolidating all measures of assistance to
Namibians by the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies within the United Nations system
into a comprehensive assistance programme of the United
Nations system;
2. Commends the progress made in bringing the preindependence components of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia to the stage of implementation and
requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to
elaborate and consider in due course policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and postindependence phases of the Programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system which have contributed to the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and calls upon
them to continue their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United
Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Preparing new project proposals at the request
of the Council;
(c) Allocating funds from their own financial resources for the implementation of the projects approved
by the Council;
4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies within the United Nations system, when planning and initiating new assistance
measures for Namibia, to do so to the extent feasible
within the context of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the
financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and calls upon it to continue to
allocate, at the request of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, funds from the indicative planning figure
for Namibia for the implementation of the projects within
the Nationhood Programme;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
substantial contribution to the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia, in particular for its emphasis on the cultural identity of the Namibian people and the preparation
and implementation of an educational programme for
the benefit of the Namibian people in close co-operation
with the South West Africa People's Organization;
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for its
substantial contribution to the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia, in particular for its emphasis on the de-

--------------

velopment of agricultural skills of Namibians in close
and continuous co-operation with the South West
Africa People's Organization;
8. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and individuals that have made voluntary contributions to
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and appeals to
them to make further financial contributions to the Programme through the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
9. Requests the Secretary-General and the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia to appeal to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals for additional financial
contributions to the Nationhood Programme for Namibia
through the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
with the necessary resources for the performance of its
responsibilities, entrusted to it by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, as the co-ordinating authority in
the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
E
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, 48
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided that the United Nations
would terminate the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia and assume direct responsibility for the Territory until independence, and its resolution 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, by which it established the United
Nations Council for Namibia,
Recalling also its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of 12
December 1973, by which it appointed the United
Nations Council for Namibia trustee of the United Nations Fund for Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
its responsibility with regard lo the Territory in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) and
subsequent resolutions of the Assembly and the Security
Council,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations accepted a solemn obligation to grant all possible support to the Namibian people
in their struggle for self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia,
Convinced of the need to grant all possible material
assistance to Namibians and their dependants who are
victims of South Africa's repressive and discriminatory
policies,
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and approves the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all States, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have made vol48 lbid., chap. VI. See also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/34/
24/ Add.I).

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

26

untary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
3. Decides that the utilization of the resources of
the United Nations Fund for Namibia should be considered also in the context of the implementation of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
4. Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to
the United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of $US
500,000 from the regular budget of the United Nations
for 1980;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to intensify appeals to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals for generous voluntary
contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
6. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system for their assistance to Namibians and requests
them to give priority, in consultation with the United
Nations Council for Namibia, to the allocation of funds
for material assistance to the Namibian people;
8. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Namibian refugees;
9. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and
the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
10. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session on the imf-'ementation of the present resolution.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

F
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 49 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 50
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia,
Recalling also the Declaration on Namibia and Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination and
National Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly resolution S-9 /2 of 3 May 1978,
Stressing the urgent need to arouse world public opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting effectively the people of Namibia to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence in a united Namibia
and, in particular, to intensify the widespread and continuous dissemination of information on the struggle for
liberation being waged by the people of Namibia, guided
by their liberation movement, the South West Africa
People's Organization,
49 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24 and Corr.1).
Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. I-III,
Vand IX.
60

Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the mandate given by the General
Assembly to the United Nations Council for Namibia
and mindful of the pressing need for the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat to intensify its
efforts to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects
of the question of Namibia,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in
consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to make every effort to generate publicity and disseminate information with a view to
mobilizing public support for the independence of
Namibia;
2. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to intensify
the dissemination of information on Namibia in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the dissemination of information related to the activities undertaken
by the Council;
4. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to review the most effective means for the publication
of a United Nations Yearbook on Namibia as the authoritative source on the question of Namibia;
5. Requests the International Telecommunication
Union to assign to the United Nations Council for Namibia, in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, an adequate number of frequencies to
be used for broadcasting inside Namibia;
6. Authorizes the United Nations Council for
Namibia, pending the establishment of its own broadcasting service, to assign to the Governments of neighbouring African countries, for use inside Namibia,
frequencies allocated to the Council by the International
Telecommunication Union;
7. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia, in consultation with the International Telecommunication Union, to investigate the jamming by South
Africa inside Namibia of radio broadcasts reaching
Namibia, with a view to instituting legal proceedings
against South Africa before the International Frequency
Registration Board;
8. Decides to allocate the sum of $US 100,000 for
the activities of the United Nations Council for Namibia
related to the International Year of Solidarity with the
People of Namibia, which extends until 3 May 1980.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
G
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 51 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 52
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
H Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/34124 and Corr.1).
52 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chaps. I-III, V

and IX.

II. Relolutiom adoptecl wltllollt nfennce to a Main Committee

Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia, as well as the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971,53 delivered in response to the request
addressed to it by the Council in its resolution 284
( 1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the resolution on Namibia
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session,
held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979,5' especially
its decision that, in the event of the failure of the Security
Council to adopt effective enforcement measures against
the r6gime in South Africa and to impose comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions under Chapter VU of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity should meet in an
extraordinary session to devise a new strategy for the
liberation of Namibia,
Taking into consideration the decision on Namibia
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979 ,5 6
Reaffi,rming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain selfdetermination and . independence within a united
Namibia,
Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of
the Namibian people in their liberation struggle under the
leadership of their sole and authentic representative, the
South West Africa People's Organization,
Indignant at the arbitrary imprisonment and detention
of political leaders and followers of the South West
Afnca People's Organization, the killing of Namibian
patriots and other acts of brutality, including the wanton
beating, torture and murder of innocent Namibians, and
the arbitrary inhuman measures of collective punishment
and measures designed to intimidate the Namibian people and to destroy their will to fulfil their legitimate
aspirations for self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian people and its ruthless exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia, as well as its efforts to
destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia,
Strongly condemning South Africa for its refusal to
comply with Security Council resolutions 385 (1976)
of 30 January 1976, 431 (1978) of 27 July 1978, 435
(1978) of 29 September 1978 and 439 (1978) of 13
November 1978 and for its decision to promote bogus
arrangements under the pretence of conducting a bona
fide electoral process and to create a neo-colonial puppet
r6gime in Namibia in order to maintain its policies of
domination and exploitation of the people and the natural resources of the Territory,
Renewing its call upon the international community,
especially all Member States, to refrain from according
any recognition to or co-operating with any r6gime
which the illegal South African administration may im63 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Re.solution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
H A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.720 OCXXIm.
H See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 61-73.

27

pose upon the Namibian people in disregard of the provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to Namibia,
Noting with satisfaction the persistent opposition of
the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence
in the Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and,
in particular, the progress of their struggle in all its forms
for national liberation under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly reiterating its support for the national liberation movement of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, the sole and authentic representative
of the Namibian people in their stru~e to achieve se1fdetermination, freedom and national mdependence in a
united Namibia,
Reaffi,rming its full support for the armed struu)e of
the Namibian people under the leadership of the-South
West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly condemning, as an act of colonial expansion,
the decision of South Africa to annex Walvis Bay,
thereby undermining the unity and territorial integrity
of Namibia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular and other relations with South Africa,
purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
as well as military or strategic collaboration, all of which
has the effect of supporting or encouraging South Africa
in its defiance of the United Nations,
Strongly condemning the racist r6gime of South Africa
for its efforts to develop a nuclear capability for military
and aggressive purposes,
Deeply concerned by the increasing militarization of
Namibia and by the continuing acts of aggression against
neighbouring independent African countries, including
the most recent acts of aggression against Angola and
Zambia which resulted in extensive loss of human lives
and destruction of economic infrastructures,
Reaffi,rming that the natural resources of Namibia
are the birthright of the Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by foreign economic interests under the protection of the repressive racist colonial administration, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, of the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and of Decree
No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of
Namibia enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974,6 6 is illegal and contributes to the maintenance of the illegal occupation
r6gime,
Strongly supporting the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to it under the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia;
2. Reiterates that Namibia is the direct responsibility
of the United Nations until genuine self-determination
and national independence are achieved in the Territory
and, for this purpose, reaffirms the mandate given to the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence;
66 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. UA (A/9624/Add.I), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. I.

28

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

3. Reaffirms that the national liberation movement
of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people;
4. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, including Walvis Bay,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and as recognized in resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145
(XXI), as well as in subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating to Namibia, and the legitimacy
of their struggle by all means at their disposal, including
armed struggle, against the illegal occupation of their
Territory by South Africa;
5. Requests all Member States to co-operate fully
with the United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal
Administering Authority for the Territory until independence, in discharging the mandate entrusted to it
under the provisions of General Assembly resolution
2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the Assembly;
6. Declares that the continued illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa constitutes an act of aggression
against the Namibian people and their national liberation
movement, as well as against the United Nations, which
has direct responsibility over the Territory until independence;
7. Strongly condemns the South African regime for
its persistent refusal to comply with the resolutions of
the General Assembly relating to Namibia;
8. Strongly condemn• also the manoeuvres of South
Africa to impose in Namibia a so-called internal settlement, designed to give a semblance of power to a puppet
regime and a cover of legality to the racist occupation,
as an alternative to the South West Africa People's
Organization, which is fighting for the genuine national
and social liberation of Namibia as a united political
entity;
9. Solemnly reaffirms that a just and durable settlement of the question of Namibia is possible only with
the direct and full participation of the South West Africa
People's Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, and that the parties to the
conflict in Namibia are, on the one hand, South Africa,
which is illegally occupying the Territory and committing aggression against the people, and, on the other, the
Namibian people, under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization, supported by the United
Nations, which has direct responsibility for the Territory
until independence;
10. Calls upon the international community, especially all Member States, to continue to refrain from
according any recognition to or co-operating with any
regime which the illegal South African administration
may impose upon the Namibian people in disregard of
the provisions of Security Council resolution 385 (1976)
and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Council;
11. Reiterates that Walvis Bay is an integral part of
Namibia in accordance with United Nations resolutions,
in particular General Assembly resolution S-9/2 of 3
May 1978 and Security Council resolution 432 (1978)
of 27 July 1978, and that any decision by South Africa
to annex Walvis Bay is therefore illegal, null and void;
12. Supports the armed struggle of the Namibian
people, led by the South West Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia;
13. Appeals to all Member States to grant all necessary support and assistance to the South West Africa

People's Organization in its struggle to achieve national
independence in a united Namibia;
14. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its massive repression of the people of
Namibia and their national liberation movement, the
South West Africa People's Organization, with the intention of establishing, among other things, an atmosphere
of intimidation and terror for the purpose of imposing
upon the Namibian people a political arrangement aimed
at subverting the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as well as perpetuating the systematic plunder of
the national resources of the Territory;
15. Demands that South Africa immediately release
all Namibian political prisoners, including all those imprisoned or detained in connexion with "offences" under
the so-called internal security laws, martial law or any
other arbitrary measures, whether such Namibians have
been charged or tried or are being held without charge
in Namibia or South Africa;
16. Strongly condemns South Africa for its everincreasing military build-up in Namibia, its recruitment
and training of Namibians for tribal armies and the use
of other agents to carry out its policy of military attacks
against neighbouring States, its threats and acts of aggression against independent African countries and the
forcible and wholesale displacement of Namibians from
their homes for military and political purposes;
17. Calls upon all States to take effective legislative
measures to prevent the recruitment, training and transit
of mercenaries for service in Namibia;
18. Declares that South Africa's consistent defiance
of the United Nations, its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia and its war of repression against the
Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression
launched from bases in Namibia against independent
African countries, its present policy of colonial expansion, its policy of apartheid and its development of nuclear weapons constitute a serious threat to international
peace and security;
19. Condemns those Western States which have assisted South Africa in developing a nuclear capability
and urges again all Member States, individually and
collectively, to frustrate the attempts by South Africa
to develop nuclear weapons;
20. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign
corporations operating in Namibia under the illegal South
African administration which are exploiting illegally the
human and natural resources of the Territory and demands that transnational corporations comply with all
pertinent resolutions of the United Nations by immediately abstaining from any new investment in Namibia, by withdrawing from the Territory and generally
by putting an end to their co-operation with the illegal
South African administration;
21. Strongly condemns South Africa for obstructing
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 385
(1976), 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) and its manoeuvres,
in contravention of those resolutions, designed to consolidate its colonial and neo-colonial interests at the expense of the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian
people for genuine self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia;
22. Demands that South· Africa urgently comply
fully and unconditionally with the resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolution 385 (1976)
and subsequent resolutions of the Council relating to
Namibia;
23. Calls upon the Security Council to act decisively
against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrating the
legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people, under the
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization, for self-determination and national liberation as
well as negating the achievements of their just struggle;
24. Solemnly calls once again upon the Security
Council to convene urgently to impose comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions against South Africa, as provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to ensure South Africa's immediate
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to Namibia.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
34/93.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 57
A
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 68
Recalling and reaffirming the Programme of Action
against Apartheid adopted by the General Assembly in
its resolution 31/6 J of 9 November 1976,
Taking note of the conclusions of the United Nations
Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South Africa,
held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979, 59 and of
the International Seminar on the Role of Transnational
Corporations in South Africa, held in London from 2 to
4 November 1979,60
Gravely concerned about the situation in South Africa,
and in southern Africa as a whole, resulting from the
policies and actions of the apartheid regime, in particular
its efforts to perpetuate and consolidate racist domination in the country, its policy of "bantustanization", its
brutal repression of opponents of apartheid and its constant acts of aggression against neighbouring States,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity,
Reaffirming further that the policies and actions of the
apartheid regime constitute a threat to international
peace and security,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community to secure the elimination of apartheid and the liberation of the South
African people,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3411 C (XXX)
of 28 November 1975 in which it proclaimed that the
United Nations and the international community had a
special responsibility towards the oppressed people of
South Africa and their national liberation movements,
Reaffirming that any collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and of the international community,
Considering that such collaboration strengthens the
racist regime, encourages it to persist in its repressive
67
See also sect. I, foot-note 7; sect. X.B.l, decision 34/404;
and sect. X.B.3, decision 34/423.
68
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).
69 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/13157.
eo See A/34/655, annex.

29

and aggressive policies and seriously aggravates the
situation in South Africa, thereby constituting a threat
to international peace and security,
Reiterating its firm conviction that mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations are essential to facilitate the speedy
eradication of apartheid,
Concerned that the major Western and other trading
partners of South Africa continue to collaborate with
the racist regime and that their collaboration constitutes
the main obstacle to the liquidation of the racist regime
and the elimination of the inhuman and criminal system
of apartheid,
A /armed at the continued collaboration of certain
Western States and Israel with the racist regime of South
Africa in the nuclear field,
Recognizing that utmost priority must be accorded to
international action to secure the full implementation of
the resolutions of the United Nations for the eradication
of apartheid and the liberation of the South African
people,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance to the
national liberation movement and its legitimate struggle,
Recalling the launching by the United Nations on 21
March 1979 of the international mobilization against
apartheid, with particular emphasis on the cessation of
all collaboration with the apartheid regime and full support of the national liberation movement of South Africa,
1. Strongly condemns the illegitimate minority racist
regime of South Africa for its criminal policies
and actions;
2. Again proclaims its full support of the national
liberation movement of South Africa, as the authentic
representative of the South African people, in its just
struggle for freedom;
3. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement-by all available and appropriate
means, including armed struggle-for the seizure of
power by the people, the elimination of the apartheid
regime and the exercise of the right of self-determination
by the people of South Africa as a whole;
4. Commends all States which have provided assistance to the national liberation movement of South
Africa and urges them to increase such assistance;
5. Appeals to all States to provide all necessary assistance to the national liberation movement of South
Africa in this crucial stage of its struggle;
6. Condemns the plan of the apartheid regime for
the creation of a "constellation of States" in southern
Africa as a scheme for the establishment of its hegemony
in the region and the perpetuation of racist domination
and exploitation;
7. Reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations
to the total eradication of apartheid and the destruction
of the racist regime, rather than so-called reforms by the
apartheid regime;
8. Declares that any collaboration with the racist
regime and apartheid institutions is a hostile act against
the purposes and principles of the United Nations and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security;
9. Condemns the continuing political, military, nuclear, economic and other collaboration of certain States
with the racist regime of South Africa in disregard of
United Nations resolutions-in particular the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
