VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. States have the duty to co-operate with each other in ensuring development and climinating obstacles to development. States should realize their rights and fulfil their duties in such a manner as to promote a
new international economic order based on sovereign equality, interdependence, mutual interest and co-operation among ali States, as well as
to encourage the observance and realization of human rights.
Artic/e 4

1. States have the duty to take steps, individually and collectively, to
formulate international development policies with a view to facilitating
the full realization of the right to development.

2. Sustained action is required to promote more rapid development
of developing countries. As a complement to the efforts of developing
countries, effective international co-operation is essential in providing
these countries with appropriate means and facilities to foster their comprehensive development.
Article 5

States shall take resolute steps to eliminate the massive and flagran! violations of the human rights of peoples and human beings affected by
situations such as those resulting from apartheid, all forms of racism and
racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign domination and occupation,
aggression, foreign interference and threats against national sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity, threats of war and refusal to
recognize the fundamental right of peoples to self-determination.
Article 6
l. Ali States should co-operate with a view to promoting, encouraging and strengthening universal respect for and observance of ali human
rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without any distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion.

2. Ali human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and
interdependent; equal attention and urgent consideration should be given
to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.
3. States should take steps to eliminate obstacles to development resulting from failure to observe civil and political rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
Article 7

Ali States should promote the establishment, maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should
do their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources
released by effective disarmament measures are used for comprehensive
development, in particular that of the developing countries.
Article 8
l. States should undertake, at the national level, ali necessary measures for the realization of the right to development and shall ensure, inter alia, equality of opportunity for ali in their access to basic resources,
education, health services, food, housing, employment and the fair distribution of income. Effective measures should be undertaken to ensure that
women have an active role in the development process. Appropriate economic and social reforms should be carried out with a view to eradicating
ali social injustices.

2. States should encourage popular participation in ali spheres as an
important factor in development and in the full realization of ali human
rights.
Article 9

1. Ali the aspects of the right to development set forth in the present
Declaration are indivisible and interdependent and each of them should
be considered in the context of the whole.
2. Nothing in the present Dedaration shall be construed as being
contrary to the purposes and principies of the U nited Nations, oras implying that any State, group or person ha~ a right to engage in any activity orto perform any act aimed al the violation ofthe rights set forth in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights2 and in the lnternational
Covenants on Human Right,_24

187

Artic/e JO
Steps should be taken to ensure the full exercise and progressive enhancement of the right to development, including the formulation, adoption and implementation of policy, legislative and other measures at the
national and intemational levels.

41/129.

National institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/123 of 16 December 1977,
33/46 of 14 December 1978, 34/49 of23 November 1979,
36/134 of 14 December 1981, 38/123 of 16 December
1983, 39/144 of 14 December 1984 and 40/123 of
13 December 1985 concerning national institutions for the
protection and promotion of human rights,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights, endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the International Covenants on
Human Rights 24 and other international human rights instruments for promoting respect for and observance ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the significant role that institutions at the
national leve! can play in protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing
and enhancing public awareness and observance of those
rights and freedoms,
Welcoming the holding at Geneva, under the auspices of
the United Nations, of a Seminar on the Experience of
Different Countries in the Implementation of lnternational Standards on Human Rights, from 20 June to l July
1983, and a Seminar on Community Relations Commissions and Their Functions, from 9 to 20 September 1985,
and other current United Nations initiatives to assist in
the development of national machinery to combat racial
discrimination,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 111
2. Emphasizes the importance of developing, in accordance with national legislation, effective national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights,
and of maintaining their independence and integrity;
3. Encourages ali Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment or, where they already exist,
the strengthening of national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights;
4. Draws attention to the constructive role that national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of such national institutions;
5. Encourages ali Member States to take appropriate
steps to promote the exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment of such national institutions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to give due attention to the role of national institutions and nongovernmental organizations concerned with the protection and promotion of human rights and to provide ali
necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request,
in the implementation of paragraphs 3 and 5 above, according high priority to the needs of developing countries;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide and, as appropriate, to enhance assistance in the
111

A/411464

188

General Assembly-Forty-flrst Session

field of human rights to Govemments, at their request,
within the framework of the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to complete as
soon as possible and to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council, a consolidated report, for eventual publication as a United Nations handbook, on national institutions for the use of Govemments, including
information on the various types and models of national
and local institutions for the protection and promotion of
human rights, taking into account differing social and legal systems;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/130.

Development of public information activities in
the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that activities to improve public knowledge
in the field of human rights are necessary to the fulfilment
of the purposes of the United Nations set out in Article 1,
paragraph 3, ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and that
programmes of teaching, education and information are
central to the achievement of lasting respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on this subject, in particular resolution 40/125 of 13 December 1985, and related resolutions in the field of human rights conceming
intemational instruments and the activities of national institutions and regional arrangements,
Welcoming Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/54 of 13 March 1986 on the development of public
information activities in the field of human rights,3 1
Recognizing the catalytic effect ofUnited Nations initiatives on national and regional public information activities
in the field of human rights,
Recognizing also the valuable role that nongovemmental organizations can play in this field,
Believing that the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the lntemational Covenants on Human Rights 24 and
the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration ofHuman Rights2 should provide a focus and
renewed ímpetus to the promotional activities of the
United Nations system in the field of human rights,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the development of public information activities in the
field of human rights;ll2
2. Requests ali Member States to publicize and to
facilitate and encourage publicity for the activities of the
United Nations in the field ofhuman rights and to accord
priority to the dissemination, in their respective national
and local languages, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Intemational Covenants on Human
Rights and other intemational conventions;
3. Emphasizes the need to make available United Nations materials on human rights in simplified, attractive
and accessible form, in national and local languages, and
to make effective use of the mass media and new audio112 E/CN.4/1986/20 and Add.1-3

visual technologies to reach a wider audience, with priority given to children, other young people and the disadvantaged, especially those in isolated areas;
4. Calls upon ali relevant bodies ofthe United Nations
system, including the specialized agencies and the regional
commissions, as well as Member States and nongovemmental organizations, to assist further in the dissemination of United Nations materials on human rights;
5. Recommends that ali Member States include in
their educational curricula materials relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights issues;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to finalize work on a draft teaching booklet on
basic human rights, taking into account any comments
that may have been offered by Govemments, and to draw
the attention of Member States to this document, which
could serve as a broad and flexible framework within
which teaching could be structured and developed in accordance with national circumstances;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to complete as soon
as possible the task of issuing the personalized version of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the six official languages ofthe United Nations and to proceed thereafter, in co-operation with regional organizations and
Govemments, to the production of this document in national and local languages;
8. Invites Member States to consider nominating national focal points to which the Secretary-General could
supply copies of relevant human rights materials to complement the existing means by which such materials are
disseminated;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite work,
within available resources, on building up collections of
reference works and United Nations materials at each
United Nations information centre, taking into account
the list ofbasic reference works on human rights prepared
by the United Nations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to make available,
from the existing budget of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, appropriate funding for public information activities in the field of human rights, and
to ensure that adequate arrangements are made for the
storage and distribution of United Nations public information materials in this field;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
reprinting as soon as practicable ofthe publication entitled
Human Rights: A Compilation of lnternational lnstruments; 113
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in bis
report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fortythird session, information on the implementation of the
present resolution, including a status report on the availability, in the official languages and in other languages, of
the principal international instruments in the field of human rights and an assessment of the activities of the
United Nations information centres in this field;
13. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-second session under the ítem entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the
United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

113 Uni1ed Nation, pubhcation, Sales No. E.83.XIV. l.
