UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/45
12 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3417th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has reviewed the Secretary-General’s report of
22 July 1994 (S/1994/865) on the situation in Angola, which was submitted
in accordance with Security Council resolution 932 (1994).
"The Security Council commends the tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative and the three observer States to the
Angola peace process and encourages them to continue their efforts to put
an end to the destructive civil war and bring peace to Angola through
negotiations within the framework of the ’Acordos de Paz’ and relevant
Security Council resolutions. It urges both the Government of Angola and
UNITA to offer their full cooperation to the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative to allow the earliest and successful conclusion of the
Lusaka peace talks.
"None the less, the Security Council expresses its impatience over the
protracted nature of the negotiations, and warns that the peace process
cannot be delayed indefinitely. The Security Council believes that a just
and comprehensive peace agreement is within reach and strongly urges UNITA
to demonstrate its commitment to peace and accept the complete set of
proposals put forward by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and
the three observer States.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the efforts of
President F. Chiluba of Zambia in support of the Lusaka peace process.
"Furthermore, the Security Council expresses its gratitude to
President N. Mandela of South Africa, who offered his assistance to help
the finalization of the Lusaka peace process, and agrees that these helpful
efforts deserve time to come to fruition.

94-32656 (E)

120894

/...

S/PRST/1994/45
English
Page 2

"Consequently, the Security Council decides to defer temporarily the
imposition of the additional measures against UNITA as referred to in
paragraph 5 of its resolution 932 (1994). The Security Council confirms
its readiness to impose further measures against UNITA if the latter does
not accept the mediation proposals on national reconciliation during the
course of the month of August. The Security Council states that it will
start to compile a list of such possible measures and will not tolerate
further procrastination in the peace process.
"The Security Council again reminds both parties that offensive
military actions threaten all of the progress that has been achieved thus
far in Lusaka, and that no tactical battlefield advantage is worth the
tremendous cost in human suffering that is being paid by the Angolan
people.
"The Security Council expresses its dismay at the actions of both
parties, particularly of UNITA, which have led to deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and again reminds them of their responsibility to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian supplies. The Security Council
calls for the necessary steps to ensure that relief flights can resume to
Malange and Cuito.
"Referring to the report of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola
(S/1994/825) the Security Council reminds the Member States concerned of
their obligation to respond substantively to requests from the Committee
for the information required regarding alleged sanctions violations and
urges them to do so effectively without further delay. The matter of
cooperation with the Committee by those States which have so far failed to
respond satisfactorily will be taken up by the Security Council as a matter
of urgency for appropriate action, if such reply is not received
forthwith."

-----
