UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

MEETING:

9 NGVEMBE

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/2562). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . 1
Adoptionofthe

agenda............................,,,..................

1

Letter dated 9 November 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16825), , . , . . , , , , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . , . , . . , . , . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , 1

SlPV .2562

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, ,Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2562nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 9 November 1984, at 8 p.m.
President:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2562)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 9 November 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16825)
The meeting was called to order at 8.40 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

diplomatic skill will contribute to the success of our
work. You represent a country which, like my own,
defends the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the right to self-determination
of peoples. This guarantees that, under you leadership,
the Council will consider objectively and impartially
the grave situation that has obliged my Government, for
the umpteenth time, to come before this supreme body.
Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Bassole of Burkina
Faso, whose intelligence and dedication brought honour Iast month to its young revolution.
4, Just over one year ago, in fact on 25 October
1983, this Council met at my country’s
request
[2487th meeting] to consider the serious events that
terminated the political independence and sovereignty
of the tiny revolutionary Grenada of the unforgettable
Maurice Bishop. The military intervention
carried
out by the United States was preceded by a series of
military preparations that were not missed by political
observers,

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 9 November 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16825)
1, The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Chinese]:
The Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 9 November 1984 from the
representative
of Nicaragua to the President of the
Security Council [S/16825]. Members of the Council
also have before them documents S/16823 and S/16824,
containing the texts of two letters dated 8 November
1984 from the representative of Nicaragua to the Secretary-General.
2.

Mr. CHAMORRO

MORA (Nicaragua) [interpretaI wish to begin my statement this
evening by expressing my regret that the Permanent
Representative of the United States is not present, as
we had been promised, It was on her account that this
meeting was postponed to this late hour. We are sure
her representatives here will be able to pass on to her
our concerns and our denunciations, as she plays a
major role in the aggressive and militaristic
political
decision-making
process of the current United States
Administration,
tionfiom

Spanish]:

3. Sir, allow me to congratulate you on presiding over
the Security Council this month. Your wisdom and

5. Eighteen hours prior to the invasion, two United
States warships were to be found cruising approximately 15 kilometers off the coasts of Grenada. Even
earlier, some months in advance, the Ocean Venture 81
and Ocean Venture 82 manoeuvres took place, with the
inclusion of the Amber and Amberines manoeuvres
that included simulated invasions of the island of
Vieques. Similarly, weeks before the Marines landed,
the hospitals of Fort Bragg, the operations base of
the 82nd Airborne Division, had received orders to
accept no wounded. The President of the United States
on that occasion used a series of arguments to justify,
after the facts, that invasion that was more like a reprisal for the defeat suffered by the United States forces in
Lebanon. All the arguments were either inconsistent or
simply false. We must emphasize, for its relevance to
this debate, the reference to the fact that in Grenada an
airport of excessive proportions was being built where
powerful aircraft would be able to take off and land and,
in addition to that, that many tons of modern, sophisticated Soviet weapons were to be found there. This
fact implied a grave weapons imbalance with respect to
the neighbouring countries and a threat to the security
of the United States. Later it turned out that this arsenal
of powerful Soviet weapons amounted to a few thousand antiquated, rusty guns, as was fully confirmed by
the United States press; subsequently it also turned
out, as we can see today in the film taken by American
television in occupied Grenada, that the United States
occupying troops are finishing the building of that same

‘I
airport, with the same proportions as originally planned
and which will bring-they
now say-great benefits to
Grenada through tourism.

Pinos, travelling down into the departments of Masaya
and Carazo, then turned to the west to the department
of Chontales and departed from our territory through
Laguna de Perlas. This fresh violation took place at
approximately 8.15 this morning.

6. Here we see a series of coincidences that cannot
be concealed. We have seen the facts as they have
developed in the last few days. This time I shall not
refer to the other serious violations that have taken
place since the previous meeting of the Security Council on this matter [2557th meeting], just two months
ago.

10. During the night of 6 November, when the people
of the United States were learning the results of the
elections in this country-a
mandate which we seeas
being a mandate to govern this country and not to
meddle and interfere in the affairs of peoples of other
nations of the world-the
CBS television network reported statements made by high-ranking United States
officials to the effect that a Soviet vessel was making its
way towards Nicaragua and that it might be carrying
MiG-21 fighter planes. These high-ranking
officials
warned that “if the Reagan Administration
were to
verify the fact that ships were carrying such aircraft
towards Nicaragua it might consider a surprise attack
to destroy them”. The report also said that the ship
in question had set out from a port on the Black Sea
in September and that photographs taken by satellite
showed that when the vessel was being loaded a dozen
crates similar to those used for transporting MiG-21s
disappeared from the wharf.

7. On 31 October, my Government
publicly denounced the fact that between 9 a.m. and noon there
had been further violations of our airspace by aircraft
that had not yet been identified. The violations of our
airspace followed two particular routes: the first in the
Jalapa-Valle Limdn and Teotecacinte sectors, and the
second in the Ocotal, Somoto and Dipilto sectors. The
violations were accc ,,panied by loud explosions, and
immediately
afterwards our military authorities were
able to determine that it was a United States SR-71
aircraft, highly sophisticated and especially designed
for espionage operations. Here it is worth recalling that
this aircraft has replaced the very famous U-2 spy plane
previously used by the American armed forces.

11, On that same day, a report by the NBC television
network stated that a Bulgarian vessel which was unloading in El Bluff, a port on the Atlantic coast of
Nicaragua, carried MI-2 helicopters, NBC also qwoted
Pentagon officials who stated that the helicopters
would be “more dangerous for the region than the MiG21s”. That same night, the spokesman of the Department of State, John Hughes, speaking about these confused reports, said:

8. On 7 November another SR-71 aircraft again violated our airspace, between 8.20 a.m, and 8.30 a.m,
This time the aircraft entered over Chinandega department and flew over the departments of LeBn, Managua, Masaya and Bluefields, leaving our national territory in the El Bluff area. That same day, between 10 and
11 a.m., a merchant ship flying the Soviet flag and
sailing in our territorial waters just 7 miles off the port of
Corinto on the Pacific coast, was pursued by two
United States Navy frigates, as was confirmed by a
Nicaraguan Vedette patrol boat of French manufacture. Immediately
after the entry of the merchant ship
into the port of Corinto, the United States frigates were
stationed approximately
six miles from the Nicaraguan
coast. Simultaneously
with these events, a C-130 aircraft, whose insignia could not be identified, overflew
the same sector from north to south towards the area in
which the frigates lay. In these circumstances, and in
view of this inadmissible
violation of Nicaraguan airspace, the details of national air defence opened preventive fire on that aircraft, I wonder what would have
happened if those shots had hit their target. Perhaps
that would have served as the pretext the United States
was looking for to intervene in Nicaragua. At this point,
the United States frigates retired to within 10 miles of
our coasts, where they still remain,

“The reason for concern here is that if Nicaragua
acquired weapons superior to those of its neighbours
this would have a demoralizing effect on its neighbours and would destabilize them.”
“I do not believe,” added Mr. Hughes, “that it is
necessary to have proof that there are such weapons
on any one particular ship for us to continue to feel
concerned. ”
12. The same day also, Larry Speakes, spokesman for
the White House, stated that, if the information given
by the press on the alleged dispatch of MiGs or advanced helicopters to Nicaragua was correct, it would
be “an extreme escalation of the situation in Nicaragua
which the United States could not tolerate”. President
Reagan himself, adding to these threatening and totally
unfounded statements, said, “I cannot comment on
what we-might do.”

9. These facts, which have been denounced in notes
of protest addressed to the Government of the United
States and which represent extremely grave violations
and provocations, the gravity of whose results are unforeseeable, have been compounded by a further violation of our airspace carried out this very day by another
SR-71 aircraft. This time, the so-called “Blackbird”
penetrated our airspace from the north through Cinco

13. To this chorus of serious threats based on unfounded and controversial
suppositions,
the representative of the United States in this important body
added her voice a few days ago, affirming that the
Nicaraguan problem would be resolved three months
after the elections.
2

14. At the height of the threats and the confusion,
yesterday one of the television networks revealed that
President Reagan, from his ranch in California where he
is resting, stated that he “would use all his emergency
powers, as in the Iranian crisis”, against Nicaragua.
According to the television reporters, Reagan made
these declarations
asserting that Nicaragua
was
acquiring for its defence “SAM ground-to-air missiles”.

21, These articles appeared in the American press and
reflect intense activity at a naval station 45 miles from
San Juan, the capital of Puerto Rico.
22. We also have reports about a state of alert at Fort
Bragg in North Carolina, where the celebrated 82nd
Airborne Division of the United States Army is stationed. We ‘recall that that Division led the invasion of
Grenada, We recall also that, as in the case of the
decision taken on that occasion, the hospitals of that
military base reported to the city more than a week ago
that they were not capable of providing medical services to it. There are also reports that the IOlst Parachute Division, located at a military base in Kentucky,
has been shifted to Georgia, from a hinterland state to a
coastal state.

15. What, then, does the United States consider to
be a threat to its national security? Is it MiG-2ls,
MI-2 helicopters, SAM ground-to-air missiles, T-55
tanks, Vedette patrol boats, hand grenades, AK-47,
FAL and M-16 rifles, the contact bombs used by the
heroic indigenous people of Monimbo to overthrow
Somoza, or perhaps the stones from our roads which
we will also use again to expel the invader.

23. It is significant that all of this, according to sources of the Defense Department and spokesmen of the
United States Army, was not announced in the customary manner, because on this occasion those military
mobilizations were not under the control of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

16. What criteria are used by the Reagan Administration to determine what quantity and what type of
weaponry would disturb the military balance in the
region? And by what criteria should the aggressor
impose on the people against which its aggression is
directed the methods with which that people must
defend itself against aggression?

24. I cannot understand how it is possible that things
of this sort should happen in a country like the United
States in this day and age.

17. Is not’all of this perhaps a smokescreen thrown up
to draw a veil, for example, over our own successful
elections, the discussion of the Central Intelligence
Agency’s manual concerning assassination of our people, the acceptance by President Reagan and the National Security Council of an “effective blockade of
Contadora” , the introduction by the United States of
sophisticated helicopters and F-5 fighter planes with
advanced technology in Central America, the millions
of dollars of military expenditure in the region and the
permanent presence of its troops and ships on the territory and in the waters of Central America?

25. All these military actions, the threatening statements of members of the Reagan Administration,
including the President himself, and the acts of aggression
of which we are victims every day and which are being
stepped up-all of these things lead us to fear constantly a United States military intervention, and even
more so in present circumstances.
26. Just in case there are any doubts persisting,
I shall quote a few statements and fragmentary remarks
recently made by a retired Admiral,
Gene R. La
Rocque, Director of the Center for Defense Information, in a programme of the Fund for Peace in New
York, Mr. La Rocque pointed out that:

18, So we see with concern the recent announcements
made in the press about new military mobilizations in
the region, where the greatest Power in the world has
begun to deploy a part of its own great strength.

“From a purely military point of view, midNovember would be ideal for taking United States
troops into Nicaragua. Militarily,
everything is set
up; the plans are made and the troops are trained. All
the President has to do is issue the order and United
States troops will go into action.

19. The Pentagon announced today the beginning of
military and naval manoeuvres of the Central American
countries supported, of course, by American advisers
in the Gulf of Fonseca, opposite the Honduran port of
Amapala and the Salvadorian anchorage at La Union.
In these ll-day manoeuvres, forces of the United
States Navy and 17 warships will take part. The manoeuvres are the third in a series of exercises known as
“The King’s Guard”.

“Notification
to Congress can be delayed because
Congress will not be in session and will not have
organized its business until mid-February,
By the
time Congress eventually gets involved, it will all be
over except the period of occupation.

20. At the same time as the United States is carrying
out these exercises, it is also participating in simnlated
warfare in the Caribbean Sea in which 25 warships are
taking part, including the famous lowa, a number of
cruisers, agroup ofdestroyers, frigates, minesweepers,
auxiliary vessels, an armaments vessel and two attack
submarines.

“The two years of intensive exercises in Central
America have familiarized the personnel and their
commanders with the terrain and the coastal waters.
United States forces would enter Nicaragua simultaneously in a massive orchestrated manoeuvre by
sea, land and air.
3

I

.-

I

Department about ships allegedly taking MiGs on board
and sailing for Nicaraguan ports.

“Support for the President can be anticipated because, even if only at the beginning, Americans have
traditionally supported their President whenever he
has sent United States forces into foreign countries.
Even those Americans who might be expected to
speak out loudly against the invasion of mid-November would be too busy with their preparations for
Thanksgiving
and Christmas to form an effective
body voicing their concern. On the other hand, it is
possible that some of our friends in Latin America,
Europe and Asia may be vehemently opposed, but
they would have no effect.

31. Thirdly, information of this kind is part of the
general atmosphere of aggression against Nicaragua,
which has been intensified in recent weeks, especially
since the SR-7 1 spy flights and the report by the Council
on Hemispheric Affairs (Americas) in connection with
preparations to put into action in Central America the
82nd Airborne Division, which carried out the invasion
of Grenada.
32. Fourthly, these facts and this information confirm
our fears that significant measures of aggression are
now being prepared by the United States Government
against Nicaragua as a way of seeking to discredit the
overwhelming success it has had in the development of
the democratic process in Nicaragua as indicated in the
recent elections, on 4 November, which were characterized by broad and free popular participation. I must
add that the final results-in contrast to the position in
countries like the United States which proclaim themselves champions of democracy-show
that 80 percent
of the citizens registered and voted. These facts and
these reports confirm the complaint made by Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra in the General Assembly,’
at the close of the electoral campaign in Nicaragua,
concerning the imminence of direct military aggression
against our country.

“The United States would have to commit thousands or tens of thousands of troops in an occupying
force for an indefinite number of years. The deeper
the United States got involved and the more casualties it suffered, the more the public and Congress
would confront Mr. Reagan,”
We can recall the United States occupation of Viet Nam
in this respect and the reaction which occurred after
years of occupation because of the caskets which were
coming back containing American bodies. I continue to
quote retired Admiral La Rocque:
“But Governments do strange things, as Barbara
Tuchman has recently reminded us in her latest book
about the whopping mistakes made by Governments.
Mr. Reagan might feel that the gap between the elections and the commencement of the new session of
Congress represents his last good opportunity
to
overthrow the Sandinists.

33. Fifthly, the Government of Nicaragua categorically declares that it is false to assert that any ship of
any nationality is transporting fighter aircraft to Nicaraguan ports. We declare that no aircraft of that sort
has been unloaded. All this information that the United
States Government has been leaking is designed to
prepare the climate for a direct military attack against
our territory and establish conditions conducive to the
participation
of United States troops in large-scale
aggression.

“We shall all have reason to be thankful if between
now and Thanksgiving Day we have not invaded
Nicaragua. ”
27. What lies hidden behind all of these facts, behind
this campaign of terror, behind these threatening
statements and this studied confusion typical of psychological warfare? What lies behind these violations of
our sovereignty?

34. Sixthly, the Government of Nicaragua denounces
these manoeuvres and this manipulation of public opinion and is warning the Nicaraguan people to be
prepared to respond to our Government’s
call for the
mobilization
necessary to defend our country, in view
of the gravity of these events.

28. The Governing Junta of National Reconstruction,
in a communiquB of 8 November, drew attention to a
number of points which should be reiterated on this
occasion and which clearly set forth the position of my
Government on the grave situation of aggression which
we are denouncing, and how it began,

35. I wish to point out that yesterday 20,000 young
Nicaraguans were mobilized in the northern provinces
of the country tojoin in productive work and help in the
harvesting of coffee, which constitutes a large part of
our country’s foreign currency earnings. Because of the
genera1 threatening situation and the imminent POSsibility of a United States invasion, our revolutionary
Government decided yesterday afternoon that despite
the fact that the coffee could not be harvested, those
young persons would not be moved to the north, because their presence would be required for the defence
of Managua itself if a United States invasibn of our
country occurred.

29. First, these threats against Nicaragua, which include the announcement of the bombing of our territory, are part of the overt policy of aggression which
the present United States Government has been conducting against Nicaragua.
30. Secondly, one is struck by the fact that on the
night of 6 November, when the American press was
reporting the election results, the United
States
Administration
began making emphatic statements and
leaking information from the Pentagon and the State
4

36. For reasons which are readily understandable,
Nicaragua has fully supported the efforts of the Contadora Group, which since January last year has done
its utmost to bring about agreement among the Central American countries leading to peace in Central
America. I say “for reasons which are readily understandable”, because the Nicaraguan people is a people
that has suffered, it is a people that has struggled, it is
a people that has borne the consequences of a war
of liberation, and it is a people that has experienced
45 years of the Somozist dynasty, imposed upon it and
sustained by various United States Administrations.
Consequently, it is a peace-loving people, unlike other
peoples that have not suffered wars on their own territories.
37. Just as Nicaragua has supported the efforts of the
Contadora Group, so it has made very clear its position
that it is more necessary than ever before for the United
States to commit itself seriously to peace in the region.
The United States Government has responded to our
calls for peace by carrying out actions designed to block
that initiative and stepping up the acts of aggression
against my country, It has not relaxed for a single
moment its determination
to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua.

40. We have had countless calls from representatives
of other countries, from American friends, from journalists throughout the world, all of them asking the
same questions: what does Nicaragua expect from the
Security Council? Why does Nicaragua turn to the
Council knowing that the United States has the veto
power? To all of them we have made the same reply: we
have come here because this is the highest organ in the
entire international
legal order charged with the defence of international peace and security, and because
we believe that in situations like the one which we
are now facing here, the Council is obliged to take
appropriate measures to guarantee the purposes of the
Charter.
41. We have come here to denounce this entire campaign of lies. We have come here to unmask yet again
those who have for a long time now been determined to
destroy us and who do not believe in peaceful, diplomatic solutions because their whole language is that
of gunboats. We have come here to affirm the sacred
right to self-defence, which is legitimately
ours. We
have come here because our conviction about the courage and patriotism with which our people will defend
their sovereignty, their dignity and their independence
is the same as our conviction about peace, justice and
international law. That is why we have come to the
United Nations. That is why we have come to the
Security Council.

38. However, it would be naive to believe that the
United States Government is deceiving itself and that
therein lies the explanation for its constant violations of
international
law and its policy of State terrorism. On
the contrary, aware of the illegality of its aggression
against Nicaragua and of the fact that the international
community
repudiates its aggressive actions, the
United
States Government
has decided to put on
sheep’s clothing, pretending to support the Contadora
diplomacy
and opening direct negotiations with Nicaragua at the prompting of one of the members of that
negotiating group. Obviously, one does not have to be a
perspicacious observer to understand the true intentions of the United States and its consequent actions.

42. Mr. SCHIFTER
(United States of America): I too
should like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, upon
your election as President of the Security Council for
the month of November. I should like to extend also, on
behalf of our delegation, our thanks to the representative of Burkina Faso for the manner in which he
handled the presidency of the Council during the month
of October.
43. I sincerely regret that Mrs. Kirkpatrick
was
unable to rearrange her pressing schedule to be here
tonight. At the same time, I should like to make it clear
that, in fairness to all members ofthe Council, members
should call for meetings only after reasonable notice is
afforded to other members, unless there is an emergency requiring immediate action. No such emergency
requiring immediate action exists tonight. Insistence
that a meeting take place forthwith thus constituted a
misuse of the process of the Council.

39. On various occasions we have complained in the
Council and in the General Assembly about the policy of double standards of the present United States
Administration.
Today we do so once again as we
observe the consequences of the so-called constructive
observations on the Contadora Act, the real objective
of which was expressed in the secret report of the
meeting of the United States National Security Council, a meeting attended by the President himself. The
report was summarized in an article by Alma Guillermo-Prieto
and David Hoffman in The Washington
Post of 6 November under the heading “United States
Memo: Latin pact effectively blocked”. The articie
clearly shows that the Reagan Administration
never
had any serious intentions with regard to Contadora
and does not have any such intentions now. Consequently it has never seriously entertained the notion of
a negotiated political solution, but indeed is delighted to
have succeeded in “effectively blocking” that process,
so that it can satisfy its desire for a military solution to
the problems of Central America.

44. If I understood the representative of Nicaragua
correctly, he was telling us in his introductory remarks
that the United States rescue mission overthrew the
Maurice Bishop revolution. This statement suggests
that Nicaragua is far on its road to the state of society
against which George Orwell warned in his book 1984.
In that book, it will be recalled, he suggested the existence of a memory hole into which clippings of old
newspapers would be dropped when history was rewritten retroactively.
Lest we forget, let me remind
everyone concerned that Maurice Bishop had been
murdered and that his murderers were trying to assert
5

authority on Grenada when the troop contingents
which restored civil order and freedom landed on the
island.
45, This meeting is still another occasion, closely resembling more than half a dozen others, on which the
Council convenes at the urgent insistence of Nicaragua
to deal with an invented threat of invasion which is
alleged to emanate from the United States. Let us recall
that the next to the last announcement of a planned
invasion came from the head of Nicaragua’s military
Junta, when, speaking to the General Assembly in full
military regalia, he predicted an invasion of his country by 15 October. Well, 15 October came and went, as
most of us knew it would, without that prediction
coming true. So now, with 15 November approaching,
we are being treated to another prediction, another
potential media event-perhaps
with the idea of establishing a pattern of calling for consideration of this issue
at regular monthly intervals.

MORA (Nicaragua) [inlerpre
51. Mr. CHAMORRO
tation from Spanish]: I also shall be very brief; I do not
want to take up more of the Council’s time, especially
since, as I noted in my first statement, we unfortunately
had to delay this meeting for reasons that, in fact, did
not come to any fruition.
52. The representative of the United States has said,
among other things, that we constantly have recourse
to the Security Council, and that we do so for no ju+
tifiable reason, without there being any factors that
really constitute a genuine threat to international peace
and security.
53. I should like to ask the representative of the
United States whether he reads the American press.
I shall not ask him whether he reads the Nicaraguan
press, but does he read the daily press here, and the
magazines? Does he watch television or hear the radio
news? From these we get constant, incessant information, public information, confirmed by American press
sources, telling of constant belligerent activity and an
increasing American military presence.

46. Let me state clearly and simply that what was true
of the alleged 15 October threat of invasion is equally
true of the allegation which is being advanced against
the United States this evening. It is totally without
foundation,

54. If this is not a matter for concern for a small
country like Nicaragua, if this is not a cause for concern for a non-aligned country like Nicaragua-which
is enduring a war of aggression for the pursuing of
which funding is openly requested in the United States
Congress-I
should like him to tell us what should be a
cause for concern, and whether indeed the United
States itself would not be concerned if it was suffering a
situation similar to that which we are experiencing at its
hands.

47. Let me say at this point that, in case there is any
doubt, Retired Admiral La Rocque, who has been
quoted at such length by the representative of Nicaragua, is not an authorized spokesman for the Government of the United States. I would add: on the contrary.
48. Having thus dealt with the substance of the complaint, let me say afew words about the procedure here
employed. Under the provisions of Chapter VI, Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations, an effort should
be made prior to bringing a dispute before the Security Council to exhaust certain other named remedies
including-to
quote from the Charter-“resort
to rel
gional agencies”. In the case of the Americas, such a
regional agency exists. It is the Organization of American States, whose jurisdiction should be invoked in the
first instance.

55. Here I want to make a particular point, because it
is the second time a representative of the United States
has referred to the fact that the Co-ordinator of the
Governing Junta, Commander of the Revolution Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, appeared before the General Asset
bly recently in full military uniform. I really do
not know how the representative of the United States
expects the leader of a country such as Nicaragua to
dress-a person who is Commander of the Revolution,
precisely because he participated heroically and valiantly in a war of liberation by which the Somoza
dynasty was brought to an end. I could tell him in the
same sarcastic tone as he used that we have seen-and
I personally have seen-the President of the United
States in his Hollywood B-movie cowboy costume+

49. Having just heard in detail the allegations which
Nicaragua has chosen to make against my country,
I should like to say that we obviously need time to
prepare a sufficiently detailed response. At this juncture, I shall observe merely that it is indeed ironic that a
Government which has deliberately chosen to engage in
the process of militarizing its country, whose own military buildup does indeed constitute a serious threat
to its immediate neighbours in the region, should be
coming to the Council with a totally unfounded claim
that it considers itself militarily threatened. As I said at
the outset, so such threat exists. In fact, there is a close
parallel between the contentions advanced here tonight
and the recent elections in Nicaragua-for
they both
lack credibility,

56. The United States representative also spoke of the
credibility of our elections. I do not know how the
United States dares to speak of the credibility of our
elections, when it is well known that the Nicaraguan
people have just made a massive effort of broad popular
participation.
I have said that 80 per cent of the electorate voted, despite the United States war of aggression and despite the meddling of the United Statesin the
internal affairs of Nicaragua, persuading certain political parties to abstain, using funds provided by the
United States Government. I do not know how the

50. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Chinese]:
The representative of Nicaragua wishes to speak and
I now call on him.
6

United States dares to speak of lack of credibility, when
in spite of the war, in spite of the acts of political
interference, 80 per cent of the population took part
freely in elections and for the first time in history
elected a government in Nicaragua. All of this was
clearly seen and confirmed by observers from Latin
America, Europe, Africa, Asia and elsewhere.
57. I should like to refresh his memory. We, at least,
feel satisfaction that 80 per cent of registered voters
voted, and that the Sandinist National Liberation
Front, which the United States seeks to overthrow,
has won an overwhelming victory-67
per cent of
the vote-while
in the United States approximately
58 per cent of eligible citizens voted, and President
Reagan was elected by a similar percentage of those.
Who has the greater popular support if we look at the
figures-someone
elected by a small percentage of
voters or someone elected by a massive popular vote in
a country suffering the effects of a war of aggression?
58. The representative of the United States also referred to what he described as the “rescue operation”
in Grenada, I do not know who it rescued. Supposedly
it was the American citizens then present on the tiny
island of Grenada. But the dean of the university where
students were studying medicine himself said clearly
that the students were in no danger, quite apart from
the internal situation, and that therefore the action,
which violated elementary norms of international law,
in which the United States invaded a sovereign and
independent State, was unjustified and that there was
not the least reason for it, quite apart from whatever
internal problems the island had.
59. I wish to be brief, but I would state for the benefit
of the representative of the United States that perhaps
his country would wish us to resort to the regional
organization, the Organization of American States. But
I beg him not to misuse the Articles of the Charter for
the United States’ benefit. There are other Articles in
the Charter which, apart from the existence of regional

bodies, guarantee any Member State the right of recourse to this highest body for guarding international
peace and security when confronted with a threatening
situation and experiencing aggression.
60. I know that the representatives of the United
States have a predilection for the regional body for
various reasons, including the historic control the
United States has had in it as a logical consequence of
its historic dominion in Latin America. But the Latin
American peoples are waking up, and we know that
sooner rather than later they will wake up fully and
realize that in a regional organization such as the Latin
American one, it is neither logical nor consistent that a
military power such as the United States should try to
impose its decisions.
61. Mr. SCHIFTER
(United States of America):
I shall be very brief. On the matter of election percentages, let me just say that I was thinking back to an
experience in my own youth. I remember that it was
10 April 1938. I was present in Vienna when Austria
decided to permit itself to be incorporated into Nazi
Germany. The voter turn-out was 98 per cent and, if
I remember correctly, 98 per cent of the voters then
voted “Yes”.
62. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Chinese]:
There are no further speakers on my list. The next
meeting of the Security Council to continue its consideration of the item on its agenda will be fixed in
consultation with members of the Council.
The meeting rose at 9.40 p.m.

NOTE
1 See Offi&

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Ses-

sion, Plenary Meetings, Vol. I, 16th meeting.

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New
SE

PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adresscz-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Neciones
todas panes det mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

go-61313~Janualy

19934~~
