S/PV.8325

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8325th meeting

Thursday, 9 August 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Mielus
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-25511 (E)
*1825511*

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

rationale and deserves our encouragement. Moreover,
the Government should take that initiative into account
in the context of the intra-Burundian dialogue to ensure
the greatest possible participation by all stakeholders.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite President
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to President Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I thank you for
giving me the opportunity to again brief the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi. I would also like to
commend all the other members of the Council for their
ongoing commitment to international peace.
On 7 June, following the constitutional referendum
of 17 May, the Head of State of Burundi, President
Pierre Nkurunziza, solemnly promulgated the new
Constitution adopted by more than 73 per cent of
the Burundian people. On the same occasion, he
officially announced the end of his mandate in 2020
and his commitment to giving his full support to the
new President to be elected. In our efforts to help
this brotherly country to definitively settle the crisis,
those are two major acts whose importance we should
underline and which provide us with an opportunity
to move forward in resolving the Burundian situation
once and for all.
In particular, we believe that the Government and
the Burundian political class should jointly take the
opportunity of that new dynamic to work to create a
new political environment conducive to strengthening
national unity and peace. The political leaders’
dialogue workshop, held on 3 August in Kayanza,
in the Republic of Burundi, at the initiative of the
Minister of the Interior, which resulted in the adoption
of a road map for the 2020 elections, is part of that
2/15

09/08/2018

Since my previous briefing, on 24 May (see
S/PV.8268), I visited the subregion as part of my
mandate, in particular to meet the facilitator, President
Benjamin Mkapa, in Dar es Salaam and the mediator,
President Yoweri Museveni, in Kampala. I handed the
mediator a written message from the Secretary-General
and a memorandum containing specific proposals on
both the dialogue process and the initiatives that certain
guarantors of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement should undertake in order to reaffirm the
paramount importance of that historic Agreement,
which, as we know, represents the foundation for peace
in that part of the African continent.
At the end of the discussions, the mediator and
the facilitator reaffirmed to me their full commitment
to relaunching the dialogue as soon as possible. In
particular, the mediator committed to organizing an
extraordinary summit of the East African Community
on the subject. With regard to the same concerns, I am
hoping to visit Burundi in October so as to undertake
a certain number of activities and, of course, to
commence talks with the Burundian authorities to see
how we can pursue the process, alongside the facilitator
and the mediator.
During recent briefings on this issue, the Council
has been informed of the steady improvement of
the security situation in Burundi. The situation has
remained calm since the constitutional referendum,
notwithstanding several challenges on the part of the
opposition. There is therefore reason to commend
the efforts of the Government and encourage it to
remain vigilant.
Similarly, with regard to the humanitarian
situation, we must commend the efforts of Burundi and
Tanzania, which, with the support of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, since
September 2017 have allowed the voluntary repatriation
of approximately 35,000 Burundi refugees. Those
efforts must continue to be pursued in accordance with
the principle of voluntary repatriation, while ensuring
the return and reintegration of returnees in host
communities with respect and dignity.
In terms of bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
a number of high-level delegations from countries
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

and international organizations have visited Burundi
recently. I note, among others, the delegations of the
African Parliamentary Union, the African Ombudsman
and Mediators Association, the Forum of Parliaments of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
and the Parliamentary Assembly of the International
Organization of la Francophonie. Today, as we speak,
Bujumbura is welcoming the Women’s Forum for Peace
and Security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Subregion, organized under the auspices of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
I truly believe that such visits undoubtedly reflect
the will of the Government of Burundi to improve its
relations with the international community. On that
basis, and taking advantage of the de-escalation, it
is to be enthusiastically hoped that Burundi and the
European Union will soon resume talks with a view
to resuming their cooperation. We are encouraging
them — I was even going to say that we are pushing
them — to that end, as we believe that sanctions
are not always the ideal solution. I also call on the
Burundian authorities to finalize discussions on the
memorandum of understanding with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi and
finally agree to sign the headquarters agreement to
allow my office in Bujumbura to operate properly and
in better conditions.
My final request is that the Council reiterate its
appeal to all actors in the Burundian crisis to participate
sincerely and in good faith in the upcoming dialogue,
which will be the fifth and probably the last of its kind,
with the mediator, the facilitator and the African Union,
which we are undertaking to convene in the very near
future either in Entebbe or Arusha. Needless to say, the
road map is already in place, the programme has been
laid out and the Council would do well to launch an
appeal so that this time we can make the long-sought
dialogue a success.
The President: I thank Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank President Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for his briefing. I thank
him especially for his work on this important dossier
while the situation remains volatile in a country that
has been deeply and negatively affected by the electoral

S/PV. 8325

tensions of 2015, which created an environment of
distrust among political actors that unfortunately
continues to this day.
The persistent political stalemate and the human
rights situation in Burundi remain a source of deep
concern for France. Faced with the lack of real,
inclusive dialogue and the closing of political space,
the most radical opposition factions are tempted
by armed struggle. The heavy presence and role of
members of the Imbonerakure militia in carrying out
measures of intimidation and suppressing opposing
views are increasing. As Ambassador Delattre
underscored in May (see S/PV.8268), the risk of the
situation deteriorating cannot be ruled out, as was
shown by the killing of three soldiers — victims of an
ambush — near Bujumbura this past weekend. As we
know, the status quo is unsustainable. The situation is
a source of instability for the entire region. Reports of
clashes on Congolese territory fuelled by Burundian
armed groups are illustrative of the latter.
On behalf of France, I would like to take advantage
of the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Burundi today to appeal to the Burundian authorities
in the same spirit as President Kafando just now. It is
essential to complete the pacification of the country
and ensure the security of all against every form
violence, regardless of its source. It is urgent to combat
impunity, including within the ranks of the security
forces. It is necessary to engage unconditionally in an
inclusive dialogue with all sectors of Burundian society,
especially with those who do not share the same political
convictions. Lastly, it is crucial, in the national interest,
to restore respect for fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of opinion and of the media. The Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which is
the cornerstone of peace, as Mr. Kafando just pointed
out, provides the appropriate framework for that
reconciliation. It must be preserved at all costs.
President Nkurunziza’s announcement that he will
not run in the 2020 elections is a positive development
that France welcomes. We hope that it will facilitate
the search for a lasting political solution to the crisis
experienced by Burundi. In that context, I hope that an
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue can be undertaken,
in the spirit of unification and peaceful coexistence
established by the Arusha Agreement, with the support
of the mediation of the countries of the East African
Community so as to create the conditions necessary for
free, fair and transparent elections in 2020. In order to

18-255113/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

succeed, such dialogue will require the efforts of all
parties and their unflagging determination to close
the gap separating divergent views. The facilitator,
Mr. Mkapa, is working courageously to that end with
France’s full support. Through dialogue, all Burundians
will be able to unite and forge their common future in
full independence and respect for human rights and the
dignity of all.
I should like to tell the Permanent Representative
of Burundi that France, the European Union, his
country’s other partners and neighbours in East Africa,
and the entire international community stand together
with him and his country to help them. France calls on
the Burundian authorities to grasp this extended hand
and renew peaceful relations with their international
partners, as the Council has encouraged them to do in
its most recent presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/7)
on the subject.
The signing of the headquarters agreement with
the Office of the Special Envoy and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) would send a strong message, as would the
resumption of collaboration with the OHCHR team
of experts, pursuant to the Human Rights Council
resolution of which Burundi itself voted in favour.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we welcome the presence
of President Michel Kafando and thank him for the
comprehensive and enlightening briefing that he has
just delivered, which was an eloquent presentation of
the positive developments that have been observed
in Burundi.
Following the holding of the constitutional
referendum on 17 May, the current situation in
Burundi is generally stable, with broad participation
and almost three-quarters of the population voting in
favour as solid proof of the maturity and capacity of
the Government and people of Burundi to resolutely
address issues of concern to the country. President
Pierre Nkurunziza’s statement in June that he will
not present his candidature for the 2020 presidential
elections, when he could run, illustrates his goodwill
and demonstrates his commitment to his country. We
understand that the Burundian Government is actively
working to preserve national peace and stability and to
promote economic and social development.
In that regard, the international community should
consider the situation in Burundi in a comprehensive
4/15

09/08/2018

and objective manner, respect the independence of the
country in the management of its affairs and provide
constructive assistance with a view to preserving peace
and development in the region, given the importance of
that brotherly country to the entire region. Burundi’s
stability and development have a major impact
throughout the Great Lakes region. Burundi, let us
remember, is a troop-contributor to both United Nations
and African Union peacekeeping operations, which is
another sign that it is a peace-loving country.
Equatorial Guinea, as always, understands that a
situation such as that in Burundi is an internal affair and
must be resolved internally through a frank and inclusive
political process of negotiations among Burundians.
Political dialogue is the only way out of the situation
in Burundi, but we warmly welcome initiatives such
as the inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of
the East African Community, the conclusions of which
should undoubtedly help to restore the situation.
We believe that it is important for dialogue to
resume among the Government, opposition parties and
civil society on Burundian soil. That would consolidate
confidence-building measures and strengthen the
inter-Burundian dialogue, with the necessary presence
of the facilitator, former President of Tanzania
Mkapa; the official mediator, President of Uganda
Yoweri Museveni; the East African Community;
the African Union; and other actors that can offer
positive contributions.
Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation work of all international,
regional and subregional organizations, which in this
situation are truly important to making progress in the
process. We encourage the Burundian authorities to
continue to work together towards achieving the goal
of normalizing the situation in the country and thereby
improve its relations with the international community.
In conclusion, any negotiation process must lead to
fair elections in 2020, which must undoubtedly help to
bring about a definitive normalization of the situation
in the country.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, President Michel Kafando, for his
valuable briefing at the beginning of this meeting.
We have followed with interest the political
developments in the Republic of Burundi in recent
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

S/PV. 8325

months, the most important of which is perhaps the
constitutional referendum held on 17 May, with the
participation of most political parties. We also welcome
the current calm in Burundi at this time and we look
forward to 2020, when the presidential elections will
be held. It is our hope that they will be free, fair,
transparent and peaceful elections. We also hope that
they will be credible, include all constituents of the
people of Burundi and enjoy the participation of all
parties. In addition, we hope that they will be held in
full respect for the freedom of expression, the freedom
of the press and the participation of actors from the
civil society

environment and the return of the remaining Burundians
to their homes.

We commend the efforts undertaken by the African
Union and the East African Community (EAC) to reach
a peaceful solution in Burundi through a comprehensive
dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, signed on 28 August 2000, and the country’s
Constitution. We also highly appreciate the efforts of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa as mediators in the process of political dialogue
led by the EAC. There is no doubt that the involvement
of the Burundian Government with international and
regional organizations such as the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union and the EAC is very
important for providing the desired stability, which
is one of the factors leading to a sustainable solution
before the presidential elections. We are convinced
that the convening of an extraordinary summit of the
neighbouring States would make it possible to hold the
fifth round of inter-Burundian dialogue, which will in
turn facilitate the political process.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
concerned about the political and security situation in
Burundi, which is causing unnecessary suffering to the
population. I would like to bring the following three
points to the attention of the members of the Security
Council: the political space for the 2020 elections,
the ongoing human rights violations, and the need for
continued inter-Burundian dialogue.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we hope
that the humanitarian conditions and the human rights
situation will improve in the Republic of Burundi, as
they are a source of great concern for the international
community. Almost 180,000 people are internally
displaced and 3.6 million need humanitarian assistance,
while nearly 400,000 Burundians are refugees in
neighbouring countries. In that regard, I commend the
process of voluntary repatriation of more than 35,000
people following the signing of the tripartite agreement
among the Government of Burundi, the Government of
Tanzania and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Mr. Kafando addressed that issue during
his briefing. We underscore the need to further support
the undertaking of joint efforts, the reintegration of
refugees into society, the provision of the necessary

In conclusion, we call for accountability for those
responsible for violating human rights. They must
be brought to justice so that the Burundian people
can enjoy security and stability in an improved
humanitarian situation. It is important to ensure respect
for the rule of law in Burundi in line with human rights
and international humanitarian law.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, President Kafando, for his briefing.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has taken note
of President Nkurunziza’s statement on 7 June of
the end of his term in 2020. That is an encouraging
announcement and a step towards respecting the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. We hope that this
decision will contribute to opening the political and
democratic space to all political actors to prepare free,
transparent and inclusive elections. We therefore call
on the Burundian Government to exploit that dynamic
to create, in consultation with all political movements,
conditions conducive to credible elections in 2020, with
the full and equal participation of women. We believe
that only an inclusive dialogue involving all political
actors, women and men can lead to that result.
That brings me to my second point. As long as
the inter-Burundian dialogue remains at an impasse,
human rights violations will continue. Credible sources
have reported several cases of assassination, murder,
arbitrary arrest and politically motivated kidnapping
during the previous month in various parts of the
country. Furthermore, we are seeing a degradation in
the situation of Burundian refugees in the region, with
repeated infiltrations by Government agents of refugee
camps in Tanzania.
The involvement of the Imbonerakure militia
and the National Intelligence Service in those actions
is particularly concerning. The Government of the

18-255115/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

Netherlands condemns these violations and urges the
Burundian Government to put an end to impunity and to
fully respect and guarantee the rights of all Burundians.
Given the human rights situation, investigations
and independent reports are more important than ever.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Government of
Burundi to resume its cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and to fully cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry
and the three independent experts mandated by the
Human Rights Council. The international community
remains willing to engage in a constructive discussion
of these issues with the Burundian authorities.
My third point relates to the inter-Burundian
dialogue. That dialogue, held under the auspices of
the East African Community, remains the designated
framework for addressing the ongoing political crisis
in Burundi. Discussions on modalities for the return of
exiled opposition members must also be finalized as
soon as possible to elaborate a road map for the 2020
electoral process. That is why we call on the East
African Community to hold the next dialogue session
as a matter of urgency. We also call on all parties to
participate therein without any preconditions.
Once again, we underscore that the inter-Burundian
dialogue must be inclusive and abide by the principles
and the spirit of the Arusha Accords. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands also hails the stated commitment of the
African Union to contribute, along with the East African
Community, to an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
maintains its commitment to development and stability
for all Burundians. Nonetheless, the stakeholders in
Burundi are the only ones who can re-establish a lasting
peace, with the support of the region.
In his capacity as facilitator, Mr. Mkapa stated,
on the margins of the African Leadership Forum, that
security and peace in Burundi should be discussed by
the East African Community leaders. We support them
and call on them to continue their efforts, with the
active support of the African Union and the continued
attention of the Council, to break the political impasse.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank President Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
for his excellent presentation on the sociopolitical
situation in Burundi in the post-referendum period. We
6/15

09/08/2018

applaud the personal commitment of the Special Envoy
to help this brotherly nation find lasting peace.
My delegation welcomes the relative improvement
of the security situation in Burundi following the
holding on 17 May of the constitutional referendum.
That notwithstanding, at the political level Côte d’Ivoire
deplores the persistent impasse in the Burundian political
process more than eight months after the last session of
the inter-Burundian political dialogue, held in Uganda
under the auspices of the East African Community.
My country urges stakeholders to resume an inclusive
political dialogue and in this regard welcomes the
consultations currently under way in Arusha among
the Office of the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and
United Nations and African Union teams on the holding
of a closing session for the inter-Burundian dialogue
and the assistance to be provided to the various bodies
responsible for organizing the 2020 elections.
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Burundian authorities to
take the confidence-building measures necessary to
reduce sociopolitical tensions and resume an inclusive
political dialogue among the Burundian people on
the basis of the Arusha Accords. In this regard, my
delegation takes note of the decision taken by Pierre
Nkurunziza, President of Burundi, not to stand in 2020
for another term.
At the humanitarian level, despite the positive
trend observed in the context of the voluntary return of
Burundian refugees, my delegation remains concerned
by the situation of the thousands of refugees who are
awaiting better prospects for a definitive return to their
country. In this context, we welcome the efforts made
by the Burundian authorities, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
donor community in providing assistance and support
in the context of the programme for the voluntary return
of Burundian refugees to their country.
In that regard, my delegation encourages the
Burundian authorities to endeavour, with the support of
the international community and especially international
financial institutions and bilateral partners, to improve
the economic situation in the country and to create
conditions conducive to the dignified and safe return of
refugees and their reintegration into the socioeconomic
fabric of the country.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the international
community to further support the initiatives of the
East African Community and of the mediator and
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

the facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, with a
view to the effective resumption of the talks in order
to achieve national reconciliation and lasting stability
in Burundi.
Côte d’Ivoire, my country, strongly supports the
Special Envoy’s call on the authorities with regard to
the early signing of an agreement on and the opening
of the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy in
Bujumbura. Côte d’Ivoire expresses its support to the
Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando, and reiterates to him its
willingness to support all of his efforts in the context of
the inter-Burundian political dialogue.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando for his briefing on the current political
situation in Burundi. We are very much encouraged by
the continued stable security situation in that country,
even after the 17 May constitutional referendum. It is
also encouraging that the results of the referendum
were largely accepted by stakeholders and grievances
handled through established legal mechanisms.
We believe that the statement made on 7 June by His
Excellency Pierre Nkurunziza, President of Burundi,
not to stand for the presidential elections in 2020 is a
positive gesture towards the settlement of the political
impasse in the country. As we have repeatedly stated,
the political impasse in the country can be addressed
only through peaceful, inclusive and consensual
dialogue. The lack of progress in this regard in the
mediation led by the East African Community (EAC)
has been a matter of concern. Hence the relaunching
of a genuine and inclusive dialogue under the auspices
of the EAC and with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations, on the basis of the spirit of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and the
Constitution of Burundi, is all the more urgent so as to
ensure lasting peace and stability in, as well as a better
future for, Burundi.
In the light of the calm security situation and the
subsequent progress registered in the country, we
believe that the engagement between the international
community and the Government of Burundi must be
based on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting strong
institutions and creating a conducive climate in which
gains are consolidated and the remaining political
differences addressed, without backsliding into the
violence seen in the past.
In this regard, the Council should explore new
avenues for re-engagement with Burundi. Alleviating

S/PV. 8325

the socioeconomic difficulties of the population and
addressing the humanitarian situation, inter alia, should
be seen as an integral part of such re-engagement. On
the side of the Government of Burundi, too, we believe
that it is important to have an open-minded engagement
with the international community in explaining the
plan for the election to be held in 2020, as well as the
commitment to the spirit of the Arusha Agreement.
Finally, we call for the Government to fully
cooperate with the three human rights experts
mandated by Human Rights Council resolution 36/2,
which was presented in Geneva on 28 September 2017
by African countries, including Burundi, in gathering
the information so that it could garner the necessary
assistance to address the capacity gap critically needed
in this area.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to join others
in welcoming Special Envoy Kafando back to the
Chamber today and to thank him for his update this
morning. While welcoming the positive developments
that the Special Envoy has reported on, we must not
underestimate the frailty of the security situation in
Burundi and the precarious nature of the political,
economic and humanitarian situation, as well as
continued reported grave human rights violations.
There is clearly a need for the Security Council’s
continued engagement and support, especially for
regional mediation efforts.
The Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
continues to be the fundament for peace, security
and stability for Burundi and the region. An inclusive
political resolution of the current conflict through
dialogue must be found. Sweden fully supports the
efforts led by the East African Community to revitalize
an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue. We expect the
Government and all relevant actors to commit fully
to this process. In order to stabilize the political,
security and human rights situation, there needs to be a
conclusion of this dialogue.
A consensus-based road map towards free, fair and
inclusive elections in 2020 is important. It is crucial that
the United Nations and the international community
follow and support the process. I would also like to
firmly underscore that ensuring women’s full and equal
participation is essential for credible elections. The
announcement by President Nkurunziza that he will
not seek another term in 2020 was an important step
towards a constructive political process.

18-255117/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

We reiterate our full support for the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s Burundi configuration,
under the chairmanship of Ambassador Lauber. The
Commission remains a unique platform for discussing
the situation in the country with Burundi and brings a
holistic understanding of the socioeconomic situation
and the urgent peacebuilding needs.
Finally, we are deeply concerned about the
continued lack of progress in addressing human rights
violations and abuses in Burundi. Upholding and
respecting human rights and ensuring accountability
is critical for trust, dialogue and human dignity and
to prevent further escalation of the conflict. It is
thus of great importance that the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights be allowed to work
in the country and enjoy our full support in this regard.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
President Kafando for his briefing today.
The United States welcomes President Nkurunziza’s
announcement in June that he does not intend to seek
a fourth term. The act of stepping down of his own
accord would be a strong step forward for Burundi
and democracy, and would set a positive example for
other leaders in the region. Such a step would also
reaffirm the promise he made to the Burundian people
in 2015. As we welcome this positive step, we also call
on the Government of Burundi to improve respect for
human rights, civic space, media freedom and overall
governance so as to allow all Burundians to participate
in their Government.
We are concerned that the Government of Burundi
has still not agreed to a resumption of cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and has denied access to the
country by the commission of inquiry mandated by the
Human Rights Council. We remain deeply concerned
about continuing human rights violations and abuses,
including excessive restrictions on civic and political
space in Burundi, media restrictions, arbitrary arrests
and unduly harsh sentences for human rights defenders.
We look to the Government of Burundi to take clear
steps to end violence and reopen the political space
for members of the opposition, independent media and
civil society, and to engage in inclusive dialogue with
Burundian political stakeholders.
We also urge the Government of Burundi to
ensure that opposition political actors, including
those currently acting as independents, are fully
8/15

09/08/2018

able to participate in future elections. We encourage
opposition political actors to commit to participating
in elections in 2020 and to take concrete and realistic
steps to ensure that they are able to do so. We must
also insist that all parties, including the Government
and opposition members, categorically reject violence
as a political tool. These measures will be essential
to peaceful, free, fair and open political competition
ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020.
We also welcome efforts by the region to convene the
next round of the inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the
East African Community, in September. The sustained
support of the region will be required to produce a
durable political solution that lays the groundwork for
peaceful, free, fair and inclusive elections in 2020.
However, we reiterate that good-faith engagement from
both the Burundi Government and opposition members
is necessary for a successful dialogue.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, President
Kafando, for his insightful briefing.
Kazakhstan reiterates the importance of
implementing the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement
and
of
establishing
meaningful
inter-Burundian dialogue. Those, we can say, are the
most important and the only viable instruments for a
peaceful resolution of the political situation in Burundi.
We therefore call on all parties to engage in direct and
constructive cooperation with the aim of holding the
next round of the dialogue.
We commend the decision of the President of
Burundi, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, not to run for another
term, thereby helping to ease the political strain. This
measure will certainly assist in sustaining peace,
security and democracy in the country. We express
hope that the forthcoming presidential elections in
2020 will be held in a peaceful, free, fair, transparent
and inclusive manner, with the participation and broad
consensus of all stakeholders. Only such an approach
would ensure durable peace, and it should be supported
by the international community.
We also emphasize the importance of respecting
the fundamental rights and freedoms of all citizens,
and reaffirm the primary responsibility of the Burundi
Government for providing security, thereby protecting
its population. We further stress the importance of the
committed efforts of the African Union and the East
African Community in revitalizing the political process
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

in Burundi. We particularly support the activities of the
facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa, and the
mediator, President Museveni.
The work of the joint technical working group
is also crucial in promoting confidence-building
measures. We encourage the regional and subregional
organizations and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts and contribute
to finding a political solution to the current situation
in country. That nationally owned process should be
undertaken with respect for the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity of Burundi.
At the same time, while the security situation in
Burundi is generally calm, a large number of internally
displaced persons and thousands of refugees are in
need of assistance. This issue needs to be continuously
addressed by the Council, the United Nations and
bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
other international institutions. Such collective effort
is needed for the development work that must be
rigorously undertaken.
We also commend the regional host countries for their
assistance and reiterate that the repatriation of refugees
must be voluntary and in accordance with the principles
of respect and dignity, as enshrined in international and
human rights law. The close coordination between the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
structures would have a significant impact on the
political and humanitarian dimensions.
Finally, we commend the determined efforts of
the Special Envoy and the United Nations system to
achieve peace, security and long-term stability. We also
acknowledge the significant role of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s Burundi configuration as a platform for
the Burundi authorities to address existing economic
challenges, for which the support of international
partners is critical.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Kafando in
his capacity as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi. We hope that the Special Envoy will
continue to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with
the Government of Burundi.
The current situation in Burundi is generally
stable. The Burundian Government has worked
actively to preserve national peace and stability and

S/PV. 8325

to promote economic and social development. It has
formulated a national development plan and cooperated
with neighbouring countries to facilitate the voluntary
return of Burundian refugees. China welcomes those
positive developments. Burundi is an important country
in the Great Lakes region of Africa. The stability
and development of Burundi contribute to peace and
stability in the region. The international community
should fully recognize the efforts of the Burundian
Government in maintaining peace and stability and
should actively provide constructive assistance to the
Government and the people of Burundi to meet their
needs. China would like to emphasize the following
three points.
First, there must be proper respect for Burundi’s
national ownership, sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. The international community
should consider the current situation in Burundi
comprehensively and objectively and should play a
constructive role with a view to ensuring the long-term
stability and development of the country and the region.
Secondly, there must be continued support
for Burundi’s political process. China appreciates
the positive efforts by regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, the East
African Community (EAC) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in exercising
their good offices with regard to the issue of Burundi.
We support the EAC in taking the lead in that regard.
Thirdly, our priority should be to increase
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and to support its
economic and social development. China welcomes the
Burundian Government’s recent active cooperation
with neighbouring countries in their response to
refugees and other humanitarian issues. China urges
the relevant international agencies and organizations
to resume economic cooperation with and development
assistance to Burundi as soon as possible.
The Chinese Government supports the Burundi
peace process and has actively provided assistance for
the country’s nation-building. China is ready to continue
to play a constructive role in achieving stability and
development in Burundi.
Mr. Mielus (Poland): At the outset, I would like to
thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando for his briefing.
Noting the adoption of the new Constitution through
a referendum on 17 May, as well as the concerns about

18-255119/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

the compatibility of some of its provisions with the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, Poland
welcomes the announcement by President Nkurunziza
that he does not intend to seek a fourth term in 2020,
thereby reaffirming the promise that he made to the
Burundian people in 2015.
At the same time, we are concerned over the
political situation in the country and the slow progress
of the intra-Burundian dialogue. Poland believes that
the President’s announcement will need to be followed
by tangible steps to achieve political reconciliation. It
is the role of the authorities to ensure that the electoral
process in 2020 is free, fair, transparent and truly
inclusive, with the participation of all political parties
and the equal participation of women.
We recognize the Arusha Peace Agreement and its
provisions with regard to the need for a broad political
consensus and preventing the concentration of power
in a single institution or unit as the main instrument
for peace and stability in Burundi and in the whole
region. The intra-Burundian dialogue needs to be
continued with the active participation of all Burundian
stakeholders, since only an inclusive political dialogue
can ensure a sustainable and widely acceptable solution.
In that context, Poland would like to emphasize the
special role of the leaders of neighbouring countries
and the guarantors of the Arusha Agreement in order to
overcome the causes that are generating instability in
the region. We welcome the commitment of the African
Union and the East African Community (EAC) to a
peaceful resolution of the political situation in Burundi
and affirm our support for the facilitation led by the
EAC representative, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa.
Poland remains seriously concerned over the
human rights situation in the country. We are worried
about the reported intimidation of members of the
opposition as well as the limitations on political space,
an independent media and civil society. We strongly
condemn all violations and abuses in that regard by
whomsoever. Poland calls for the authorities to restore
effective cooperation with international institutions in
that regard. We urge the Government of Burundi to take
transparent steps to improve governance and respect
for human rights, to open up the public and democratic
space and to ensure the freedom of the media ahead of
the elections in 2020.
The situation in Burundi must be seen in the
broader regional context of the Great Lakes region. It
10/15

09/08/2018

threatens to exacerbate the humanitarian and refugee
crisis in Burundi and in its neighbourhood.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the fact that
the Arusha Agreement gives hope not only to Burundi
but also to the entire region. It is now urgent to return to
the spirit of that Agreement and to preserve the country
as an inclusive and safe home for all its people.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
the briefing by Mr. Michel Kafando.
We take note of some positive developments since
the referendum, such as the decrease in violence and
the announcement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that
he will not stand in the 2020 elections. However, we
note with concern that there continues to be a climate
of instability, confrontation and a lack of dialogue, as
well as ongoing reports of human rights violations and
restrictions on the fundamental freedoms of expression,
association and the press. The Government’s action,
or rather inaction, in the area of human rights and the
actions of associated groups such as the Imbonerakure
are of particular concern. We therefore believe that
the Security Council must remain attentive to the
developments in the country with a view to promoting
the peace and stability required to overcome the
humanitarian crisis and to address the root causes of
the conflict.
In that regard, we stress the need for the country
to remain committed to implementing the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, as well as to
upholding the delicate balance that it has established
among the Burundian communities since the civil
war. To that end, we believe that it is vital to restore
and to move forward in the intra-Burundian dialogue
facilitated by the East African Community. We hope
that it can become the inclusive and representative
mechanism necessary to overcome the political crisis
and to improve the security situation in the country. We
also believe that the difficult situation suffered by the
almost 400,000 Burundian refugees in neighbouring
countries, in particular women and children, must be
urgently addressed.
On the other hand, we believe that it is essential
to promote accountability for human rights violations
committed in the country and to build the necessary
institutional framework for that purpose. It is important
that the Government and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights decide
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

on and agree the memorandum of understanding so that
they can resume their activities on the ground.
Finally, we would like to highlight the important role
of regional organizations and neighbouring countries in
support of stability in the country. Breaking the vicious
cycle of conflict and poverty is the main task of the
Burundian people, but it also requires the support of the
international community.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Michel Kafando for his briefing on
the developing situation in the country. We regret that,
unfortunately, today the Security Council could not
listen to the Permanent Representative of Switzerland,
Mr. Jürg Lauber, Chair of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which remains a channel for reliable communication
with Bujumbura. We support the PBC’s efforts to
revitalize cooperation with the Burundians by discussing
issues related to the socioeconomic development of the
country and by re-establishing donor confidence.
We continue to receive information from Russian
colleagues — our diplomats in Bujumbura — according
to which the situation in the country remains generally
calm. The genuine security situation in Burundi is
evidenced by the fact that the country continues active
inter-parliamentary contacts. Opposition politicians as
well as refugees are continuing to return to Burundi.
The Government has released more than 2,000 political
prisoners in the framework of the ongoing national
reconciliation process.
In evaluating the political situation in Burundi, we
would like to point to the peaceful atmosphere in which
the constitutional referendum was held on 17 May.
We note the impressive, virtually unprecedented
voter turnout for an African country, and the support
expressed for the constitutional changes by a large
majority of those who voted, as well as the fact that
this expression of the people’s will was preceded by a
democratic and transparent propaganda campaign. It
is also important that the country’s new Constitution,
adopted on 7 June, retains all the elements of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, including
those concerning ethnic quotas in Burundi’s governing
institutions. We want to point out that the current
President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, has declared
his willingness to support his successor when his
second presidential term ends in 2020.

S/PV. 8325

In that regard, we are not in full agreement with the
alarmist assessments of the internal political situation
in Burundi voiced by a number of our colleagues today.
They are clearly not taking into account the country’s
positive momentum, which is a very good reason for
taking it off the Security Council’s overloaded agenda.
We get the impression that instead of trying to improve
our collaborative efforts, our colleagues are openly
playing up to the radical Burundian opposition. We
proceed from a belief in the impermissibility of outside
interference in Burundi’s internal political processes,
and we are opposed to mentoring and the imposition
of off-the-shelf recipes on sovereign States for solving
complex socioeconomic and political problems.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, for his briefing.
Bolivia is pleased that the referendum on 17 May
was held in a calm atmosphere with no major incidents
and in an inclusive manner, with all political parties
participating. We also believe that the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement should continue to be the
cornerstone of this process. We reiterate that an inclusive
dialogue and respect for the Agreement constitute a
firm foundation for dealing with the country’s crisis.
In that regard, we noted the fact that some important
aims of the Agreement on national reconciliation,
democratic principles, social cohesion, the distribution
of power, women’s participation in politics, sovereignty
and the rule of law and regional integration have been
incorporated into the new Constitution. We encourage
Burundi to continue working to create conditions
conducive to a peaceful environment and a climate
of trust for the next elections, scheduled for 2020, by
strengthening a spirit of tolerance, taking conciliatory
measures and resuming a dialogue with the opposition.
Bolivia appreciates and supports the Special
Envoy’s efforts to see the inter-Burundian dialogue
continue in an atmosphere of inclusion. We appreciate
the facilitation efforts led by the former President of
Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa and the current President
of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with
the Arusha Agreement. In that regard, we believe
that the road map proposed by Mr. Mkapa should be
implemented in order to reach a consensus. We are also
grateful for the efforts of the East African Community
(EAC), the African Union Special Representative in
Burundi, the Chair of the Burundi configuration of

18-2551111/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
country team. We encourage them to continue their
good offices and to work to coordinate their efforts
in order to improve their cooperation and continue to
support the EAC-led mediation, which should remain
at the head of the process.
Burundi’s contribution to peace and security
through its deployment of troops should also be
taken into account, since it is a demonstration of its
institutional capacity. The international community
should support Burundi in building its capacities, which
are closely linked to its socioeconomic development
and continuing humanitarian challenges. We encourage
the international community to continue providing
financing for the humanitarian response programme
in Burundi. We want to highlight the fact that more
than 35,000 refugees have voluntarily returned and
urge the Government to continue to prepare for the
voluntary return of the hundreds of thousands of others
who are still in neighbouring countries. In order to
overcome these challenges, it is essential to establish
an atmosphere of trust, which will involve lifting any
unilateral sanctions, in accordance with the call by the
Heads of State at the July Summit of the African Union.
Such sanctions have damaging consequences for the
lives of groups in vulnerable situations and a negative
impact on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Lastly, the Security Council, and the international
community in general, should give constructive support
to the dialogue and take action in areas where there is
still a lack of convergence, in the interests of a peaceful
settlement based on respect for Burundi’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank Special Envoy Kafando for
his briefing. I also agree with my Russian colleague
on the value of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
work of Ambassador Lauber, who is unfortunately on
vacation right now. It is really important that we bring
all elements of the abilities and capabilities of the
United Nations to bear in these situations.
The Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
brought peace to Burundi after more than a decade of
civil war and hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths.
It is crucial for Burundi’s long-term stability that the
spirit and the letter of the accords be preserved. We
12/15

09/08/2018

welcome President Nkurunziza’s announcement that
he will step down at the end of his current term. It
was an important step and an important message for
the people of Burundi, the region and the international
community. A genuine, inclusive dialogue with all
parties remains the only viable option for resolving the
political situation, and so, as Mr. Kafando made clear,
progress on the inter-Burundian dialogue led by the
East African Community remains crucial to the future
peace and security of both Burundi and the region.
We echo his call for the parties to engage openly and
constructively, and urge the region and subregion
to remain fully engaged in order to ensure that swift
progress is made during the coming months and weeks.
The human rights situation in Burundi is deeply
worrying. The United Kingdom urges the Government
of Burundi to take steps to make rapid progress in
improving the situation so that the country is better
prepared to move towards elections in 2020. First, it
should signal its commitment to upholding human
rights by completing its negotiations on a memorandum
of understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
in order to enable OHCHR to operate effectively in
Burundi. Secondly, the Government should implement
Human Rights Council resolution 36/2, endorsed by
the Group of African States, including Burundi, and
adopted at the thirty-sixth session of the Human Rights
Council in September 2017. We urge the Government
to engage with OHCHR to facilitate the return of
the human rights experts whose visas were revoked
in April.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I am taking the floor under the United
Kingdom presidency, I would first like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. Knowing your experience and your team’s
proven professionalism and dynamism, we have no
doubt that your presidency will be a successful one,
and you can count on Burundi’s cooperation throughout
your tenure. I would also like convey through you my
thanks to all the members of the Security Council, who
since 2015 have always supported the sovereignty and
political independence of Burundi and respected the
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

principles of the Charter of the United Nations during
their consultations on Burundi.
I thank all the delegations that spoke this morning,
but we regret that a small number among them remain
wedded to the narrative of 2015 and fail to note
positive developments in Burundi that have led to the
positive situation referred to by the Special Envoy, who
enjoys the support of everyone here. The tendency to
diametrically oppose the position held by the Special
Envoy and the majority of States Members and disregard
developments of the situation on the ground, while
adhering to the 2015 narrative, is not a constructive
approach, and it should change.
I warmly welcome the presence of Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, this morning. I cannot thank him enough for
his briefing.
The purpose of my statement this morning is
to share with members of the Security Council new
developments in Burundi since previous briefing on
the situation in my country, on 24 May (see S/PV.8268).
As one can see, the security situation in
Burundi has remained calm, stable and fully under
control. The return to normalcy in the country has
allowed, inter alia, the holding of the constitutional
referendum, which took place without major incident,
the large-scale return of refugees and the hosting of
several conferences at the regional and continental
levels, as well as the welcoming of foreign dignitaries
visiting Burundi. The visit of the Chairperson of the
African Group of the Inter-Parliamentary Union took
place just this past week. At the conclusion of his visit
and after having travelled to six provinces within the
country, the Chairperson issued a statement in which
he declared that he had found Burundi to be a calm and
stable country. He was impressed by the evident will
of the Burundian political class to turn over a new leaf
vis-à-vis 2015, in order to work towards the holding of
free, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.
With regard to the political situation, the Council
will recall that, upon the promulgation of Burundi’s new
Constitution on 7 June, the President of the Republic
informed Burundians and the international community
that his second term of office would end in 2020 and
that he would support the new President to be elected
the same year. Contrary to the statements of some — as
you will recall, Mr. President — who had attributed to
him the intention to fashion the new Constitution to

S/PV. 8325

his own ends so as to remain in power until 2034, the
President’s gesture was of great political and democratic
significance and strengthened democratic processes in
the region and on the African continent. His gesture
should be encouraged and welcomed. I thank all the
delegations that commended that action, which was
extremely important not only for Burundi but also for
the subregion.
Furthermore, with regard to the political sphere,
it would not be an overstatement to say that the spirit
of tolerance and the process clearing the way for and
opening Burundian political space are becoming
increasingly strengthened. That has been reflected
in the return and reintegration of several thousand
refugees, as well as several political leaders who had
fled the country, including former President Sylvestre
Ntibantunganya and former Vice-President Alice
Nzomukanda, as well as several former Burundian
parliamentarians. Those politicians who returned
to their country are freely enjoying their civil and
political rights today. The release of more than 2,000
prisoners in early 2018 is also part of that dynamic of
reconciliation, social cohesion and political tolerance
under way in the country.
With regard to the inter-Burundian dialogue, my
delegation recalls that, as a means of finding peaceful
solutions to political disputes, dialogue has become
a way of life in our country. Those asking us to
promote dialogue today are pushing on an open door.
Besides the commendable efforts of the East African
Community, Burundi enjoys a Political Party Forum,
which is an excellent platform for promoting dialogue
among authorized political parties in Burundi. Within
that context, all political parties met in Kayanza, in the
north of Burundi, on 3 August to discuss informally
significant issues concerning the 2020 elections. That
meeting resulted in the adoption of a road map by more
than 20 political parties with a view towards free,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020.
With regard to regional dynamics, they remain on
course. Contacts at the highest level have continued
since the Council’s latest meeting on the subject. This
past week, His Excellency the President of Uganda,
the chief mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
granted an audience to the first Vice-President of
Burundi, who conveyed a special message from His
Excellency President Nkurunziza to his Ugandan
counterpart. Similarly, early this week, His Excellency
the President of the United Republic of Tanzania also

18-2551113/15

S/PV.8325

The situation in Burundi

received in audience the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi, who also carried a special message from the
President of the Republic of Burundi to his Tanzanian
counterpart — all of which is an indication that regional
political dynamics are healthy despite what has been
said in this Chamber.
With regard to the return of refugees, I am pleased
to inform the Council that, to date, since 2016, more
than 206,000 refugees have voluntarily returned to
Burundi. That number includes 100,000 refugees,
who decided to return in 2016; 168,000 who returned
to their families from January to August 2017; and
another 38,254 who have returned to the country since
the tripartite agreement of August 2017 among the
Governments of Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). The voluntary return of refugees is
continuing at a satisfactory pace.
My delegation nevertheless reiterates its request
to UNHCR and our friends in the region to work with
certain host countries holding our compatriots hostage
in exile by erecting artificial barriers towards their
voluntary return to Burundi and towards ensuring that
the refugee camps maintain their civilian character in
accordance with the Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees of 1951 and resolution 2389 (2017), on the
Great Lakes Region, adopted on 8 December 2017.
With regard to human rights, Burundi once again
reiterates its readiness to work and cooperate with
other nations and the United Nations to promote the
protection of human rights in Burundi and elsewhere
throughout the world. That noble mission will be made
possible only through stepped-up cooperation and
frank dialogue among Member States. In that context,
Burundi continues to cooperate in implementing the
resolution adopted by the Group of African States on
28 September 2017 in Geneva within the framework of
cooperation and capacity-building. Burundi is awaiting
official notification from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on
the appointment of three experts in transparency and
due process. What has been said about Burundi’s socalled lack of cooperation in the implementation of that
resolution, which we own as our own, as we supported it,
is owing to misinformation and a lack of transparency.
The same can be said concerning the memorandum of
understanding on the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Burundi. Burundi remains very
open to pursuing discussions in a constructive spirit.
14/15

09/08/2018

With regard to the economic sanctions that European
Union partners imposed upon Burundi following the
unrest caused by the 2015 elections, my delegation
would like to inform the members of the Council that
the context in which those sanctions were imposed has
fundamentally changed. The electoral tensions of 2015
are no more. For us, they are a page in history that will
serve as a lesson to irreversibly reconcile our country.
I also recall that, following the undisputed return of
peace and security in our country, the African Union
Summit of Heads of State and Government held in early
July in Mauritania adopted a resolution demanding
the European Union to lift the unjust and immoral
sanctions weighing heavily on Burundi, which are, as
members know, contrary to the principles of Charter
of the United Nations and negatively affect vulnerable
groups like women and children.
Concerning cooperation with the United Nations,
Burundi is proud to participate actively and outstandingly
in United Nations and African Union peacekeeping
missions. More than 6,000 Burundian men and women
have been deployed in various peacekeeping operations
throughout the world, especially in the Central African
Republic and Somalia. The excellent work of our brave
soldiers on a peace mission, who have voluntarily
chosen to sacrifice their lives by saving those of others,
far from their native land and in particularly difficult
conditions, must be appreciated and recognized at its
true value.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its strong
appeal to the Security Council to have the courage to
remove Burundi from its agenda. It is worth noting
that the current political and security situation in the
country is calm, stable and completely under control.
It is far from posing a threat to international peace and
security, which is the Council’s area of ​​competence. No
objective argument can justify the holding of untimely
meetings on Burundi at this juncture.
My delegation draws particular attention to the fact
that the organization of a spate of meetings on Burundi
that are not motivated by the reality on the ground
could become a factor of destabilization for the country,
instead of promoting the peace and stability sought by
all, and could monopolize regional efforts. This fury
against Burundi, a country whose return to normalcy is
well established, should cease; if it does not, history will
remember that our country was kept on the Council’s
agenda unjustly in order to meet non-Burundian and
non-African interests. The valuable time that Council
18-25511

09/08/2018

The situation in Burundi

allocates to Burundi should be devoted to other areas
of tension and conflict, which are legion at the moment,
as we all know. The place that Burundi deserves
today is not in this Chamber; it should be within the
United Nations agencies in charge of socioeconomic
development to boost its economic recovery.

S/PV. 8325

The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

18-2551115/15
