VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 103
l. Insists on the urgency of assuring the prompt establishment of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women in the host country;
2. Reiterates the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 May 1976 regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the need
for close collaboration with the regional centres and institutes which have similar objectives;
3. Underlines the importance of the contributions of the
Institute to the work of all United Nations bodies, agencies
and institutions involved with the advancement of women.
in particular the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat;
4. Urges all Governments to consider contributing financially to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women or co-operating in other ways with the Institute
in order to assure its regular and effective financing so that
it can plan the expansion of its programmes;
5. Requests the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and other organs and bodies of the United Nations
system to co-operate fully with the Institute in their respective fields of competence.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/129.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, by which it proclaimed the period from 1976 to 1985
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace,
Recalling its decision of 15 December 1975 to extend the
activities of the Voluntary Fund for the International
Women's Year so as to cover the period of the Decade,
Recalling its resolution 3 I /133 of I 6 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management
of the Fund,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 38 of 16 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 56 of 17 December 1979,
in which it expressed the desire to see the activities developed by the Fund continued beyond the United Nations
Decade for Women and decided to review at its thirty-sixth
session the decision regarding the location of the Fund in
New York,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/3 of 16 April 1980,
Bearing in mind its resolution 35/136 of 11 December
1980, in which it endorsed the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 10t
Conscious that the Fund is intended to supplement,
through financial and technical support, the activities for
implementing the goals for the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Noting with appreciation the effective management and
coQtin~ing expansion_ of the Fund's activities and the cooperation extended by the relevant organs of the United
Nations, including the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and the regional commissions,
103

Resolution 35/56, annex.

181

Reaffirming the role of the Centre for Social Development
and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal
point for inter-agency co-operation towards the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with appreciation the support given by the Fund
to projects in the developing countries,
Noting also with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the future of the Fund, 104
I. Notes with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women during its ninth and tenth
sessions; 105
2. Expresses its appreciation for the voluntary contributions pledged by Member States and urges them to contribute or increase their contributions to the Fund;
3. Decides that the Fund should continue its activities
beyond the United Nations Decade for Women;
4. Stresses the importance of the contributions of the
Fund towards the realization of the goals and objectives of
the United Nations Decade for Women;
5. Stresses also the interrelationship of the Voluntary
Fund with the Advancement of Women Branch of the Centre
for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the views
of Member States on how best the Fund can continue its
activities beyond the Decade and to submit a report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
7. Requests also the Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed by Member States on this matter.
to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session
a report on the substantive and financial implications of,
and his proposals for the timing and modalities for. a relocation of the Fund within the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat in order
to enable Member States to take a decision in the matter.
97th plenary meeting
14 December /981

36/130.

Equal rights to work

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/ 155 of 17 December 1979, in
which it called upon Governments to take steps to ensure
the effective participation of women in the decision-making
process with respect to foreign policy and international economic and political co-operation, including steps to ensure
that they have equal access to diplomatic functions and that
they are represented in the United Nations and other international organizations,
Recalling also its resolutions 33/ 184 of 29 January 1979
and 34/ I 59 of 17 December 1979, in which it recommended
that States should envisage in their policies all appropriate
measures to create necessary conditions which will enable
women to participate in work on an equal footing with men,
Noting that in some countries legal and administrative
regulations hamper the possibilities of accompanying spouses
of members of diplomatic missions or consular posts and
of staff members of intergovernmental organizations to
work.
Concerned that women continue to be under-represented
in the professional staffs of international organizations. in-

"" N36/64 7 and Corr. I
10
' Ibid .. para. 13.

182

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

eluding the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
and are not always exempt from discrimination when they
are recruited,
Invites Governments in host countries to consider granting, when appropriate and to the extent possible, working
permits for spouses accompanying members of diplomatic
missions or consular posts and staff members of intergovernmental organizations.
97th plenary meeting
/4 December /98/

36/131.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any
distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social, economic and political processes of development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/ 180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolution 35/140 of 11 December 1980,
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the Convention, 106
1. Notes with appreciation that a significant number of
Member States have already ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women;
2. Welcomes with great satisfaction the fact that, as a
result, the Convention entered into force on 3 September
1981;
3. Notes further that an important number of Member
States have signed the Convention;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
status of the Convention.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981
36/132. International campaign against traffic in drugs
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 196 l, as amended by the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, 107 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 108
Concerned that, despite national, regional and international efforts, the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is increasing in many parts of the
world,
Recognizing that many States, including those that are
not producers or significant consumers of illicit narcotics,
are increasingly affected by the international drug traffic,

Bearing in mind that the extensive and increasing abuse
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in many countries is directly linked to the volume of the traffic in illicit
drugs into or through such countries.
Convinced that greater control over the production and
distribution of narcotic raw materials and the reduction of
the demand for illicit narcotics are necessary prerequisites
for reducing the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Aware of the links between drug trafficking and organized
crime, illegal acquisition of firearms, exchange control violations, customs offences, various forms of criminality and
other serious problems of a socio-economic nature,
Affirming the need for increased surveillance and stronger
penalties regarding the use of boats, aircraft and other means
of transport of any type for illicit traffic in drugs,
Acknowledging that constraints of an economic and technical nature are obstacles in many developing countries to
their fight against drug trafficking,
Convinced that any liberalization of national legislation
with regard to the illegal possession of and traffic in narcotics will have a negative effect on international efforts to
control the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs,
Conscious of the fact that drug abuse and the related
trafficking present a threat to the health and social wellbeing of peoples, particularly youth, and endanger the national security, resilience and future of many countries,
Mindful of the important role of an informed public opinion in the struggle against drug trafficking,
Bearing in mind United Nations programmes related to
combating the problem of drug trafficking, in particular the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 109
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive international campaign against traffic in drugs,
I . Recognizes the need for an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs in the context of the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, which would involve activities at the national, regional and international
levels, with particular emphasis on, inter alia:
(a) The enactment of effective national legislation and
the strengthening of existing legislation against drug abuse,
wherever necessary;
(b) The strengthening of regional efforts, with due regard to the specific problems and needs of each region;
(c) A review of the situation and needs of those States
that are primarily transit States;
(d) The provision of technical and financial assistance
to countries, particularly developing countries, whose limited resources are strained by their efforts to implement drug
abuse control programmes;
(e) The strengthening of law enforcement efforts and
increasing co-operation at the regional and international
levels;
(j) A comprehensive information campaign on the hazardous effects of the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the dangers of drug trafficking, and
on the positive achievements in this regard;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to Member States, relevant bodies of the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations
for comments and proposals on an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs and to report, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its thirty-seventh session;

106

A/36/295 and Add. I.
United Nations publication, Sale, No. E.77.Xl.3, p. n.
108
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.Xl.3. p. 7.
107

'"" See resolution Jh1 1h8 he low.
