S/2018/1030

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2018
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 5–7 October 2018
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 23 August 2018, the President of the Security Council informed
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that it had decided to send
a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 5 to 7 October 2018. The
terms of reference of the mission are contained in the annex to document S/2018/890.
The mission was co-led by representatives of Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Equatorial Guinea and France and comprised the following members:
– Verónica Cordova Soria
(Plurinational State of)

(Deputy

Permanent

Representative),

Bolivia

– Wu Haitao (Deputy Permanent Representative), China
– Gbolié Désiré Wulfran Ipo (Deputy Permanent Representative), Côte d ’Ivoire
– Job Obiang Esono Mbengono (Deputy Permanent Representative), Equatorial
Guinea
– Mahlet Hailu Guadey (Deputy Permanent Representative), Ethiopia
– François Delattre (Permanent Representative), France
– Kanat Tumysh (Deputy Permanent Representative), Kazakhstan
– Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi (Permanent Representative), Kuwait
– Karel Jan Gustaaf van Oosterom (Permanent Representative), Netherlands
– Francisco Tenya (Deputy Permanent Representative), Peru
– Joanna Wronecka (Permanent Representative), Poland
– Dmitry Polyanskiy (Deputy Permanent Representative), Russian Federation
– Olof Skoog (Permanent Representative), Sweden
– Stephen Hickey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
– Austin M. Smith, United States of America

18-19520 (E)

291118

*1819520*

S/2018/1030

II. Visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Meetings in Kinshasa
A.

Meeting with the Independent National Electoral Commission
2.
The President of the Independent National Electoral Commission provided an
overview of the activities conducted by the Commission in the past years and
confirmed that both the electoral calendar and the legal framework were in place for
holding the presidential, national and provincial legislative elections on 23 December,
as scheduled.
3.
Council members welcomed the commitment of the Government to holding
elections as scheduled and acknowledged the challenges of organizing elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They stressed that the aim of their visit was
to support the electoral process in full respect for the sovereignty of the country. They
welcomed progress made to date and noted the decision of the Government to take
full responsibility for organizing and funding the elections. They reiterated the need
for a credible and inclusive process and encouraged the Independent Nat ional
Electoral Commission to maintain dialogue with all parties with a view to addressing
remaining contentious issues in a constructive manner. Referring to the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic o f
the Congo (MONUSCO), Council members reiterated the Mission’s availability to
provide the Commission with technical and logistical support, should the Commission
wish to make use of that support, and asked whether the Commission could share
their technical and logistical plans to allow MONUSCO to provide appropriate
support, if and where needed.
4.
The President of the Independent National Electoral Commission, Mr. Nangaa,
insisted on the historic nature of the forthcoming elections as, for the first tim e, there
would be a peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He
expressed the view that insecurity, which prevailed in some areas, would not prevent
the elections from taking place on 23 December. He argued that all steps had bee n
taken to ensure a successful conclusion of the electoral process and he recognized
that two contentious issues remained, namely, the voter registry and the use of voting
machines. While acknowledging that the registry was “not perfect”, the President
stressed that the Commission had addressed the issue of voters who had registered
more than once and that the controversy over some 6 million voters registered without
fingerprints should not be considered as a real problem, as both the voter cards and
the voter lists included pictures of the voters. He explained that the Commission had
chosen to use voting machines rather than ballot papers because the former were cost efficient, reliable and the best option to hold presidential, national and provincial
legislative elections on the same day. The President clarified that the use of voting
machines could not be assimilated to an electronic vote but rather to a form of ballot
printing. He confirmed that counting, which would take place in the presence of
observers, would be done manually, and he underlined the critical role of national
observers in lending credibility to the process. He expressed appreciation for the
report on voting machines issued by the Westminster Foundation for Democracy and
stated that most of the recommendations therein were already being implemented.
The President welcomed technical assistance from MONUSCO and added that the
Commission would not see any inconvenience in the provision of logistical assistance
by the Mission. He explained that the Commission had recently requested assistance
from MONUSCO with a sensitization campaign, as well as with capacity-building
and the training of electoral agents stationed at the polling sites.

2/8

18-19520

S/2018/1030

B.

Meeting with the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
5.
Council members met President Joseph Kabila Kabange in the presidential
palace, in Kinshasa. They welcomed the progress made, in particular the decision of
the President to turn a page in the history of the Democratic Republic of the Co ngo
with a view to ensuring the first peaceful transition of power and stressed the
importance of holding free, fair, credible and transparent elections for the future
stability of the country. Council members also assured President Kabila of their
respect for the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They
underscored the need to create consensus around the electoral process, the importance
of international observation and the need for political space and freedom of
expression.
6.
President Kabila noted that, the last time that he had met the Security Council,
in 2016, he had expressed the hope that, at their following encounter, they would
discuss development-related issues rather than elections. He also recalled the first
time that he had addressed the Council, when his country was still invaded and only
a few military observers were deployed. Seventeen years later, his country was now
ready to take on the responsibility to deal with armed groups and organize elections.
He stated that his country had received plenty of international advice over the past
years and that, given their experience since the independence, it would now be time
to listen to Africa and its statesmen.
7.
President Kabila underscored that elections were an internal affa ir. In the light
of past elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, he expressed more concern
about what happened after the elections — stability, the development of the country
and the consolidation of the democratic process — than the elections themselves. He
reiterated his decision to organize the elections without international support “as a
matter of principle”. The Democratic Republic of the Congo had received assistance
from many different partners, which, rather than providing help, had crea ted what he
described as “havoc”. He stated that, since the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
taken this decision, the electoral process had been running smoothly and that the
elections would take place on 23 December. He added that they would be free, fair
and transparent, which was what the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deserved. Should the Democratic Republic of the Congo need any assistance, the
Government would make it known. In responding to questions and comments,
President Kabila mentioned that there was not much that the Government could do to
address the lack of trust in the electoral process, including the use of voting machines,
as people would always be afraid of technical innovation, noting that, even within the
presidential majority, there were individuals who had doubts about the technology.
With regard to political space, the President said that political rallies would be
allowed, provided that they were peaceful. He expressed the view that the issue of
freedom of expression should not be raised in a country with such a variety of media
outlets as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

Meeting with the Prime Minister and the Vice-Prime Minister,
Minister of Interior and Security
8.
The meeting was chaired by the Prime Minister and attended by the Head of the
National Intelligence Agency, the Deputy Chief General of the National Police, the
Diplomatic Adviser to the President, the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations and representatives of the military
intelligence service.

18-19520

3/8

S/2018/1030

9.
Security Council members reaffirmed their respect for the independence and
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and underscored the historic
nature of the forthcoming elections as the first peaceful transfer of power in the
country. They stressed the importance of credible, transparent and peaceful elections,
which would contribute to peace and stability in the country, the region and beyond.
Council members insisted on the need to reach a consensus over contentious issues,
such as the use of voting machines and the voter registry. They also advocated the
full implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement, including the
opening of the political space, respect for human rights, freedom of expression and
the right to manifest. Council members acknowledged the various challenges faced
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and congratulated the Government on its
effective response to the Ebola virus disease. They also welcomed progress made in
ending the recruitment of child soldiers. Referring to the mandate of MONUSCO,
Council members reiterated the availability of the Mission to provide logistical
support, as appropriate. They also stressed the importance for the Mission, notably its
force, to be fully equipped to implement its mandate with regard to the protection of
civilians, and they called upon the Government to facilitate the entry of MONUSCO
arms and ammunition into the Democratic Republic of the Congo to that effect .
10. The Government welcomed the Security Council’s visit, noting that, since the
deployment of the Mission, the Council had visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo almost every year. It added that the present visit was “extraordinary” in view
of the forthcoming historic elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
would lead to the first peaceful transfer of power. The Government underlined
challenges associated with organizing elections in a country with more than
40 million voters and expressed the view that the conditions for holding free and fair
elections were in place. It reiterated its decision to fully assume the holding of the
elections on 23 December and the importance of the international community ’s
support for the process. The Government sought to justify the use of voting machines
to address the challenges of organizing combined elections and reaffirmed the
independence of the Independent National Electoral Commission. It also underlined
progress made in the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
Regarding confidence-building measures, the Government stated that political actors
convicted of crimes could not be considered as political actors and dismissed the
excessive emphasis placed on the notion of inclusivity as unwarranted, saying that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo had a tradition of dialogue and power -sharing.
11. The Government referred to the sometimes “unhappy cooperation” with
MONUSCO, reproaching the Mission for violating fundamental princ iples, such as
the sovereignty of the host country, and for not always operating within the limits of
its mandate. It regretted the alleged interference of the Mission with public
demonstrations, as well as its patrols, which were not systematically coordi nated with
the national authorities. The Government added that MONUSCO had played an
important role over the past two decades, but that time had come for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to fully assume its responsibilities, including on
the security front. The Government suggested reviewing the collaboration with
MONUSCO in the light of emerging threats, such as terrorism in the Beni area.

D.

Meeting with the presidential majority (Front commun pour
le Congo)
12. Security Council members reiterated their respect for the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and underscored that they were not interested in
the outcomes of the elections but in the credibility of the process. They insisted on
the need to resolve differences through dialogue and called for the implementation of

4/8

18-19520

S/2018/1030

the 31 December 2016 political agreement, including through confidence -building
measures. They expressed concern that conditions for credible elections were not yet
in place and asked what steps the Government intended to take to address the situation
in a timely manner. They also insisted on the need to sensitize the population.
13. Members of the Front commun pour le Congo confirmed their commitment to
the vision of President Kabila to safeguarding peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They also confirmed the commitment of the Government to
implementing the 31 December 2016 political agreement and ensuring that elections
were held on 23 December. They insisted that elections were the only viable path out
of the current crisis but stressed that the practical modalities of the elections were the
prerogative of the Independent National Electoral Commission. They agreed with the
Council members that the deployment of observers in all polling stations would
contribute to enhancing the credibility of the elections. The Front commun pour le
Congo urged the Security Council to use its influence to impress upon those who
wanted to derail the elections or plunge the country into violence the need to desist
from carrying out their scheme.

E.

Meetings with members of the opposition
14. The meeting with the political opposition began with a minute of silence in
memory of victims in the Beni area. Council members commended the opposition’s
engagement in the December elections. They asked the delegates of the opposition
for their assessment of whether the conditions for credible elections had been met and
whether the political opposition intended to agree on a single cand idate.
15. The Union pour la nation congolaise spoke on behalf of the delegation, which
comprised members of the Dynamique de l’opposition, the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès social, Nouvel Élan, Ensemble pour le changement, the Mouvement de
libération du Congo and Synergie électorale notre Congo. The delegates of the
opposition informed the Security Council members that they were ready for the
elections of 23 December. They stressed, nevertheless, that conditions for inclusive,
free and transparent elections were not currently met. They underlined how persistent
insecurity prevented candidates from campaigning freely throughout the country.
They added that the Independent National Electoral Commission was subservient to
government authorities and that several issues risked undermining the electoral
process, notably the use of voting machines and the voter registry. On many
occasions, they denounced the disqualification of Jean -Pierre Bemba and Adolphe
Muzito as candidates and regretted the decision to prevent Moïse Katumbi from
entering the country to submit his candidacy. The delegates of the opposition also
questioned whether the Government had the means to fully assume the logistic and
cost of the elections, and the refusal of logistical support fr om MONUSCO.
16. The delegates of the opposition shared a memorandum with the Council ’s
delegation, in which they had identified a number of steps aimed at ensuring the
credibility of the process, namely, abandoning the project of using voting machines;
cleaning the voter registry; allowing the participation of candidates excluded from
the race for political reasons; implementing the confidence -building measures
outlined in the 31 December 2016 political agreement; deploying international
observers; allowing the provision of international financial, material and logistical
support for the election; deploying a regional force to secure the electoral process;
allowing the participation of MONUSCO in the entire electoral process; and
restructuring the Independent National Electoral Commission, including by replacing
the delegate from the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social. Those issues
notwithstanding, the delegates confirmed that the opposition would not boycott the
elections and that it would soon agree on a unique candidate with a single programme.

18-19520

5/8

S/2018/1030

F.

Meeting with female candidates
17. The Security Council delegation met with a group of 17 female candidates for
the national and provincial legislative elections, including the only female
presidential candidate.
18. The group, which comprised representatives from both opposition and
presidential majority political parties and groupings, asked the Security Council and
MONUSCO to work alongside the Government to reinforce the security of women
during elections (candidates, voters and observers). The representatives stressed the
importance of listening to female candidates, not only as candidates but also as
women. They welcomed the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Dr. Mukwege, as a
defender of women. They expressed concerns about ongoing reports of sexual and
gender-based violence, notably in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and stressed that violence against women was not limited to physical violence,
as women were consistently subject to discrimination and intimidation. They stated
that women were faced with additional challenges in politics, whether with regard to
campaigning in areas affected by conflict or to being given the space to participate in
the political life. Highlighting the fact that only 12 per cent of candidates were
women, they stressed that more remained to be done to support the participation of
women in the political process.
19. Some participants also raised concerns about the credibility of the electoral
process if the use of voting machines were to be pursued without a political
consensus. Mirroring the political divide in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there were at times clear divergences in views between majority and opposition
candidates, notably regarding the use of voting machines. The Security Council
delegation underlined the importance of the engagement of women in the political
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and suggested that women advocate
the implementation of the technical recommendations of the Westminster Foundation
for Democracy regarding voting machines before the Independent National Electoral
Commission. While most agreed that MONUSCO should remain in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo beyond the electoral process, some regretted that its presence
had not prevented a rise in insecurity in the eastern part of the country or human rights
violations.

G.

Meeting with the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo
20. Council members lauded the critical role of the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo (Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, CENCO)
as a facilitator of dialogue. They expressed concerns about the lack of consensus and
pervasive politicization of the electoral process and inquired about post-electoral
scenarios. They asked CENCO whether it would be ready to play yet another
facilitating role and sought advice on the role that the Council could play to contribute
to confidence-building and the holding of credible elections on 23 December.
21. CENCO highlighted positive recent developments, notably the fact that
President Kabila was not seeking a third term, and the overall adherence to the
electoral calendar. It also welcomed the holding of a demonstration by the opposition,
which had taken place without incident on 29 September. CENCO advised the
Security Council to continue to advocate the confidence -building measures laid out
in the 31 December 2016 political agreement, the facilitation of equal access to public
media for all stakeholders and the lifting of all restrictions to the holding of peaceful
demonstrations. It urged the Council to engage with the Independent National
Electoral Commission to seek consensus on the use of voting machines or revert to

6/8

18-19520

S/2018/1030

ballot papers, to clarify irregularities in the voter registry, including the removal of
those registered without fingerprints, to invite international observers such as the
African Union, the European Union, the Southern African Development Community
and the Carter Center, and to cooperate closely with MONUSCO on the deployment
of logistics and the transport of the electoral kits. CENCO also provided information
on its activities to train and deploy some 40,000 observers, who included young
people.
22. CENCO expressed concerns about continuing insecurity in Beni, Ituri,
Tanganyika and Kasai compounded by the recent outbreak of Ebola, which would
have an impact on the electoral process. It called for a joint MONUSCO-government
plan to secure the national territory during the electoral process. While expressing
concerns about the post-electoral situation, given current tensions and polarization,
CENCO advised against a postponement of the elections, arguing that this would
create additional challenges. It added that all must be done to ensure a peaceful
transfer of power.

H.

Meeting with representatives of civil society organizations
23. Council members met with a group of representatives of civil society
organizations, including women rights groups, young people activist movements and
human rights organizations, and asked for their views on the current political, security
and humanitarian situation. Stressing the responsibility of the Government with
regard to security and humanitarian matters, Council members asked how their visit
could contribute to improving the current state of affairs.
24. While stressing the importance of the elections in leading to a successful
transfer of power, representatives of civil society nonetheless questioned whether the
elections in themselves would effectively improve the lives of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They stated that the population had little
confidence in the process and limited hope in its outcome. They expressed concerns
about the current polarization of positions, notably on the use of voting machines and
the voter registry, which prevented the population from fully trusting the electoral
process. They questioned what the Independent National Electoral Commission could
do now that it had not been able to do in the past two years. Civil society organizations
further warned that ill-organized elections could lead to large-scale violations of
human rights and recommended that the Security Council take measures to end
impunity, such as through the imposition of sanctions against political actors from
both the ruling majority and the opposition. In conclusion, the civil society
organizations assessed that holding elections within the current climate of mistrust
and persisting divergences could exacerbate the prospect of ch aotic elections. They
said that Politicians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were not ready for
holding elections on 23 December and that the United Nations must step in to ensure
a credible process and secure the elections.
25. Representatives of civil society organizations based in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo denounced the continuing insecurity and
expressed their frustration that the situation had not improved despite the presence of
MONUSCO. They alerted Council members that young people were still being
recruited by armed militias and that women continued to be sexually abused. The civil
society organization based in Beni cited the ongoing massacre of the civilian
population in Beni as illustrative of what they said were insufficient efforts by the
United Nations. They called for the effective reinforcement of MONUSCO to protect
civilians and prevent further insecurity, notably in the post -electoral period. They
regretted the fact that the Intervention Brigade of the f orce had not met the
expectation that it would neutralize armed groups effectively, and they suggested

18-19520

7/8

S/2018/1030

reinforcing the MONUSCO community alert networks and for the Mission to develop
joint plans with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address
the threats of armed groups and militias.

I.

Briefing by the MONUSCO senior leadership and the
United Nations country team
26. Throughout their visit, Council members were briefed by MONUSCO on its
activities and the challenges to the implementation of its mandate, notably with regard
to supporting the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement and
the protection of civilians. The Council members welcomed the good offices provided
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to diffuse tensions and promote confidence -building among all political
stakeholders. They also welcomed the Mission’s strategy for the comprehensive
protection of civilians and the ongoing reconfiguration of the Mission. Council
members also met the United Nations country team, which highlighted the
considerable humanitarian and development challenges that would likely remain in
the post-electoral context. The country team expressed the view that the dev elopment
assistance formulation process provided an opportunity for the United Nations to
identify ways to achieve the expected results and to develop concrete proposals for
joint interventions in support of the nexus among humanitarian and development
interventions, recovery and peacebuilding. According to the country team, the process
also provided an opportunity to reflect on the transfer of responsibilities from
MONUSCO to the Government and the country team. They suggested that the
MONUSCO exit strategy be considered as a reconfiguration of the presence of the
United Nations rather than a transfer of tasks.

J.

Press conference
27. The visit ended with a press conference, during which the co -chairs of the
mission shared with the press the conclusions that the Security Council had drawn
from its mission.

8/8

18-19520
