TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

18 APRIL

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

. . , . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

of Senegal . . . . . . . . , , I . . , . . , . . . + . . . . . .

1

. . . . : . . +, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

agenda (S/Agenda/l413/Rev.l)

Welcome

to the representative

Adoption

of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic
Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia,
Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco,
Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454)
,..............,.,...........................

S/PV.1413

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 18 April 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

like to stress with particular satisfaction that friendly
relations are developing between the Soviet Union and
Senegal, and this is a source of particular gratification to me
as I welcome him here as the representative of a friendly
country.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translatedfrom French): I thank
YOU, Mr. President, for your kind words of welcome to the

Security Council,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 3Ftev.l)

5. In renewing my associationwith you-whom I have had
the opportunity to meet over the years in the course of
your many journeys to Africa and during my own official
visits to the Soviet Union-and as I join my other colleagues
on the Council, I should like to assure you of the same
loyal co-operation that I have alwaysgiven in other United
Nations bodies. At the same time, I wish to reaffirm that
the people of Senegal,its Government and its President will
continue to co-operatewith the United Nations towards the
realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter, in
particular the maintenance of international peace and
security.

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963
addressed to the President of the Security Council on
behalf of the representatives of thirty-two Member
States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454).

Adoption of the agenda
Theagendawasadopted.
Questionconcerningthe situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters dated2 and 30 August 1963 addressedto the
President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives
of thirty-two MemberStates(S/5382 and
S/5409):
Letter dated12 March1968addressed
to the Presidentof
the Security Councilby the representatives
of Algeria,
Botswana,Burundi, Cameroon,Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast,Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania,Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda,Senegal,SierraLeone,Somalia,Sudan,Togo,
Tunisia,Uganda,UnitedArab Republic,United Republic of Tanzania,UpperVolta andZambia(S/8454)

Welcome to the representative of Senegal

1. The PRESIDENT (translated fram Russian): Before the
Council proceeds to the consideration of the item on its
agenda, may I be permitted, on behalf of the members of
the Security Council, to extend a cordial welcome to our
new colleague, the representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Boye. It gives us great satisfaction to welcome him here and
to express the hope that, by our joint efforts, we shall
co-operate in examining and taking appropriate decisions
on all the items which the Security Council will be
considering.
2. We all well remember the close co-operation that we
had with his predecessor, Mr. Diop, whom we had the
honour and pleasure to greet and also to bid farewell
recently. I am sure that this excellent tradition will
continue in the future.

6. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom ‘Rus&n): In conformity with the decisions taken previously by the Council
during the discussion of this item last month, and if I hear
no objection, I shall invite the representatives of Jamaica
and Zambia to take places at the Council table to
participate without vote in the Council’s debate on this
question,

3. In welcoming the representative of Senegal in my
capacity as representative of the SOVIET UNION, I should
I

At the invitation of the President,Mr. L. M. H. Bamett
(Jamaica)and Mr. J. B. Mwemba (Zambia) took placesat
the Council table.

7. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):The Security Council will now resume discussion of the question of
the situation in Southern Rhodesia, which was last considered at the 1408th meeting of the Council on 26 March
1968.
8. Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to draw
the attention of members of the Council to the draft
resolution of 16 April [S/8545] submitted by the delegations of Algeria, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan and Senegal.

the people of Southern Rhodesia for their freedom and
independence, we urge the Council to act under Chapter
VII of the Charter and to take effective,measures that will
bring the rebellion of the racist minority regime to an end,
IS. The course of action recommended in the operative
part of our draft resolution can be summarized under three
main headings. First, the selective sanctions authorlzed
previously by the Council have proved inadequate, as
indeed many of us had foreseen at the time. In view of the
failure of selective sanctions, the Council must now agree
on effective measures of comprehensive mandatory sane.
tions and must, to that end, call on all States to severall
economic and other relations with the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia. That, in our view, is the only
way by which the racist regime can be made to feel the full
impact of its isolation from the rest of the world. The
Council must call upon all States to carry this decision on
total and mandatory sanctions, and to do so in accordance
with their obligations under the Charter.

9. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): On behalf of
the delegations of Algeria, India, Pakistan, Senegal and my
. own country I have the honour to present the draft
resolution already submitted and distributed in our name
[S/8545/. The document is so self-explanatory in what it
sets out to suggestand is so much on the lines of the policy
statements the sponsor delegations have already made i 14. Second, our experience with selective sanctions has
during the present debate that it becomes hardly necessary shown that it is not enough for the Council to decide on
to explain it in great detail. We believe that the text speaks any such measures without at the same time envisaging
pre’:entivl: steps which have to be taken in order to
for itself and, that being our assessment, my short
statement of introduction v&l aim only at underlining some eliminate counteractions on the part of those that are bent
of the points that we consider to be basic to the graveissue on undermining the Council’s efforts. It is obvious that the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia could not have continued
with which we are confronted.
without the overt and covert sustenance of South Africa
10. The draft resolution rightly and properly starts by
and Portugal; and since the Governments of those two
countries show no sign of a change of heart, the Council
recalling the previous decisions taken on this question both
should not only condemn them for their past acts of
by the General Assembly and by the Council. In so doing, it
seeks to establish continuity and consistency in all action
defiance but also forestall the possibility of future misbehaviour by deciding to take resolute and effective action
that is to be taken by the United Nations, and notably by
the Security Council, which according to the Charter has in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
should those two countries persist in defying the authority
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of internaof the United Nations by any further attempt to frustrate
tional peace and security.
and undermine the Council’s efforts in this regard.
11. The sponsors firmly believe, as indeed they have
believed from the very beginning, that the main responsi- 15. We also urge the Council to call upon all Member
bility for enabling the people of Southern Rhodesia to
States, and in particular those which are the trading
exercise their right to self-determination and independence partners of South Africa and Portugal, to assist and
is one that falls on the United Kingdom as the administerco-operate effectively in the implementation of the measing Power. In so far as the United Kingdom has failed to
ures to be called for by the Council’s decision on
take effective action to bring the Rhodesian rebellion to an
comprehensive mandatory sanctions. The Council’s permaend, it must naturally bear the responsibility for the
nent members have, of course, a special responsibility in
continuation of the rebellion and for the tragic conse- this regard, and the sponsors feel that more needs to be
quences that it has had. This, in our view, is a responsibility
done in the area of implementation and follow-up if the
from which the United Kingdom cannot escape,And, while
efforts of the Council are to be as effective as they are
doing everything that can help expedite the process by
intended. We feel that the Council should study and agree
which the rebellion can be brought quickly to an end, the
upon some effective mechanism that would enable it to
Council must urge the United Kingdom to use all the means ensure full and effective compliance with its decisions.
at its disposal, including the use of force, to end the
rebellion, thus restoring to the people of Zimbabwe their
16. Last but not least, the United Kingdom as the
rights to freedom and independence.
administering Power must be the principal pilot of this
project. No amount of pleading based on the excuse of
12. Those, in short, are the central considerations that
economic crisis at home or of withdrawal from a predomihave formed the basis for the course of action that we nant role abroad can extricate the United Kingdom
recommend in our draft. Basing our whole approach on the
Government from this brave and historic responsibility.
decisioni taken by the Council so far, emphasizing the
Through an ill-conceived policy which amounted to sheer
primary responsibility of the United Kingdom Government
neglect and indifference to the legitimate rights of the
for the aggravation of the threat to international peaceand
indigenous peoples, followed by an attitude of indecision
security that the rebellion and its consequenceshave come
and inaction in the face of a clear case of rebellion in a
to create, and recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle of
Territory under its full responsibility, the United Kingdom
2

to a situation in which 4 million Africans are
virtual prisoners of an armed racist minority r6gime that
has the audacity to defy the authority of the United
Nations
and to challenge the very prerogative of the British
CrQ~n. Thus the United Kingdom is paying a high price for
the inadequate and indecisive policy it has chosen to follow
So far, and surely it will continue to pay that price, in terms
Of both conscience and national pride, until and unless this
Shameful and ridiculous rebellion is brought to an end.

19. With those few explanatory remarks, I wish to
commend the draft resolution contained in document
S/8.545 for the consideration and approval of the members
of the Council.
20. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): As a
result of informal consultations among members of the
Council, there appears to be general agreement that time is
necessaryfor a more detailed study of the draft resolution
submitted by the five sponsoring delegations, and that
discussion of this item should be continued at the next
meeting of the Council. Consequently, it is anticipated that
the date of the next meeting on the question of Southern
Rhodesia will be announced following consultation among
the members of the Security Council. In view of the
importance and urgency of this item now before the
Security Council, the members of the Council agree to be
prepared to hold a meeting of the Council at any time in
the near future.

17.
The United Nations and the international community
will no doubt assist in expediting this process, but it is for
the United Kingdom as the administering Power to wake up
to its responsibility, even at this late hour, in order to repair
the
wrong done to the African majority of Southern
Rhodesia by quickly and effectively undoing that which has
been
done and by thus bringing freedom and justice to
those for whom Britain has responsibility and trust.
18.
I cannot end this statement without reiterating the
fim
conviction on our part that, in this as in other areasof
the colonial struggle, freedom is bound to win in the end;
of this we have no doubt, The question is whether the
United
Kingdom and the world community will live up to
their
duty and responsibility. Whatever happens, the gallant
people
of Zimbabwe will continue their struggle for
freedom,
fortified by the knowledge that in their struggle
we of the African and Asian world, and all progressive
forces
of mankind with us, shall stand by the freedom
fighters
in Southern Rhodesia, as in the rest of southern
Africa,
for as long as it will take to wipe out the curse of
racial
oppression from the face of our continent

21. If all members of the Council agree to this, and if
there are no objections we shall adjourn today’s meeting.
It was so decided.

22. The members should bear in mind that the Council
will meet at 3.30 p.m. today to consider the admission of
Mauritius to the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

3

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUELICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

mcly be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PIJELICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der Nations
Unies
sent
d6positaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vow
Notions
Unies, Section der venter, New York

HAK IlOJlY’iMTb

M3AAHMfi

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

Nations,

New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairies
et les agences
ouprbr
de votre librairie
ou odrersez-vow
6:
ou Genive.

06bEAMHEHHblX

OPrAHM3AuMM

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publieociones
de las Nacioner
Unidas
erthn
en todor partes del mundo.
Conrulte
o w librero
Ventas, Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

throughout
New York

HAUMW

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfar
y casas distribuidorar
o dirijote
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccilin

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (dr equivalent

in other currencies)

de

35422-September

1972-2,100
