United Nations

S/PV.6178

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6178th meeting
Wednesday, 5 August 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-44283 (E)

*0944283*

S/PV.6178

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Morocco,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Serbia, South
Africa, Sweden, Tunisia and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and General Martin Luther Agwai,
Force Commander for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. I will begin by making a few
remarks at the outset.
I should like to start by welcoming the two
Under-Secretaries-General, Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra. In their recent non-paper on peacekeeping,
entitled “A new partnership agenda: Charting a new
horizon for United Nations peacekeeping”, they have

2

spoken about the need to set a new horizon for United
Nations peacekeeping — one that will help meet the
challenges of today and tomorrow. I hope that today’s
debate will make some contribution to achieving that
objective.
I am also very pleased that we have with us today
General Martin Agwai, Force Commander of
UNAMID, to provide a perspective from the field.
Effective delivery on the ground has to be at the centre
of our efforts to review peacekeeping — in the
Security Council, in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, in the General Assembly and
elsewhere in the United Nations system. I thank
General Agwai for his attendance today.
I also welcome his colleagues, the commanding
officers of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
who between them represent and command around
100,000 United Nations peacekeepers around the
world. I pay tribute to them and to the men and women
they serve with — military, police and civilian — and
thank them all for their contribution to peace and
security around the world.
United Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership. Our peacekeepers help fragile nations
emerge from conflict to find new stability. They are a
scarce asset, demand for which continues to grow. The
United Nations system has a responsibility to ensure
that United Nations peacekeepers are deployed to
maximum effect in the places where they are needed
most.
The initiative that the United Kingdom and
France launched in January sought to ensure that the
Security Council could play its part to best effect. In
the early stages of our work, we have focused on the
strategic oversight of peacekeeping operations, seeking
to ensure that mandates are credible, achievable and
measurable. And we have sought ways to improve
information sharing and consultation with the countries
that contribute troops and police.
At the same time, the increasing scale and
complexity of peacekeeping have stimulated a dialogue
among Member States and the Secretariat — a dialogue
that has already produced important proposals from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support which warrant our further
reflection.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

This work has generated some initial progress on
which we now need to build, working within the
Security Council and beyond, in close cooperation with
the wider United Nations system. Our objective today
is to hear the views of colleagues from across the
United Nations membership, record and review
progress to date, and identify common elements of a
way forward.
I now invite Mr. Le Roy to address the Council
on this subject.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Obviously, it is an
honour to be once again before the Security Council in
a debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations at
this important juncture in their development. I will be
brief because I have had the opportunity twice in recent
months to present our thoughts on the future of
peacekeeping operations and since, as you said, Sir,
our non-paper on the New Horizon initiative was
issued on 17 July. Like you, I wish to highlight the
presence today of nearly all of our commanding
officers, who have been attending a seminar all this
week. I welcome them here with us today.
Next year will mark a decade since the
publication of the landmark report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations led by Ambassador
Brahimi (S/2000/809). This is clearly an important
moment for the Security Council and all Member
States to take stock of progress and the challenges
ahead.
Certainly, the Brahimi report and the subsequent
reform efforts have served us particularly well. United
Nations peacekeeping has become stronger and more
effective. Without these improvements, the United
Nations could not have kept up with the massive
growth in demand for peacekeeping. There have been
setbacks since the Brahimi report, such as in Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo, but we
have managed to move beyond them relatively quickly.
We have built on lessons, good and bad, from the field.
Much of this progress has been the result of the
consistent support of the Member States, and the
guidance provided by the Security Council and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has
been the basis for strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping.
Within the Secretariat, the “Peace Operations
2010” internal reform sought to further professionalize
our work. The restructuring of the Department of

09-44283

Peacekeeping
Operations
(DPKO)
and
the
establishment of the Department of Field Support
(DFS) in 2007 aimed to strengthen the organization
and management systems at Headquarters. In 2008, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations produced a
document entitled “United Nations peacekeeping
operations: principles and guidelines” — better known
as the Capstone Doctrine — which set out the elements
that DPKO considers key for the successful conduct of
peacekeeping operations. It reaffirms the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping — consent,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and defence of the mandate. It underscores the
importance for peacekeeping operations of having, by
definition, a peace to keep, a political process to
support and an integrated approach bringing together
the United Nations family on the ground.
Yet we are all aware that the current scale and
complexity of United Nations peacekeeping require us
to review where we stand and to reinvigorate our
partnership. The British-French initiative in the
Council, the work of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which is chaired
by Japan, and the various initiatives of individual
Member States in 2009 reflect that collective
awareness. Our discussions have helped us to
collectively identify some of the most urgent of these
challenges.
First, it is increasingly tricky, as the Council
knows, to find sufficient the personnel, equipment,
senior leaders and even political leverage to meet the
scale of our activity.
Secondly, we need a shared vision on the use of
United Nations peacekeeping — on the conditions in
which peacekeeping operations are an effective tool
and the circumstances in which they are not. We face
the challenge of translating that shared vision on the
ground so as to protect civilians, defend against attacks
on peace, and assist countries and Governments to
recover from conflict.
Thirdly, we need effective transition strategies.
Once we have achieved early stabilization, we must
ensure that a strong and sustained collective recovery
effort follows so that peacekeeping missions can
transition and withdraw.
With that in mind, during the Security Council’s
debate on 29 June (see S/PV.6153), Under-SecretaryGeneral Malcorra and I called for a renewed

3

S/PV.6178

partnership among peacekeeping stakeholders. The
President referred to this call in his earlier remarks.
Each and every one of us — the Security Council, the
General Assembly’s Special Committee and Fifth
Committee, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and, of course, the Secretariat — has an
essential role to play. Each is indispensable, and we are
mutually responsible to one another to deliver on our
respective roles.
We look forward to pursuing our dialogue with
members of the Security Council and to continuing a
similarly rich dialogue with bodies of the General
Assembly, in particular the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
(spoke in English)
To help facilitate this dialogue, DPKO and DFS,
as the President mentioned, issued the New Horizon
non-paper on 17 July. This non-paper is part of the
New Horizon process to reinvigorate the peacekeeping
partnership. It outlines a wide range of peacekeeping
challenges that can be met only through effective
partnership. Let me very quickly draw the Council’s
attention to some of them.
First, the non-paper highlights the importance of
effective partnership for strengthening the planning of
peacekeeping operations. We need to improve the
quality of assessments and we can do so only through
enhanced information sharing.
The Secretariat must also present to the Council a
full range of options so as to enable the Council to
authorize achievable mandates. Here too, the non-paper
stresses the importance of enhanced consultation and
communication. Effective planning depends upon
peacekeeping partners clearly indicating, early on,
where and how they might be able to assist in the
preparation of an operation.
Secondly, the non-paper looks at some of the
ways in which a revitalized partnership can improve
the management and oversight of peacekeeping
operations. It highlights the need to strengthen
command-and-control systems at every level, including
through more robust accountability frameworks
between Headquarters and mission leaders. It also
proposes stronger consultation and interaction with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) at all levels to
ensure a common understanding of what may be

4

demanded of personnel on the ground, particularly in
robust peacekeeping scenarios.
Thirdly, the non-paper identifies three policy
areas where the peacekeeping partnership is currently
not united, which is creating very real operational
dilemmas for our missions today. These are robust
peacekeeping, protection of civilians and critical
peacebuilding tasks for peacekeepers. We urgently
need to build a common view on the role of
peacekeepers in these areas, how they are translated on
the ground, and what tools we need to do that.
Fourthly, we need to shift from a focus on
numbers to ensuring that the necessary capability is in
place. Such a capability-driven approach would have
wide-ranging implications for how we source
equipment and compensate Member States for it, for
the standards we establish for personnel and tasks, for
training support for newer TCCs and for
inter-operability with regional organizations. This
focus on capabilities for delivery also underpins much
of the thinking behind the Support Strategy of the
Department for Field Support (DFS), which UnderSecretary-General Malcorra will discuss shortly.
There is certainly a full agenda of issues which
will depend on mutual vision and effort. The
Secretariat, for its part, has sought through the New
Horizon to identify ways that we ourselves can better
deliver on our responsibilities. I would like to conclude
by focusing on several commitments highlighted in the
non-paper that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and DFS intend to hold ourselves
to.
With respect to the planning and monitoring of,
and reporting on, United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we are making several commitments.
First, we commit to provide the Security Council
with thorough assessments of situations into which a
new peacekeeping operation may be deployed and to
present proposals for the full range of support that
might be considered to assist with mission deployment.
We commit to consult with the Security Council
and contributing countries in advance of the
deployment of technical assessment missions and to
debrief on their findings.
We are committed to enhancing meaningful
dialogue with troop and police contributors in the
planning for new and ongoing missions and to ensuring

09-44283

S/PV.6178

that the Security Council receives, through the reports
of the Secretary-General, a clear assessment of the
views received by the Secretariat from those
contributing countries in advance of mandate renewal.
We will review, improve and streamline our
reporting procedures to ensure that priority information
requirements of the Security Council and troop
contributors can be met within the resources we have
available, and we will explore options for mutual
information-sharing in support of peacekeeping
missions.
We will continue our work to produce appropriate
and high-quality benchmarks for missions, driven by a
comprehensive understanding of conditions on the
ground, and to research best practices in
benchmarking, in close cooperation with all parts of
the United Nations family that contribute to building
peace after conflict.
The issues that I have highlighted are only some
elements of a broader dialogue we hope to develop and
sustain with members of the Security Council, with
troop- and police-contributing countries and with our
regional and United Nations partners on the full gamut
of recommendations in our recently circulated nonpaper. The DPKO and DFS non-paper is, as we always
say, the start of a dialogue, not the end.
We sincerely hope that the months leading to the
tenth anniversary of the Brahimi report can be used to
build a new vision among all stakeholders in the
peacekeeping partnership on how best to build on the
foundations laid for United Nations peacekeeping
nearly a decade ago. I am confident that in the coming
months we can arrive at a revitalized partnership that
sets out a common vision for United Nations
peacekeeping and a shared commitment to strengthen it
in order to serve the men, women and children who
depend on it today and tomorrow.
The President: I am very grateful to Mr. Le Roy
for his briefing. I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: Mr. President, allow me to start
by thanking you and this Council for providing this
forum for discussion of matters of significance for our
work to better serve the peacekeeping and political
field presences serviced by the Department of Field
Support (DFS). Allow me also to welcome our force
commanders to this forum, because I think their
presence really adds value to our discussion.

09-44283

Alain has already referred to the work done in the
New Horizon document. DFS has worked closely with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in
the creation of this non-paper. As the Council knows,
one of the key enablers of the New Horizon non-paper
will be the Support Strategy. We started to discuss this
Strategy with the Council at the Council retreat earlier
this year, and we intend to maintain close consultations
with Member States throughout the process. Our
overarching goal is to provide improved support
services with quality, speed and efficiency, and we
believe that there are clear opportunities to achieve
these goals.
I am absolutely convinced that DFS must
improve its response to the evolving and increasing
needs for support, and to do so in a holistic manner.
The need to develop an agenda ambitious enough to
tackle these demands and to give all parties involved
the opportunity to engage in a good conversation
underpins our efforts. Throughout the process, DFS
will develop options, outline opportunities to improve
and present sound business plans to support the
decision process.
With this in mind, on Monday 3 August, we
issued to all Member States a mid-point non-paper on
the Support Strategy, which should be in your hands by
now. This non-paper follows the release of the New
Horizon document and is aimed at taking stock of our
strategic thinking, while we start work on detailed
proposals and business cases, including cost-benefit
analyses. We anticipate that this process will culminate
in a report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, next spring.
Some matters for discussion will have, in one
way or the other, implications for rules, regulations and
resource management, which will require review and
endorsement for change by the Member States. The
approval of the intergovernmental bodies will be
sought in due course to achieve the support
transformation envisioned.
The DFS Support Strategy non-paper reflects a
high-level view and a fresh approach to supporting
field missions. It also builds on the tools approved by
the General Assembly to improve our operations. The
development of this work takes into account the
following key drivers.
The first is the need to update the regulatory
framework to strike the right balance between the

5

S/PV.6178

demands for effective delivery and the demands to
comply with rules and regulations. As it is
unacceptable to excuse ourselves using the imperatives
of the operational demands to justify shortcuts, it is
also unacceptable to hide behind the existing
framework without questioning its continued
applicability and, where relevant, without seeking the
appropriate empowerment to do our job better. Quite
often, support operations are hindered by processes
that have not been revisited for a long time or have not
been adjusted to the current realities on the ground and
to a fast-paced operational tempo.
Secondly, it is imperative to strike a balance
between the risk to mandate delivery associated with
delays in mission deployment and the risks stemming
from increased operational empowerment. It is easier
to measure the financial exposures than to measure the
risk of not meeting the needs of the individuals we
serve. We must do more to find the right balance.
These proposals will have to go through an appropriate
risk management analysis and will involve putting in
place the necessary mitigating measures.
Thirdly, there is a need to protect our personnel
and to ensure appropriate living and working
conditions in the mission, while maximizing safety and
security. Concepts such as modular delivery and the
delivery of support from regional service centres will
achieve clear benefits in terms of effectiveness and
efficiency. We expect that they will also lead to a
reduction in the quantity of support staff required in
difficult and unsafe locations.
Fourth is the need to recognize that missions go
through a life cycle and that key investments at critical
stages can have a sizeable effect on the ability of
missions to show real results in shorter time spans.
Again, we anticipate that this approach should result in
increased efficiency and a more strategic investment of
scarce resources.
Fifth and last, there is the requirement to ensure a
more productive impact on the environment in which
we operate by contributing to the local or regional
development of industry and individuals and by
ensuring that the footprint is ecologically mindful and
environmentally sensitive.
The elaboration following these drivers will be
framed by the views expressed by Member States a few
weeks ago during the adoption of the peacekeeping
budgets regarding the balance between ambitions and

6

the availability of resources to achieve them. We are
conscious that all of this work requires that solid
business cases be constructed to inform the decisionmaking and strategic direction.
We will seek guidance from Member States in the
following key areas.
The first area is the establishment of a new
support framework for service delivery in field
operations, a framework based on a clear distinction
between functions of a strategic and policymaking
nature to be performed at Headquarters and repetitive
transactional tasks that can be more effectively and
efficiently delivered closer to the field operations they
are designed to serve.
Second is the adoption of standardized mission
support models to improve deployment timelines,
achieve economies of scale and facilitate oversight and
the responsible stewardship of the resources of
Member States.
Third, we will seek guidance on the
implementation of responsive resource management.
We are striving for a model that allows improved
flexibility to allow greater asset-sharing and allocation.
This will also include a more effective approach to
managing staff, ensuring their development and
facilitating mobility across locations.
It is indeed too early for us to provide a detailed
report at this juncture. We are working closely with all
our implementing partners and stakeholders within the
Secretariat to further develop this mission.
In conclusion, let me stress that support is not an
end in itself. My Department has service delivery at its
core. We must not lose sight of our ultimate purpose,
which is to better serve those dedicated men and
women charged with the daunting challenge of
securing a fragile peace in war-torn countries. All our
efforts will be dedicated to realizing this mission, and
we count on the Council’s support and guidance to get
there.
The President: I thank Ms. Malcorra for her
briefing and for the work that she and her Department
have been doing on this very important topic.
I have the pleasure to give the floor to General
Agwai, Force Commander for the United NationsAfrican Union Mission in Darfur.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

General Agwai: Good morning. I am deeply
honoured to have been invited here to address this
prestigious forum.
We have just heard from two Under-SecretariesGeneral about the importance of identifying a new
horizon for peacekeeping. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
encapsulates the full range of challenges facing modern
United Nations peacekeeping missions: the role of
critical enablers, deployment challenges, robust
peacekeeping, the protection of civilians, logistic
support and all the other issues addressed, which are at
the very heart of UNAMID.
I come here as a simple soldier and would like to
take this opportunity to speak to the Council candidly
at the end of my posting to Darfur. It has been an
extraordinary two years, and it has been a privilege to
end my 40-year military career with such a challenging
mission.
I was first posted to Darfur in July 2007 as the
Force Commander of the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS), which was basically an observer
mission with only eight infantry battalions and a
strength of just about 7,000 sparsely deployed
personnel. From those early days we have had to
confront the consequences of the lack of critical
strategic enablers in peacekeeping, whether in the
African Union or the United Nations.
One example is the lack of military helicopters.
In the attack on the AMIS camp at Haskanita in
September 2007, 10 peacekeepers lost their lives on the
spot and 2 more died in hospital. We could not fly
many of them out until the following day because of
the lack of helicopter resources. Sadly, UNAMID is
now approaching its second anniversary without these
vital enablers that can make such a difference to the
safety and security of our personnel.
Another one of those enablers is robust
communication lines. The well-executed ambush of a
UNAMID patrol in July 2008 resulted in the deaths of
seven more peacekeepers. One of the first rounds fired
destroyed the patrol’s only VHF radio, and the first
information that the base camp had about the attack
was when the survivors limped in some six hours later.
Again, helicopters could have played a critical role in
bringing the injured to safety.

09-44283

The lack of specialized capabilities is critical in
difficult and dangerous operating environments. Even
the most experienced United Nations hands who were
brought to help us after the transfer of authority on
31 December 2007 agreed that Darfur presents logistic
challenges that go well beyond those that United
Nations peacekeeping operations regularly face. The
roads were no more than muddy tracks; the airfields
were too short to allow large aircraft such as Antonov
124s to land; the railway was single-track, and the
climate was brutal. The rate of deployment has been
affected. The first new troops did not arrive until May
2008.
Nevertheless, we have made progress. By the end
of this month, we should have 74 per cent of the total
19,555 troops on the ground. This is one of the factors
behind the positive shift in attitude towards UNAMID
among the local population and the significant number
of civilians moving towards the UNAMID camps.
Yet, as the New Horizon non-paper makes clear,
effective deployment is not just a question of total
numbers of the ground. It is about the right types of
capabilities arriving in the right sequence. As
UNAMID’s integrated deployment plan illustrated,
sequencing of deployment — logisticians, engineers
and medics first, as the United Nations Light and Heavy
Support Packages, and new battalions thereafter —
makes sense. But UNAMID also demonstrates that this
is often very difficult in practice. Even now, there
remain significant shortfalls to effective operating
capacity of the mission.
The longer it takes to establish initial operating
capacity, the more difficult it is to focus on practical
mandate implementation. We are now beginning to
look at this at UNAMID. Here, the New Horizon
document makes an essential point as to the importance
of peacekeepers with adequate pre-deployment
training. In particular, we need to continue developing
patrol skills if we are to extend UNAMID’s area of
influence.
At present, we are like 32 ink spots on a very
large piece of blotting paper. Each spot must grow and
be connected to the others. That means considerably
longer patrols, ranging from base for several days at a
stretch. Many of the troops deployed do not currently
have the skills, discipline and equipment required for
this type of patrolling. This, in turn, puts further strain
on UNAMID to establish in-mission training units.

7

S/PV.6178

I attended the Conference on Robust
Peacekeeping organized by the Office of Military
Affairs in May 2009. Darfur typifies the kind of
environments that often demand a robust response
capacity. It is a complex internal dispute with many
diverse players. It affects the most vulnerable —
women and children. As the Brahimi report asserts,
peacekeepers “must be prepared to confront the
lingering forces of war and violence, with the ability
and determination to defeat them” (S/2000/809, p. viii).
From my experience as Deputy Force
Commander in Sierra Leone from 2000 to 2002,
wherever the United Nations deploys, civilians have an
expectation that it will provide protection. We are
achieving that, but we need the tools with which to do
it, including those critical enablers that I mentioned
earlier. We also need well-trained troops and effective
command and control. If we are to be robust, there
must also be an acceptance of the risk of casualties,
and we will need to redouble our efforts to protect
mission and civilian personnel in the face of these
risks.
I should say, however, that a robust posture is not
only a matter of training, equipment or force strength,
important as they are. It is first a matter of the attitude
and resolve of the mission. When the Sudanese army
and the forces of the Justice and Equality Movement
squared off over control of Muhajeriya in late January
and early February 2009, UNAMID’s small contingent
there risked being caught in the crossfire and was by
no means in a position to directly impact the military
situation. But by refusing to leave the town and its
inhabitants, it sent a potent message to both parties and
thereby contributed to averting direct hostilities.
A mission such as UNAMID demonstrates the
importance of partnership and interaction between all
the parties involved. The tripartite mechanism between
the African Union, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan, which focuses on
deployment, logistical and administrative issues, is an
effective one. I am particularly grateful to UnderSecretary-General
Susana
Malcorra
for
the
commitment she has made to keeping those meetings
focused, and to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for pushing the process forward.
But it does not stop there. In Darfur, we have to
liaise daily with the parties on the ground — the State
leadership, the Walis, the umdas, the Government of

8

the Sudan police and military liaison, the sheikhs, the
sheikh of sheikhs — and the list goes on. Failure to
include any one of those can result in delays in
deployment, stalled projects or obstructed patrols. It
remains a real challenge for operational effectiveness.
This has been a remarkable two years for
UNAMID. We have made significant progress on the
ground and the end of the deployment is at last in sight.
This is a major achievement, and I have faith that when
we are fully deployed, we will make a difference to the
men and women of Darfur, who have suffered so much
for so long. The burden of expectation upon us is high,
but we owe it to them to deliver.
On a personal note, may I thank all Council
members for their unflinching support throughout my
tenure. It has been an absolute privilege to be the Force
Commander of such a challenging mission.
The President: I thank General Agwai for his
briefing and his outstanding service to the United
Nations over the past several years. We are very
grateful to him for everything that he has done
personally. We also thank the entire team at the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I take this opportunity again to thank all the
commanders of the peacekeeping missions who are
here for their annual conference and have taken time
out from that to attend our meeting this morning. I
know they have to move on in 10 minutes’ time or so,
but we are very glad to have them here. On behalf of
the Council, I should just like to thank them all, and all
the men and women of their missions, for the
outstanding work they do for peace and security around
the world.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council. In accordance with the understanding
reached among Council members, I wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
wish to thank the delegation of Uganda for the skill

09-44283

S/PV.6178

and effectiveness with which it presided over our work
last month.
I welcome the broad participation in this meeting,
particularly on the part of the major troop-contributing
countries, and the presence of the force commanders in
the field. I also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and General Agwai for
their very clear briefings. I also associate myself with
the statement to be made shortly by my Swedish
colleague on behalf of the European Union.
Much has changed since the beginning of United
Nations peacekeeping and the establishment of the
earliest forces, such as United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization and the First United Nations
Emergency Force. The goals remain the same,
however. Unfortunately, many of the structural
difficulties also remain the same. Some of those
difficulties have even increased due to the number and
scope of United Nations operations.
The Security Council, which shoulders the
primary responsibility for peace and security, must
always strive to make responsible decisions that reflect
the desired goals and enable their effective fulfilment
as quickly as possible and in acceptable human and
financial conditions.
In any crisis situation, the operations we launch —
after having done our utmost to avoid doing so through
preventive action — must be carefully thought out and
constructed in the context of a comprehensive strategy
taking into account the specific nature of each crisis
and the complexities of its management, root causes
and settlement. Peacekeeping operations must be
structured around precise, clear and hierarchical
mandates and be sustainable in the long term. To that
end, they must enjoy the support of all Council
members and draw on adapted and sufficient financial,
human and technical resources. They must also be
supported by all the other peacekeeping components of
the system, be it the troop-contributing countries, the
primary financers of United Nations budgets and the
organs and agencies that, in the field or at
Headquarters, have a key role to play in ensuring the
consistency and effectiveness of our actions.
While most challenges are recurrent, many
solutions are equally so. As has already been
mentioned, a rereading of the Brahimi report, the
“Peace Operations 2010” report (A/60/696) or
statements released by the Council since 1994 shows

09-44283

them to be as relevant as ever. Although no past
attempt at reform has been sufficient in and of itself,
all such attempts have been useful milestones in the
development of peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations record is impressive. Allow me to say —
solemnly, humbly and with restraint — that we can be
collectively proud of that record. Together, we have
learned from our failures and the tragedies of the past.
In short, we have assumed our responsibilities.
In that respect, I reiterate our admiration of and
gratitude to all United Nations personnel, particularly
all those civilian and military staff members who risk
their lives in the field every day.
Along with you, Sir, in January we launched a
common initiative to enhance the effectiveness of the
Security Council in peacekeeping. As we engage in our
first stocktaking, I would underscore two sources of
satisfaction.
First, we feel that the French-British initiative has
led to intense activity that we believe to have proven
extremely fruitful already. Reports, debates, seminars
and statements have abounded in recent months. The
unalloyed enthusiasm and earnest that have been
expressed have been commensurate with the stakes. We
must draw on the initial conclusions of this work so
that we can transcend rhetoric and change our working
methods as soon as possible.
The second source of satisfaction in recent
months is the fact that we have begun to change our
practices in a concrete way. We have set up quarterly
meetings with the Secretariat to take stock of the
overall difficulties encountered in peacekeeping. We
have enhanced our dialogue with the troop-contributing
countries, thanks in particular to the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations chaired by Japan. We have
begun to extend the so-called political/military
meetings operation by operation, and we have launched
the slow process of updating planning documents and
of extending the establishment of the benchmarks
necessary to ensure genuine follow-up for operations.
Many of these elements can be put in place with
ease; others with more difficulty. But changes are
occurring, and for that I would like to congratulate and
thank all our counterparts in the Secretariat,
particularly the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support, which have been able to
adapt to the new way of working, which we consider to
be the most effective, and to the new relationships that

9

S/PV.6178

the Security Council seeks to establish with all actors
in the system.
Much remains to be done, however. We are
preparing to adopt a statement that underscores the
challenges we face, of which I would like to highlight a
few. We need to further strengthen our strategic followup of operations, while considering, inter alia, specific
ways of increasing the Council’s military expertise. We
also need to ensure that the Secretariat can plan and
undertake operations in an increasingly effective
manner, particularly through adapted rules of
engagement.
We also need to deepen our thinking, particularly
through an open dialogue with troop-contributing
countries, non-governmental organizations and United
Nations specialized agencies on such sensitive issues
as the protection of civilians, combating violence
against women, especially sexual abuse, and
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers. We
recognize that if Blue Helmets are to be effective, they
must be able to take robust action, while taking into
account the risks to which such actions may sometimes
expose civilians.
We also need to enhance our work on resources
and budget performance, while ensuring that, when the
Council takes its decisions, it has a clear understanding
of their operational and financial impact. We must
continue to work to expand available capacities and
regularly review the strategy, balance, composition and
size of ongoing operations.
Lastly, we must enhance our capacity to
implement complex mandates. It is essential to
strengthen the interaction of the Security Council and
the Secretariat on questions concerning the police,
judicial and rule of law components of operations. That
will require us to prepare exit strategies as soon as we
begin to draft mandates, in particular with respect to
the economic, social and political recovery and
reconstruction of societies, which have often been
devastated by conflict. We know well that, if we wish
to establish lasting economic development, only the
rule of law and the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedom can ensure a permanent return to
peace.
We must work to ensure better integration of
these various components in New York, Geneva and
the field. From that standpoint, the implementation of
the conclusions on system-wide coherence is

10

fundamental. To accomplish all this, it is clear that the
Council should rely more on the Peacebuilding
Commission in its central component and its countryspecific configurations, with the specific aim of
serving as a focal point and venue for discussion
among all actors involved — the authorities of the
countries in conflict, members of the Council and the
General Assembly, troop-contributing and donor States,
senior officials of funds and programmes, and agency
representatives.
The momentum is under way. Our next meeting is
set for the end of 2009. Until then, the Council may
rest assured that France will spare no effort to ensure
that we make progress in the implementation of our
road map.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Malcorra and General Agwai for their very
helpful briefings. I want to join you in expressing how
honoured we are by the presence of so many United
Nations force commanders and chief military observers.
We are deeply grateful for their leadership and
sacrifice. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank again all the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their invaluable contributions.
As the Council may recall, the United States
outlined its overall approach to the challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping on 29 June at this
Council’s thematic debate on peacekeeping, convened
by Turkey (see S/PV.6153). Therefore, today I would
like to restrict myself to five brief points.
First, my Government greatly appreciates the
efforts that the United Kingdom and all fellow Council
members have made on today’s presidential statement.
It is the product of several months of increased
attention to United Nations peacekeeping, which the
United Kingdom and France helped generate early this
year. Important discussions have also been held in the
Security Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and in the General Assembly’s Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by
Japan and Nigeria, respectively. Turkey and Canada
have helped to advance the debate through initiatives
and efforts of their own. We thank these Member States
and, again, the troop, police and financial contributors,
who have all been involved in formulating the
presidential statement.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

In adopting today’s presidential statement, we
will increase the chances of success of peacekeeping
operations both now and in the future. In that
statement, we have committed ourselves to providing
missions with clear, credible and achievable mandates.
We have pledged to think carefully before establishing
new missions that may lack the resources needed to get
the job done or may have to operate in conditions illsuited to success. We have resolved to resist the
temptation to simply roll over mandates when they
expire.
These are important steps. We have agreed to
reflect seriously on the progress that has been made
and the obstacles that remain to ensure that we can
make any necessary adjustments. But, as we have
noted before, the United States will not support the
arbitrary or abrupt downsizing or termination of
missions.
Secondly, the presidential statement acknowledges
that both the Security Council and the Secretariat must
do a better job of consulting with troop- and policecontributing countries, especially when adopting new
mandates or renewing old ones. The troop and police
contributors bring a wealth of experience to these
discussions, and they deserve to have their concerns
heard and heeded. This is one of the most important
messages we have taken away from discussions in the
Council’s previous thematic debates, its Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and the General
Assembly’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Thirdly, the United States appreciates the efforts
that the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support have made to advance the debate on the
future of United Nations peacekeeping. The recently
issued non-paper, “A new partnership agenda”, rightly
reminds us that we are all in this together. While the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat
and individual Member States each have distinct roles
and responsibilities, success in peacekeeping depends
on our collective unity of purpose and effort.
In the non-paper, one key partner, the Secretariat,
is appealing for help in energizing faltering peace
processes, rallying missing capabilities, meeting local
capacity-building and peacebuilding needs, considering
new business models for mission planning and support,
and clarifying such key concepts as robust peacekeeping
and the protection of civilians.

09-44283

As I have said before, the United States remains
ready to do its part, and we will receive new ideas with
an open mind. We look forward to in-depth discussions
over the coming months on the proposals in the New
Horizon non-paper and in the companion draft field
support strategy that was circulated this week. We are
reviewing both documents with great interest, and we
are ready to work closely with all involved to further
develop these proposals.
At the same time, we look to the Secretariat to do
all it can to improve mission leadership and
management, strengthen personnel and procurement
systems, achieve economies and savings, prevent
waste, fraud and abuse and clarify the roles and
responsibilities of United Nations actors at Headquarters
and in the field.
Fourthly, the United States is ready to act on both
the spirit and the letter of the presidential statement
and the New Horizon non-paper. The mandates of
United Nations missions in Liberia, Haiti and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will come up for
renewal over the next few months. We welcome early
dialogue with troop and police contributors on these
missions. We also welcome early recommendations
from the Secretariat on actions that the Security
Council and Member States can take to increase the
chances that mandates will be successfully
implemented and that missions can be drawn down
responsibly at the appropriate time.
Finally, while the United States will be appealing
to all Member States to do more for United Nations
peacekeeping, we are also asking more of ourselves.
That includes, importantly, meeting our financial
obligations. On that note, I was pleased to make the
case for United Nations peacekeeping on Capitol Hill
last week, while acknowledging its shortcomings and
underscoring the United States’ commitment to
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
I was also honoured to be able to thank the
United States Congress for the funding it has recently
appropriated. The United States is now in a position to
clear all its peacekeeping arrears accumulated from
2005 to 2008 and to meet our obligations in full for
2009, which are currently estimated at approximately
$2.2 billion.
We remain ready to invest in United Nations
peacekeeping, even in a time of economic crisis,
because this truly global enterprise serves a shared

11

S/PV.6178

interest and offers millions of people the prospect of a
more secure, prosperous and dignified future. We look
forward to working closely with our fellow Council
members and with all interested parties to forge an
even stronger partnership, and we look forward to
working together to make United Nations peacekeeping
more effective in the twenty-first century.
The President: I believe that General Obiakor
and his fellow commanders now need to leave. I thank
them again for their presence here for the past hour and
for all their work. I ask them to convey our thanks to
all the men and women of their missions.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month. We are confident that your
wisdom will make it possible for us to achieve the best
results. I would also like to thank you for having
organized this important debate on peacekeeping
operations and congratulate Ambassador Rugunda and
the delegation of Uganda for the excellent way in
which they conducted the Council’s work last month. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their excellent
briefings.
My delegation supports the statement to be made
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I will therefore simply raise a
few points here. I will be brief.
Major efforts have been made to reform the
planning and management of peacekeeping operations.
This began with the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
which was followed by the “Peace Operations 2010”
report, the restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the establishment of the
Department of Field Support. The work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has guaranteed
the follow-up to and assessment of that report.
We hope that today’s debate will enable us to
achieve concrete results by establishing a broad
partnership that includes all actors. That partnership
should benefit from the expertise and experience of
troop- and police-contributing countries in improving
the planning of peacekeeping operations and from our
consideration of how we can strengthen their
effectiveness within the framework of clear, achievable
and consensual mandates.

12

We believe it is high time to broaden the
participation of troop-contributing countries in
peacekeeping operations so that more developed
countries can contribute troops, financial resources and
materiel, and peacekeeping operations can have the
weapons and equipment they need to function.
We reiterate that the establishment or renewal of
a mandate must be in line with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and based on
the guidelines agreed between the various parties.
The growing demand for peacekeeping requires
us to consider enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations so that the
latter are encouraged to play a greater role in
peacebuilding and in preserving peace. There is no
doubt, in this connection, that the African Union, with
Libya as its Chairman, is at the forefront of these
regional organizations, first because most current
armed conflicts are in Africa and, secondly, it has its
own peacekeeping mechanisms. Indeed, the African
Union created the Peace and Security Council, is
playing a growing role in the area of peacekeeping and
has launched numerous initiatives that deserve support
and encouragement. We therefore reaffirm the need to
continue to implement the joint action plan between
the African Union and the United Nations for shortand midterm peacekeeping capacity-building. We would
also like to strengthen direct cooperation on capacitybuilding for the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Finally, we reaffirm that successful peacekeeping
is based on a given mission’s full deployment and on a
parallel active political process involving all parties to
a conflict, in which they express their willingness to
reject violence and their commitment to dialogue in
order to resolve their differences. We believe that the
draft presidential statement before us will contribute
enormously to peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): Allow me to begin my
statement, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. I also express my appreciation to
Ambassador Rugunda and his staff from the Ugandan
mission for the excellent manner in which they
conducted the work of the Security Council for the
month of July.
I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra
and General Martin Luther Agwai for their very
extensive briefings on peacekeeping operations.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

As they mentioned, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been among the most important tools
for the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security. In spite of the harsh operational
environments in which they are deployed, United
Nations peacekeeping missions are making a difference
by improving the lives of people in countries emerging
from conflict.
Their success notwithstanding, the entire system
of peacekeeping operations is faced with various
challenges, which must be addressed through a holistic
approach. We welcome the ongoing efforts in this
regard in various forums within the United Nations,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat, as well as those under way outside
the United Nations system. We consider it imperative
to formulate practical and concrete steps to address
issues pertaining to peacekeeping as a whole. We need
to have an open mind in this discussion in order to
achieve an outcome leading to more effective
peacekeeping operations in the future.
For this timely debate today, we would like to
touch upon three areas in which enhancement is
required: policy review of peacekeeping operations;
cooperation with troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs); and troop
capacity and assets.
Regarding policy review by the Council, we
would like to raise two points. First, it is important for
the Council to have a comprehensive understanding of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and to review
them in a holistic manner. To that end, we consider it
useful to establish the practice whereby the Council
would periodically review, in an interactive manner, its
policy on peacekeeping operations, based on briefings
by the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support.
Secondly, as my delegation pointed out in the
recent open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding (see
S/PV.6165), the Council needs to explore more
precisely the extent to which the mandates of
peacekeeping missions could be expanded to include
such peacebuilding activities as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the establishment of
democratic governance and the rule of law, and
capacity-building. If some of those peacebuilding
activities are to be carried out by other entities, we

09-44283

need to consider how peacekeeping missions can
coordinate effectively with those activities.
The further enhancement of the interaction
between the Security Council and troop- and policecontributing countries is required to achieve more
effective mission operations in the field. The Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations was
established to serve as a forum to strengthen
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders. As Chair of the
Working Group, we have invited troop- and policecontributing countries and other stakeholders to three
meetings this year to address gaps between mandates
and their implementation.
In the meetings, the Working Group was briefed
by the Secretariat and sought first-hand feedback from
the TCCs and PCCs on conditions on the ground. We
take this opportunity to thank those countries that have
shared their valuable experience and ideas with the
Working Group. We reported the outcome of the
meetings in the interim report of the Working Group
that was submitted to the President of the Security
Council at the end of last month. We plan to continue
the discussion in the Working Group in order to begin
efforts for the enhancement of cooperation with troopand police-contributing countries and other stakeholders.
In that regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to touch upon the following two points.
First, as suggested in the New Horizon non-paper, we
would consider it useful to create a so-called coalition
group to support each peacekeeping mission. Our
confidence in the utility of that approach is based on
Japan’s experience as a member of the core group on
Timor-Leste. Garnering broad support among the
countries concerned, including regional partners and
donors, contributes greatly both to the actual operation
of a mission and to supporting the political process.
Such practices could be applied to other peacekeeping
missions.
Secondly, in May, the Council held a meeting
with the troop- and police-contributing countries of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste on
beginning the transfer of police authority. That is a
good example of an occasion for the Council to hold
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
not only at the time of mandate renewal, but also when
there are new developments in the field. Such
interaction is particularly important for the early

13

S/PV.6178

engagement of the TCCs and PCCs. We believe that
this precedent should also be applied to the operation
of other missions.
Finally, the enhancement of troop capacity and
assets and logistical support is indispensable in order
for a complex mandate to be implemented successfully.
Although we have seen positive progress in that area,
such as the enhancement of information gathering for
the protection of civilians in the United Nations
Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the activities of peacekeeping training
centres in Africa, many participants in the Working
Group have pointed out the need to address the
inadequacy of troop mobility, including the need for
aerial assets, as well as the enhancement of
communications. Those issues are also touched upon in
the New Horizon non-paper. We would like to follow
up those issues from various perspectives, including
through the work of the Working Group, in conjunction
with the efforts of the Secretariat.
We hope that those political and operational
issues will continue to be addressed in the Council
towards the formulation of an enhanced strategy on
peacekeeping operations. As Chair of the Working
Group, Japan will continue its efforts to reinforce the
work of the Council through in-depth consideration of
those operational issues. We intend to resume the work
of the Working Group this autumn, with a focus on the
enhancement of cooperation with troop- and policecontributing countries, while also taking up other
priority issues.
Japan highly appreciates the efforts of the United
Kingdom in the preparation of the draft presidential
statement of the Security Council. We will actively
engage in the follow-up of that presidential statement.
The President: I thank the Ambassador of Japan
for his delegation’s leadership of the Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to extend to you, Mr. President, and the
United Kingdom delegation our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like to thank
Ambassador Rugunda and the Ugandan delegation for
their effective leadership of the work of the Council in
July.

14

I thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra
and General Martin Luther Agwai for their detailed
briefings, and the force commanders who have left the
Chamber for their presence. Viet Nam supports the
statement of the Non-Aligned Movement, to be
delivered by the Ambassador of Morocco.
Through more than six decades that witnessed
radical transformations in the international security
environment, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have evolved into a versatile tool and a credible
response of the Organization to deterring or reversing
protracted conflicts and to helping the affected countries
move towards a steady state of stability. Today, with
116,000 personnel deployed in 15 missions,
peacekeeping is shouldering a unique spectrum of
integrated, multisectoral and multifaceted mandates
that extend far beyond the traditional task of ceasefire
monitoring and involve a wider partnership of
international and national stakeholders.
Since the beginning of the new millennium,
however, the exponential growth in the number, scope,
size and cost of peacekeeping operations has
overstretched the United Nations capacity to deliver on
all tasks. The prolongation of intra-State conflicts and
their transboundary dimensions have brought about
challenges associated with personnel management,
logistical support, quality assurance, oversight and
political engagement, while there is little sign that the
demand for complex, multidimensional missions is
decreasing. Against the backdrop of the global
financial crisis, the mismatch between costs and
capacities, which vary across operations, and the
disconnect among those who take decisions on
peacekeeping operations, those who implement them,
those who allocate resources, those who have to
implement decisions on the ground and recipient
countries are factors that, in varying degrees, add to the
complexity of the problems faced.
For the shared objective of making United
Nations peacekeeping work better, over the past couple
of years Member States have come up with several
important initiatives on policy issues and capacitybuilding, including the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
the 2010 reform agenda, the restructuring of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
establishment of the Department of Field Support.
Efforts are also being undertaken by the Fifth
Committee, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Commission, United

09-44283

S/PV.6178

Nations agencies and programmes, and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations. As an internal
review to help configure United Nations peacekeeping
to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow, the New
Horizon non-paper calls for a global partnership in
purpose and action for the future and proposes
recommendations that cut across the entire life cycle of
a mission.
In the context of the multiplication of proposals
already available, we consider that the merit of any
new initiative or process should be carefully gauged in
the context of the ongoing reforms and discussed in an
open and transparent manner. Thus, we can ensure
coherence and the best possible results and, in
particular, gain a correct understanding of and
appropriately carry out such cross-cutting tasks as the
protection of civilians, robust operations and
peacebuilding activities.
We underline the importance of ensuring the best
possible unity of command, lines of accountability,
integration of efforts, and the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeepers through every phase of
the relevant reforms. In that process, the establishment
and performance of mandates should always be carried
out in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and such universally
recognized principles as the consent of the parties, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, total
impartiality, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, and non-interference in their
internal affairs.
The wider United Nations membership and
international partners can also have a role to play in
such endeavours. Troop- and police-contributing
countries, most of which are non-aligned and
developing nations, should be involved early and fully
in all aspects and stages of peacekeeping so as to
contribute their expertise and experience to the
decision-making process both at Headquarters and in
the field. The comparative advantages and inputs of
regional organizations could be further exploited within
the framework of Chapter VIII in order to reinforce the
effectiveness and synergies for peacekeeping.
As part of a comprehensive approach to latent
conflicts, peacekeeping can be neither a panacea for
the problems related to international peace and security
nor a substitute for the local political process, which
should be strengthened by national reconciliation

09-44283

efforts and the full realization of peoples’ potential.
That in turn would alleviate the situations of already
overburdened missions.
Peacekeeping operations are not intended
primarily to engage in reconstruction or to rebuild the
countries in which they are deployed, as other
specialized organizations and institutions can carry out
such activities more efficiently. In order to achieve
sustainable peace, the root causes of conflicts must be
resolved by engaging all involved parties on the basis
of dialogue and peaceful dispute settlement and by
finding long-term solutions to the comprehensive
political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of the problems in question.
Depending on the specific circumstances and
context, preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution, and peacebuilding, if used appropriately,
can have more desired effects and less-costly solutions.
Accomplishing that will mean integrating the New
Horizon initiative with the recently issued reports of
the Secretary-General on mediation and early recovery,
strengthening the relationship between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, and enhancing the critical role of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Finally, we thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for the draft presidential statement, which
we support.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening today’s Security Council
meeting on the critical issue of United Nations
peacekeeping. We listened very closely to the briefings
by Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra,
who introduced the New Horizon non-paper prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. We thank General Agwai
for his valuable comments, which were based on his
practical experience in one of the most complex
peacekeeping operations. We intend to carefully study
the proposals and recommendations set out in the
non-paper, particularly since many of them require
further analysis.
A preliminary look at the New Horizon non-paper
shows that, in general, it contains an adequate
assessment of United Nations peacekeeping. It can
serve in principle as a good basis for the formulation of
practical recommendations to enhance the effectiveness

15

S/PV.6178

of peacekeeping activities. All peacekeeping reform
measures must be aimed at enhancing the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Improving United Nations peacekeeping is a
fundamental challenge. It involves improving the
quality of peacekeeping operation management, more
effectively utilizing the resources of regional
organizations and building the capacities of the United
Nations itself with regard to all key dimensions of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We should update the practice of conducting
operational consultations among Security Council
members, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on all aspects of peacekeeping operation
activities. In that regard, we wish to draw attention to
the need to implement existing cooperation
mechanisms, as referred to in the note by the President
of the Security Council dated 14 January 2002
(S/2002/56).
Many of the ideas set forth in the New Horizon
document appear to be timely. Undoubtedly, the
Security Council must develop clear and feasible
mandates for its operations. In that regard, it is
important that mechanisms be established for adjusting
them in accordance with developments in the situation
on the ground. We support the idea of formulating
criteria for the alteration of mandates and benchmarks
for the drawdown of peacekeeping operations.
The report rightly highlights the need to expand
the number of United Nations peacekeeping partners
through enhanced dialogue with regional organizations.
Experience has shown that active utilization of the
capacities of regional mechanisms is effective if their
activities are carried out in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and if their relationship with the Organization,
including the Security Council, is guided by the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter. There is no
doubt that strict respect for the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security is essential.
The United Nations should increase its
interaction with other regional structures as well. We
believe that good opportunities in that area lie in
improving the cooperation between the United Nations
and such traditional partners as the African Union and
the European Union, as well as organizations that are
actively gaining experience, such as the Shanghai

16

Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
Particular attention should be accorded to the
problem of ensuring the level of military expertise
necessary for the implementation of Security Council
decisions. Although the New Horizon non-paper
unfortunately overlooks that issue, there is still room
for further work in this area. We support the idea of
involving military experts from members of the
Council in reviewing and agreeing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, it is our view that the work of
the Security Council on the military aspects of
peacekeeping should be further systematized. In that
context, we believe that the Russian proposal that the
composition of the Military Staff Committee be
expanded to all 15 Security Council members remains
fully relevant and essential.
We welcome the Secretariat’s intention to more
systematically implement the provisions of Security
Council resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001),
which concern measures to increase the interaction
among the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat.
Further study should be devoted to the strategic
vision for United Nations peacekeeping. It is not clear
how, in practice, United Nations partnerships will be
formed; how the division of labour and coordination
will be undertaken; or how the number of troopcontributing countries and the resource base will be
expanded. The ideas of increasing the staffs of
Secretariat structures and establishing standby and
permanent units have already been discussed
repeatedly but, unfortunately, have yet to be
implemented.
The idea of establishing informal coalitions of
interested actors in support of specific country
missions, referred to today by a number of delegations,
needs further clarification. How will the informal
status of such coalitions relate to their involvement in
addressing the issues of mission budgets and resource
support?
Another issue concerns the designation of
technical assessment missions when planning
specialists are already present on the ground. Further
study should be devoted to the parameters for the new
strategy of field support.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

We also need to determine the feasibility of the
concept of robust peacekeeping. That will require the
expansion of peacekeeping mandates, which is not
always warranted, and an even further increase in the
peacekeeping budget, rather than its optimization.
We do not believe that the initiative aimed at
greater flexibility in financial resource management is
fully justified, as we understand that it would involve
the consolidation of peacekeeping operation accounts.
That could lead to an overallocation of funds, which in
turn would undermine the already established financing
system for each specific mission.
We await more detailed information on the
Secretariat’s ideas to optimize the system of field
support, specifically with regard to procurement
mechanisms. We would like to emphasize the
responsibilities of the Secretariat in terms of improving
the comprehensive planning of operations and
coordination between Headquarters and the field.
Russia attaches great importance to the role of
United Nations peacekeeping in the maintenance of
international peace and security and is moving to
increase its participation in peacekeeping operations.
Russian peacekeepers are taking part in operations in
the Middle East, several regions of Africa, Haiti and
Kosovo. A Russian helicopter unit is operating in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. Another Russian
air group is deployed in the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. The training of
African specialists in Russian specialized training
institutes has proved to be of great utility.
We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for preparing the draft presidential statement
on peacekeeping, which we support. At the same time,
we would draw attention to the fact that the draft
focuses insufficient attention on the role of the General
Assembly’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and on the need to intensify the activities of
the Military Staff Committee and implement the
mechanisms of cooperation with the troop-contributing
countries, as provided for in the note of the President
of the Security Council dated 14 January 2002.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing our thanks for the
briefings of the Under-Secretaries-General Malcorra
and Le Roy. We also welcome the presence of General
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and thank him for

09-44283

his briefing, which stressed the need for the Security
Council to improve its interactions with force
commanders in the future.
I would also like to thank your delegation, Sir, for
having organized this debate. I acknowledge your joint
initiative with the French delegation this year to
promote the discussion within the Council on how to
improve its ability to plan, mandate, manage and assess
peacekeeping operations.
The concept paper circulated by the delegation of
the United Kingdom allows us to take stock of the
progress made by the Council since January, including
the intensified effort to interact with the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), especially through the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations chaired by Japan.
In many cases, we have seen improvement in the
interaction at the technical level between Council
members and the Secretariat, especially through the
meetings of political and military experts. We also
welcome the more consistent use of benchmarks, which
are valuable tools for assessing progress in missions.
Lastly, this open debate and those held under the
French and Turkish presidencies have given the
Council an opportunity to review the general
challenges of peacekeeping operations in conjunction
with the TCCs and PCCs, whose participation in these
debates is crucial.
The debate of 29 June (see S/PV.6153) made it
clear that there is a consensus on the need to broaden
and deepen interaction between the Council, the TCCs
and PCCs, and the Secretariat. Having determined that
this is a common objective, we must now discuss and
welcome practical proposals to improve consultation
among all actors and commit the Council, the troopand police-contributing countries, and the Secretariat
to making better and more consistent use of existing
mechanisms. We must continue the practice of holding
private meetings established in accordance with
resolution 1327 (2000) well in advance of mandate
renewals. We also must participate more actively in
these meetings on the basis of more operational and
timely information provided by the Secretariat. In that
respect, we support the proposals contained in the New
Horizon document for improving the quantity and
quality of communication and reports from the
Secretariat. We are grateful to Mr. Le Roy for his
commitment to these measures.

17

S/PV.6178

This year, we have observed that the level of
interaction and participation of the troop- and policecontributing countries has been greater and more
substantial in the meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations than in the private meetings
of the Council with the troop-contributing countries.
This experience leads us to suggest that the Council
make greater use of the consultation mechanism
identified in the note of the President of the Security
Council dated 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) or of the
meetings between the Working Group and the troopand police-contributing countries on specific operations.
My country also supports the emerging practice
of holding meetings between the political and military
experts of the members of the Council and the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Field
Support. Such meetings should also be planned in
advance of negotiating mandates in order to give the
opportunity to members of the Council to interact with
the Secretariat and receive inputs so as to ensure that
the mandates respond to operational, logistical and
political realities on the ground.
In recent weeks, we have worked alongside other
members of the Council to draft a presidential
statement that brings together many of the elements
that I have pointed out and proposes a series of steps
and commitments. As with other Council resolutions
and statements, the most important thing will be to
translate words into deeds. Costa Rica will work with
other delegations in order to make sure that these
commitments are fulfilled.
Costa Rica values the flexibility with which the
Council can operate and the many instruments it has at
its disposal. However, we would like to stress the need
to use more inclusive tools. The Council must be more
creative and seek tools that promote inclusiveness,
transparency and interaction. We believe that we must
consider how we can promote interaction with host
countries and increase communication with the force
commanders, as we have done today with General
Agwai. We must also use tools whose general purpose
would be greater interaction with other actors, which
would allow the Council to take more informed
decisions and ensure more effective implementation of
its decisions.
I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings on the New Horizon

18

document and the support strategy. Costa Rica believes
that the document is a solid basis for seeking a new
consensus on United Nations peacekeeping.
My delegation generally supports the valuable
and relevant recommendations outlined in the New
Horizon document, and we hope to discuss them in
greater depth in the future. In particular, we support the
recommendations aimed at defining a clear and
comprehensive vision for the responsible transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. From the initial
stages of the life cycle of a mission, the Council must
incorporate elements necessary to building sustainable
peace, such as the promotion of social and economic
development, security sector reform and strengthening
the rule of law, while it seeks to build and strengthen
national capacities. In this respect, we support greater
interaction between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Costa Rica is working on and remains committed
to the need to strengthen consensus on policies that
define the implementation of mandates, such as the
protection of civilians. We intend to have substantive
discussions on this matter within the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as well as
within the Council under the Austrian presidency in
November. We hope that we can review the
recommendations and conclusions of the joint study
that has been commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO on
the implementation of mandates for the protection of
civilians.
I conclude by highlighting the approach contained
in the New Horizon document with respect to the idea
of partnership. It is on the basis of this partnership that
the success and legitimacy of peacekeeping operations
can be better prepared.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra, for their
presentations. We also wish to thank General Agwai,
Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We welcome the United Kingdom initiative to
hold this debate, which gives us the opportunity to
continue our collective consideration within the
Organization, in various formats, on how to enhance
the effectiveness and fulfilment of the objectives

09-44283

S/PV.6178

involved in peacekeeping operations, as well as on
efforts directed toward the future.

military, police, rule of law and peacebuilding aspects
of an operation, among other things.

We welcome the document that serves as a basis
on which to shape a new horizon for peacekeeping
operations. We believe that particular attention should
be given to the proposal to establish a new partnership
agenda that would incorporate three elements: first,
strengthening the unity and cohesion of the actors
involved in the management, planning and
administration of peacekeeping operations; secondly,
giving greater credibility to operations; and thirdly,
strengthening their capacity so that they can continue
to be an instrument that would guarantee global peace
and security. We will continue to carefully study the
recommendations, which are based on strengthened
conversions of partnerships around the purpose, action
and future of United Nations peace operations.

As we pointed out during the debate that took
place under the Turkish presidency of the Council in
June (see S/PV.6153), it is also important to keep the
contributing countries informed in the process of
planning and analyzing peacekeeping operations, as
that would broaden and enrich the vision of those
operations and enhance their viability by incorporating
those countries’ knowledge, experience and good
practices. Likewise, we feel it is a priority to promote
the Council’s strategic partnerships with regional
organizations and other organizations in the field.

During the debate last January under the French
presidency (see S/PV.6075), my delegation underscored
the need to identify the areas where we need greater
action, as well as the good practices that could be
implemented in future, given the growing complexity
of the international situations that face peace
operations today.
In that connection we reiterate five aspects that
we believe are crucial and that we wish to raise today.
These are, first, the centrality of the decision-making
process for the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation; secondly, specific political guidelines in the
mandates that help define the conditions that will
determine the success of a mission; thirdly, the
multidimensional character of the operations and the
nature of conflicts, in order to seek collective
approaches founded on different types of cooperation
based on greater coordination at the level of
programmes and strategies; fourthly, the importance of
protecting the civilian population as an essential
element in the effort to strengthen peace operations;
and lastly, the need to establish an effective planning
and coordination mechanism.
The complexity of peacekeeping operations
reflects the need to seek greater and more flexible
mechanisms for complementarity and coordination
among the different bodies and with other entities in
the area of peacekeeping. We need to intensify the
Council’s interaction with the Secretariat during the
initial stage of designing the different mandates and
during the deployment of a mission, including the

09-44283

Mexico has been stressing the importance of the
fact that in order to ensure the credibility and
legitimacy of the United Nations, it is necessary to
establish peace operations that enjoy the military,
financial and political resources that enable them to
comply with their mandates in the terms that we have
described. Likewise, it is also important to have
updated information on the development of the
activities set out in the mandates and on the assessment
and viability of the operation in the circumstances that
it confronts.
We feel that the briefing sessions that we have
had with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support since the start of
the year have been very valuable, as have the meetings
with the main troop-contributing countries in the
framework of the working group chaired by Japan.
Along these lines, we support the holding of
frequent interactive sessions with the different actors,
primarily at the expert level, during the analysis that is
carried out for every mandate prior to its renewal or
modification. That would not only contribute to
achieving a greater sensitivity to field implications but
would also help the Council to take decisions that are
more in line with the challenges and opportunities
prevailing in every situation.
Similarly, my delegation is convinced that a new
vision of peacekeeping operations must have a very
clear strategy in order to use the resources devoted to
such operations more effectively and more efficiently.
That is why we are grateful for the working document
on a field support strategy, which Under-SecretaryGeneral Susana Malcorra has shared with the Member
States and which the General Assembly will consider
in the near future.

19

S/PV.6178

At the same time, another of the main aspects
within the different mandates of the peacekeeping
operations is that of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts, particularly women and children, and
following up on its implementation. In that respect, we
underscore the need to be more clear with respect to
the elements that make up the mandates, the
responsibilities that stem from them and the
development of monitoring mechanisms for proper
implementation.
With regard to peacebuilding, as we said in the
debate on 22 July under the Ugandan presidency (see
S/PV.6165), the initial stage immediately following the
cessation of hostilities is a vital time for laying the
bases for true peacebuilding.
The development of the political effort to
promote reconciliation is particularly important.
Confidence and national reconciliation are crucial
aspects for outlining a framework that would
incorporate the priorities that the local actors
themselves would establish and that would enjoy the
support of international teams. It would include a
comprehensive vision of the role of the United Nations
in political, humanitarian, security and development
aspects.
We underscore the need for peacekeeping efforts
to be accompanied by a political process aimed at
strengthening the State apparatus and local human
resources. Coherence and integration between
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
be borne in mind from the point at which the
Organization first approaches a conflict situation.
Likewise, we must design proper transition strategies,
including the responsible transfer of authority to
national institutions and the gradual withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation after a stable climate has been
established.
Lastly, Mr. President, we congratulate you and
your delegation on preparing the draft presidential
statement and we fully support its adoption.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): Uganda congratulates
you, Mr. President, and the United Kingdom delegation
on your assumption of the office of the President of the
Security Council for the month of August. We also
thank you for organizing this important debate and
welcome the participation of United Nations force
commanders. The timing could not have been better.

20

I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Malcorra for their very informative briefings to the
Council. I also thank General Agwai, Force
Commander of the United Nations-African Union
Mission in Darfur, for sharing his experiences with the
Council.
Since the year began, we have witnessed a
number of initiatives undertaken to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We commend all
these efforts because they have facilitated greater
interaction between the various stakeholders at
different levels, which will further enhance practical
progress in United Nations peacekeeping. It is
necessary that we sustain these efforts.
This debate comes at a time when United Nations
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means are being
put to the test by new threats to global peace and
security. Impunity, terrorism, piracy and other forms of
social injustices meted out by non-State actors are on
the rise in the theatres of peacekeeping operations. The
humanitarian consequences of these actions on
innocent civilians, including women and children, are
alarming.
Therefore, Uganda considers the following points
to be key. First, it is important to recognize that an
ineffective United Nations peacekeeping capability
anywhere around the world greatly undermines the
credibility of the United Nations in the eyes of the
public. It is imperative that United Nations
peacekeeping be adaptable to emerging challenges,
such as we have seen in Somalia. A shift to more robust
and comprehensive United Nations peacekeeping, such
as we have seen in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, can yield positive results.
Robust peacekeeping is what the United Nations
requires to ensure the protection of civilians, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian aid workers in the
field today. However, to that end a clear understanding
of the situation on the ground is required, and the
missions must be provided with the necessary
capabilities to effectively implement their various
mandates.
Secondly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries is crucial, and
there is a need to strengthen the existing mechanisms
for engagement. It is crucial because it is they that
implement the mandates on the ground, where they
often face considerable risk.

09-44283

S/PV.6178

It is fundamental that political objectives and
peacekeeping mandates for missions be clear and
credible. A stronger understanding among troop and
police contributors, donor countries and the Security
Council as to what is expected of peacekeepers in
fulfilling these objectives can greatly facilitate the
achievement of mission objectives. Uganda therefore
supports Security Council efforts to strengthen
cooperation and interaction amongst stakeholders in
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, the challenges of modern peacekeeping,
as we have seen in recent times, clearly indicate that
not even the United Nations is capable of tackling the
challenges on its own. The United Nations should fasttrack its efforts to broaden the contributor base by
working with partners at the regional and subregional
levels. It should take advantages of these capacities
and build on the efforts so far taken in this regard.
The United Nations should take maximum
advantage of the strengths of regional organizations,
such as the African Union, and of subregional
organizations, such as the Southern Africa Development
Community, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and of the roles they can play. However,
this requires a deliberate and conscious effort to
establish strategic relationships with these organizations
in order to strengthen their capacity to contribute to
United Nations efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Fourthly, early consideration of peacebuilding
activities during the peacekeeping stage is critical to
the success of peacekeeping missions. Without tangible
peace dividends, such as the provision of basic services
like health care, education, shelter, and the
improvement of the standards of living of populations
affected by conflict, the chances of peace are very slim.
There is therefore an urgent need for the United
Nations system to ensure greater coherence in
peacekeeping, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
development activities. Uganda therefore supports
efforts aimed at more comprehensive United Nations
peacekeeping.
Uganda pays tribute to the men and women of the
United Nations for their tireless sacrifice. They serve
in some of the most dangerous and hostile places in the
world but continue to keep many people safe and give
them hope. We especially remember and honour those

09-44283

who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the service of
peace.
Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation fully supports.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of
Burkina Faso, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month,
and to pay a well-deserved tribute to the delegation of
Uganda for the effectiveness with which it steered the
work of the Council in July.
I would also like to thank you and your
delegation for having organized this debate and for
having submitted the New Horizon non-paper, which
has been extremely useful in preparing for this debate.
We have an opportunity to pursue our consideration of
the important issue of peacekeeping operations and the
ways and means to ensure that they are better managed.
We thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra and General
Agwai for their very enriching briefings and their
contributions to the ongoing reflection process.
My delegation endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
As a troop-contributing country, Burkina Faso is
closely following the reflection under way on how to
improve peacekeeping operations performance in the
context of new and pressing requirements, for which,
unfortunately, resources are lacking.
The effectiveness and potential success of
operations require above all clear, feasible mandates
adapted to the realities on the ground. To that end,
United Nations forces must be equipped with broad
deterrence capacities and pay greater attention to the
rules of engagement, logistics and mission planning.
That cannot be done without the support of all
stakeholders — donor countries, troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council, the Secretariat and
host countries.
Similarly, the specific issue of financing remains
critical. Nevertheless, no decision on deploying a new
mission or adjusting the mandate of an existing
mission should be subordinate exclusively to its
estimated budget. Decisions need to be guided by the

21

S/PV.6178

sole concern of preserving international peace and
security.

more flexible transition to peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction.

The Security Council and the General Assembly,
specifically via the Fifth Committee, each need to
exercise their authorities in accordance with the
Charter. Along these lines, and like others, we believe
that the response to the financial challenges of
peacekeeping operations should not be the automatic
closing of certain missions that remain necessary to
restoring peace. This means that only an objective
evaluation should guide our decisions in this area.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
always been a major challenge to the United Nations.
Because it remains critical, it requires greater attention.
In that context, yesterday’s adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1882 (2009) is to be commended.

Related to the drafting of mandates and the
success of peacekeeping operations is the question of
strengthening triangular cooperation among troopcontributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretariat.
We note and welcome the dynamic nature of that
cooperation, which has led, inter alia, to a variety of
initiatives in the Security Council, the Secretariat and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations that
allow the three entities regularly to exchange views on
the various aspects of peacekeeping operations. While
we hope that this strengthening will continue, the
United Nations needs better and more deeply to engage
and involve regional and subregional organizations,
which also have a role to play in the success of
operations.
We need hardly recall that the African Union and
the African subregional organizations should be special
partners of the United Nations because, unfortunately,
Africa is host to a number of peacekeeping operations.
General Agwai’s testimony on the challenges facing
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur deserves the greatest attention and should
inspire the work of the Council and all players
involved in the process of strengthening the
operationalization of peacekeeping operations.
Another issue of note is the support of
peacekeeping operations for the political process.
Peacekeeping operations should not be alternatives to
the peace process. If their support role is to be more
effective, we must strive to ensure effective
cooperation among all key players, particularly
mediators, special representatives and heads of
mission. Moreover, troops must be better informed of
agreements to resolve conflicts and commitments made
by the different parties. That would be a decisive factor
in the conduct of a mission and clearly help to ensure a

22

With respect to the ongoing brainstorming
process, my delegation believes that it remains possible
to benefit from all the recommendations contained in
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), other reports and
resolutions of the Security Council, despite the fact
that circumstances have changed over time and certain
realities on the ground have required us to adapt. At the
same time, if the most recent initiatives are to be true
agents of change, they must enjoy the broadest possible
support of Member States. In that regard, the ongoing
and inclusive communications between the members of
the Security Council, the Secretariat, the troopcontributing countries and all bodies relevant to
peacekeeping operations, as established by the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations chaired
by Japan, can be excellent sources of inspiration. We
believe that with such an approach and within the most
appropriate frameworks, all current initiatives on
peacekeeping operations, including the Secretariat’s
New Horizon initiative, could be considered more
fruitfully and enjoy consensus in the future.
We therefore encourage all players to continue to
follow the path of ongoing coordination, which is the
only way to strengthen trust and ensure the greater
effectiveness of United Nations involvement in the
field.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening
today’s open debate. We also thank the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support for their joint report on charting a New
Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping. I further
thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra
and General Agwai for their briefings.
Since its inception 60 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has made a positive contribution to
maintaining world peace and security and has won the
confidence and support of Member States. Over the
past six decades, ongoing efforts have been made to
reform and adapt United Nations peacekeeping
operations to changing circumstances. Multifunctional

09-44283

S/PV.6178

integrated missions have become the prevailing trend
in the development of peacekeeping operations. The
expanded scope, mandates and funding requirements of
relevant peacekeeping missions have also given rise to
new problems. United Nations peacekeeping operations
face new difficulties and challenges in the areas of
policy parity, financial support, planning and
management.
China supports wide-ranging consultations
between Member States and relevant parties in order to
reach consensus and advance peacekeeping reform. We
welcome the views and proposals of Member States
and the Secretariat on enhancing the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and strengthening international
cooperation in peacekeeping.
With respect to the issues addressed in the New
Horizon non-paper, I should like to make the following
five points regarding the ongoing reform of
peacekeeping operations.
First, the United Nations should focus particular
attention on formulating an integrated conflict
prevention and resolution strategy. Equal attention
should be paid to the deployment of peacekeeping
operations and the promotion of political negotiations.
With respect to potential conflict situations, the United
Nations should make greater efforts in the area of
preventive diplomacy, launch early interventions and
do its utmost to defuse tensions. Efforts must also be
made to bring the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his special envoys into full play, and to
support the peace initiatives of regional and
subregional organizations. If we reverse the trend of
favouring conflict resolution over prevention, and
engage earnestly in conflict prevention, we could make
it less necessary to deploy peacekeeping operations. In
deploying such operations, the Organization should
also focus more on promoting political dialogue and
reconciliation so that there is a peace to keep.
Secondly,
peacekeeping
reform
requires
innovation and adherence to basic principles.
Experience has shown that the Hammarskjöld principles
are important guarantees of the success of peacekeeping
operations and remain effective in practice. The
tripartite mechanism of the Sudan, the United Nations
and the African Union has played an active role in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, clearly demonstrating the
importance of enhanced communications and new

09-44283

partnerships with host countries. Peacekeeping
operations must exercise caution in the use of force and
avoid excessive emphasis on military options. Given
the ongoing divergence of views on mandating
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians, further
in-depth discussions on that issue will be necessary.
Thirdly, the Security Council should improve the
authorization,
planning
and
management
of
peacekeeping operations. There is broad consensus that
the mandates of peacekeeping operations should be
clearly defined and achievable. In considering the
deployment of such operations, the Security Council
should take into full account the political environment,
the security situation, economic and social conditions
and other relevant factors in the country concerned, as
well as the resources available to the relevant
peacekeeping operation. In that way, mandates and
clear priorities can be formulated in the light of
specific conditions. The Security Council should also
closely monitor the implementation of mandates and,
in due time, develop exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations. Close interaction between the Security
Council and the Secretariat is of critical importance
during the deployment or extension of peacekeeping
operations.
Fourthly, Member States are duty-bound to
endow peacekeeping operations with adequate
resources, while operations should use their resources
more efficiently. China believes that Member States
should pay their assessed contributions in full and on
time so as to ensure the smooth functioning of
peacekeeping operations. In order to meet the
ever-growing demand for peacekeeping, serious
consideration must be given to the idea of exploring
innovative financing channels. We support the
Secretariat’s ongoing effort to improve its logistics
support system, optimize the operational procedures of
peacekeeping operations, and expedite their deployment.
At present, most troop contributors are developing
countries. We call on more countries to contribute
troops to peacekeeping operations.
Fifthly, the United Nations should continue to
attach great importance to enhancing cooperation with
regional organizations in the field of peacekeeping
activities. Africa’s special needs especially deserve our
attention. Currently, about 75 per cent of United
Nations peacekeeping personnel are deployed in
Africa, and about 70 per cent of peacekeeping
assessments are spent there.

23

S/PV.6178

The African Union is playing an increasingly
important role in preventing and resolving conflicts on
the continent. The United Nations should continue to
strengthen its peacekeeping partnership with the
African Union and to help Africa improve its
peacekeeping capacity-building. China looks forward
to receiving the Secretary-General’s report on practical
ways to effectively support the African Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
this debate, giving the Council the opportunity to take
stock after six months of reform discussions. Let me
also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susana Malcorra for their presentations.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.
We were particularly pleased to see General
Martin Luther Agwai and his colleagues in the Council
today. Austria hopes that the presence of force
commanders in Council meetings dealing with
peacekeeping issues will become a regular practice.
Briefings by military experts provide accurate
information on the real-life challenges peacekeeping
missions face and are thus indispensable to the
Council’s decision-making.
The past few months have seen a great increase in
the dialogue on peacekeeping. We need to pursue this
effort systematically when dealing with specific
missions as well. A more systematic dialogue between
Council members and troop-contributing countries, as
well as with the Secretariat, is the best way to close the
gap that often still exists between the Council as a
mandating body and the Member States whose forces
are supposed to implement Council mandates.
The draft presidential statement before us today
rightly identifies the implementation of protection
mandates in peacekeeping operations as one of the
areas requiring further debate within the Council and
among Member States, and I certainly agree with the
representative of China that this topic demands further
in-depth discussion. From our point of view, some of
the questions that we ought to reflect on during the
coming months are the following.
How can we match the challenges of a particular
protection task with a realistic assessment of the
available resources? How can we best avoid disparities

24

between a mission’s protection mandate, its
composition and the resources required? How can the
various parties involved — the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop contributors and host countries —
help define realistic protection scenarios that provide a
clear framework of action for peacekeepers on the
ground? And how can we improve the Council’s
monitoring and oversight with a view to enhancing the
effective implementation of such mandates?
We
hope
that
the
independent
study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs will provide answers to these
questions. We also hope to make further progress on
these issues in the framework of the debate on the
protection of civilians that Austria plans to organize
during its presidency of the Council in November.
Our peacekeeping efforts will meet with success
only if we are able to respond to crisis situations in a
timely and effective manner. We therefore support a
capability-driven approach that concentrates on skills,
capacity and equipment, with a special focus on
potential resource gaps. Not only is this in the interest
of the effectiveness of our missions, but it is also
essential to the security of our peacekeepers.
While recognizing the need to increase the pool
of troop and police contributors, we have to be aware
that Member States have only one set of forces that
they deploy in various frameworks. We must therefore
increase our emphasis on pooling resources and
enhancing force integration training, be it at the level
of the United Nations or of regional organizations. In
this regard, we believe the United Nations could draw
on existing experience and knowledge within regional
organizations.
We are, of course, aware that the United Nations
operates in a unique global setting. Lessons learned at
the regional level are not automatically applicable in
the global context of the Organization. We nonetheless
believe that we should study whether such concepts as
that of the framework nation, developed at the regional
level for particularly demanding multinational peace
operations, might not also be relevant to some United
Nations peacekeeping situations.
We also have to take into consideration that the
United Nations and regional organizations increasingly
cooperate in peacekeeping by acting together or
sequentially. It is in the interests of all parties involved

09-44283

S/PV.6178

to base this cooperation on standardized framework
arrangements. At the same time, United Nations
mandates are and will remain essential, both in view of
the provisions of the Charter and to achieve a clear and
efficient division of labour between all international
actors involved in specific peacekeeping efforts. In this
context, we also look forward to the forthcoming report
of the Secretary-General on how to provide effective
support for African Union peacekeeping operations.
We support a substantial and open-minded debate of all
the proposals in the Prodi report (S/2008/813).
We welcome the clear connection made in the
draft presidential statement between peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. For this reason, we
also think that the Council should further deepen its
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission. Let
me also add that Austria sees the need for a new field
support strategy that takes into account the important
contributions peace operations can make to the
sustainable socio-economic development of the region
in which they are deployed, and I heartily agree with
what Under-Secretary-General Malcorra said on this
subject.
In conclusion, let me express my country’s full
support for the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later today. We would like to thank you, Sir,
and your delegation for all your efforts in preparing
this comprehensive and well-balanced text. It shows
how far this debate has moved forward since the
beginning of the year, when France and the United
Kingdom started this discussion. It also demonstrates
how much still needs to be done.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Mr. President, first let me
thank you for organizing today’s open debate, which is
indeed a very timely one. I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for August.
I wish to express our thanks and appreciation to
the Ugandan mission for its efficient work during its
presidency in July. I also wish to thank UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, as well as
General Martin Luther Agwai, for their useful and
thought-provoking briefings. General Agwai’s firsthand experience on the ground was particularly
enlightening and helpful.
I would also like to take this opportunity to salute
all the United Nations force commanders who were
with us this morning, and through them convey our

09-44283

heartfelt gratitude to all the men and women who serve
peace under their blue berets in some of the most
dangerous parts of the world. Our hearts and prayers
are always with them, but I know they want more than
that, and rightly so. They need a more efficient
peacekeeping system that provides them with the
necessary mandate, guidance and resources and that
duly honours the heroism of the United Nations
peacekeepers who risk their lives in the line of duty
day in and night out.
That is indeed why we are here. For the eight
months since the launch of the joint France-United
Kingdom initiative, we have extensively discussed
several aspects of peacekeeping reform in various
forums. We believe it is now time to take stock of what
has been said and done so far with a view to charting a
practical way forward.
To date, what has come out of our discussions in
no ambiguous terms is a broad consensus on the need
to reform the way we run our peacekeeping operations
in the United Nations. There is explicit agreement that
the entire United Nations peacekeeping system is
plagued by serious problems and stretched to the point
where the risk of failure has become intolerable.
It is also unmistakably clear that peacekeeping
operations are seen as the showcase of United Nations
efforts to advance the ideals and principles enshrined
in its Charter. Thus, what is at stake is the credibility of
the United Nations itself, with enormous implications
for whether we will or will not be able to deliver on the
promises of the Organization in the future.
What has been even more striking throughout this
review process is that there is also broad agreement on
what needs to be done. The previous open debate (see
S/PV.6153) organized in June under our own
presidency of the Council, for instance, brought out
those points of convergence in a most lucid manner.
In principle, everyone concurred that we need
earlier and more meaningful consultations with troopand police-contributing countries; that we should
engage and encourage regional organizations, notably
the African Union, to assume a greater role in
peacekeeping and help them strengthen their
capacities; that we have to come up with clear and
achievable mandates, matched by the necessary
resources and driven by existing capabilities; that we
ought to improve the level of information and analysis
available to us about the operational environment, in

25

S/PV.6178

particular military advice; that we must make better
use of benchmarks to monitor progress and to make the
necessary adjustments along the way; that we should
always have a political strategy that will guide all the
efforts of the international community, including
peacekeeping operations; that we must have a holistic
and robust approach to peace, integrating peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding into one single
strategy, including the protection of civilians; and that
we need to invest more in preventive measures,
including mediation, so as to settle conflicts through
peaceful means.
Yet, what was and is still missing are the practical
steps that will help translate this collective
understanding and commitment into a renewed and
more effective partnership, drawing together the
strengths of all stakeholders.
This is why we greatly welcome the non-paper
prepared by the Secretariat, which proposes a new
partnership agenda with a view to charting a new
horizon for United Nations peacekeeping. Frankly
speaking, we are still examining the paper and its
recommendations, but what we like about it is its
practical and action-oriented nature. Thus, we are
confident that it will provide us with the necessary
momentum and framework to build upon our next
steps.
To that end, however, we Member States need
immediately to start taking up each and every
recommendation of the non-paper and see how we can
put them into practice or why we cannot. In other
words, the Secretariat gave us a rich menu of options
and practical suggestions. It is now up to us to take
them to the operational level.
This exercise should be an all-inclusive one.
Every major stakeholder, including the Security
Council and its Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and of
course the Secretariat itself, all have a role to play, or
better, a responsibility to deliver.
As to the time frame of this endeavour, on the
other hand, we believe that we can and should aim at a
deadline of early next year to put in place at least the
initial and most essential elements of this new
undertaking. Indeed, 2010 will mark the tenth
anniversary of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and the

26

culmination of the “Peace Operations 2010” reform
process. There is now a chance for us to make the year
2010 a milestone for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We should not lose this window of
opportunity.
Turkey is ready and willing to take an active part
in this important enterprise. As a traditional troop- and
police-contributing country to the United Nations and
other international peace operations, we know by heart
the difficulties encountered in the United Nations
peacekeeping system, and will do our best to help
bring about a new and results-oriented consensus on
United Nations peacekeeping.
Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for preparing a draft presidential statement
for this meeting, which we fully support.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, allow me to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for convening
this important debate on one of the most important
issues for the United Nations and this Council — the
question of United Nations peacekeeping. Allow me to
also use this opportunity to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra for their interventions,
as well as Force Commander General Martin Luther
Agwai of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur for his candid overview from the
perspective of peacekeeping force commanders
working in the field.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden, so
allow me to just raise several points of interest.
While it is true that the traditional peacekeeping
of past decades has slowly given way to the more
robust, multidimensional and integrative peacekeeping
of today, when addressing the question of
peacekeeping we must not lose sight of the fact that it
is probably one of the most important tools available to
the United Nations in general, and to the Security
Council in particular — a symbiotic relationship that
has existed from the time of the establishment of this
Organization.
The question before us, however, is not about the
worth of peacekeeping operations as a concept, but
instead is a deliberation on the possible measures or
recommendations before us for streamlining the work
of peacekeepers in the field and on how to improve
cooperation, not only within the United Nations system

09-44283

S/PV.6178

itself, but also between the Secretariat and the Security
Council and, inversely, between the United Nations,
the Security Council and the general membership,
including troop-contributing countries and especially
affected States. In short, what are we doing to improve
the quality and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and cooperation between and within all
its constituent parts?
The Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the New
Horizon non-paper and the United Kingdom/France
initiative give us numerous good ideas. We also note
with great interest the strategic paper of the new
Department of Field Support. We commend the work
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
and support many of the suggested guidelines provided
in those documents for one primary reason — they
stress that the United Nations acts under the premise
that conflict cannot and should be resolved not first
and foremost by military means, but rather by
addressing problems at their root causes. Time and
again in our debates, we have heard a call to the parties
to a conflict to resolve their differences through
political dialogue, with the United Nations, including
its peacekeeping missions, acting as an intermediary in
achieving this goal.
These reports also stress that each United Nations
peacekeeping mission needs to be tailored according to
concrete conditions on the ground and the political
realities prevailing at the time of their establishment. A
clear political strategy and integrated mission planning
are, to this end, extremely important and should
include the provision of a precisely defined mandate
with clear and achievable benchmarks and goals and a
clear exit strategy. In refining ideas on how best to go
about this, we agree that the Council can improve
peacekeeping effectiveness through stricter monitoring
and oversight of its mandated tasks, including through
the establishment of and reporting on benchmarks.
That being said, we would like to stress that, in
multidimensional
peacekeeping,
reporting
on
benchmarks should address not only issues of
immediate security or military concern, but also longterm issues such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society, security sector reform,
including the strengthening of police and judicial
forces, and economic revitalization and development.
Development is especially important since, unless a
host country is assisted in returning to selfsustainability, recourse to violence can and quite often

09-44283

does happen, as has been demonstrated by returning
peacekeeping operations to countries in West Africa,
for example.
The new robust way of approaching peacekeeping
also brings together a plethora of United Nations and
other international or regional actors, often with
similar or overlapping goals. I believe that no one
questions the benefit of burden-sharing when it comes
to peacekeeping, with strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations or among
various United Nations and international agencies
operating in-country, with the United Nations and the
Security Council taking on the primary role.
Streamlining their operations in-country is the
overriding goal, essentially so as not to waste or
duplicate much needed resources — a task that can
most effectively be provided by the United Nations and
its peacekeepers.
Croatia particularly supports all proposals aimed
at greater coordination and strengthening of relations
among the Secretariat, the Security Council and troopand police-contributing countries. As mentioned in the
New Horizon non-paper, the Secretariat alone cannot
structure missions without intense cooperation with
Member States, while Member States similarly draw
upon the experience of the United Nations in
strengthening their national capacities. We reiterate
that it is clearly counterproductive to plan a
peacekeeping operation without the unambiguous
support of a core number of nations willing to provide
troops for a proposed mission. For that reason, we
believe that outreach to potential and actual troopcontributing countries must be a high priority.
Before I finish, allow me to highlight once again
an issue that we deem exceptionally important,
especially in the light of the ever-increasing burden,
both financial and logistical, being placed on United
Nations peacekeeping and its troop contributors.
Croatia firmly believes that, in weighing the full range
of responses to threats to international peace and
security, the Security Council can and should pose
itself the question of whether the preventative
deployment of a small number of peacekeeping troops
can stem the outbreak of wider conflict at its genesis.
Such a decision not only has the potential to save
scores of lives, but can also lessen later financial and
logistical burdens on the United Nations and its
Member States. For us, the value of such a response is
self-evident.

27

S/PV.6178

In conclusion, let me express our gratitude to you
personally, Mr. President, and your delegation for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which we
fully support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
In my introduction to this debate, I referred to
United Nations peacekeeping as a unique global
partnership and, over the past six months, I have been
struck by the extent to which we have a shared
understanding of the challenges that we face and how
we can overcome them. That substantial common
ground has been made clear again today.
I think that we all agree on the central principle
that peacekeeping can only support a political strategy;
it cannot replace it. We all agree on the importance of
having mission mandates that clearly reflect achievable
objectives and in which tasks are prioritized. We also
agree on the need to enhance consultations with those
countries that contribute troops, police and other units
to peacekeeping operations.
I think that there are three things on which we
now need to focus, and those are captured in the draft
presidential statement that we look forward to adopting
later today.
First is a commitment to building on the work
that we have done in recent months, paying greater
attention to the monitoring and evaluation of missions,
more realistic mandates; greater involvement of the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and better
information-sharing between the Secretariat and
political and military experts of the countries
concerned. We have made some progress. We have
much more still to do, as many colleagues have said.
Secondly, we need to take advantage of
opportunities, such as under the forthcoming Austrian
presidency in November, to develop a wider consensus
on the critical tasks that we expect modern
peacekeepers to perform. We know that today’s
conflicts require a complex range of responses from
peacekeepers. They must help to protect civilian
populations, monitor and protect human rights, work to
build fledgling police forces and judiciaries in support
of national authorities, and support electoral processes.
Those activities are all essential to the wider
peacebuilding process.

28

To deliver success in peacekeeping, we must
ensure that it is part of a longer-term effort to build a
sustainable peace. That requires coordination with a
wide range of partners with specialist skills from
within the United Nations, funds and programmes,
international financial institutions, and regional and
subregional organizations. It is that approach that
represents the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and the greater integration and
coordination of effort of which we often speak.
Thirdly, we should support the call from our
colleagues in the Secretariat — the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support — to establish a new horizon for United
Nations peacekeeping. We have heard much support
for the recommendations made in their recent
non-paper in statements today.
Those are not issues that can be tackled by the
Security Council alone; nor should they be. During the
rest of today’s debate, I look forward to hearing ideas,
perspectives and views from across the peacekeeping
partnership, including from Member States that
contribute personnel to operations and money to
finance them.
The Council should continue to support the work
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Secretariat as we take forward what is a very
challenging agenda, set out in the draft presidential
statement that we will adopt this afternoon.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.
Let me begin by expressing the European Union’s
appreciation for the way that the United Nations has
managed the unprecedented expansion of its
peacekeeping activities. United Nations peacekeepers
serve in conflict zones on a scale that few could have
foreseen 10 years ago.
Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of the
landmark Brahimi process, which paved the way for

09-44283

S/PV.6178

ambitious reforms and a new era for United Nations
peacekeeping. Today, United Nations peacekeeping is
again at a critical juncture. As noted by UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, the system
is stretched to the point at which some missions face
the risk of failure. That would have serious
consequences not only for international peace and
security, but also for international cooperation.
We commend the Secretariat for its non-paper on
charting a new horizon for United Nations
peacekeeping, and the Security Council for the review
that it has undertaken over the past months on the basis
of the French-British initiative. Those activities,
together with other initiatives, such as the Challenges
Forum, have generated a set of ideas and
recommendations that would better position United
Nations peacekeeping to respond to current and future
challenges.
Today’s debate is very timely. It provides an
opportunity to take stock of progress made in adapting
United Nations peacekeeping to new demands and to
set a course for work in the years to come.
After the catastrophic events in Bosnia and
Rwanda in the 1990s, the United Nations went through
a period of soul-searching. It proved that the
Organization was capable of learning from setbacks
and adapting to the changing demands of global
peacekeeping. It is encouraging that the surge of
United Nations peacekeeping, while putting difficult
strains on the Organization, has been marked by a
similar determination. The Secretariat’s reform agenda
“Peace Operations 2010” has been an important step
towards a more professional and effective approach to
United Nations peacekeeping.
That agenda should now be taken a step further.
We need to build a new political consensus on the
strategic context of peacekeeping and on the role of the
United Nations membership and regional partners in
providing collective support to peacekeeping. The
challenge is to ensure that gaps between needs,
expectations and performance are minimized.
Since the issuance of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), decisive improvements have been
achieved, but many of the challenges identified in the
report remain and there are new demands that need to
be addressed. The financial crisis puts additional
pressure on United Nations peacekeeping, as does the

09-44283

current overstretch of military, police and civilian
resources faced by many Member States.
The New Horizon paper is an excellent basis for
seeking a new consensus on United Nations
peacekeeping. Its recommendations provide us with a
coherent and realistic framework for future
improvements. They should guide our work in the
period ahead.
While the European Union believes that it is
necessary to consider all of the recommendations in a
positive spirit, at this stage we would like to draw
attention to a few points of strategic importance to
developing the partnerships called for in the New
Horizon non-paper.
First, with regard to burden-sharing, countries
make varying contributions to peacekeeping, and
regional organizations are taking on an increasing
share of the burden. A dialogue should be initiated
between the United Nations and its partners on what
various stakeholders can bring to the table, how we can
improve cooperation and enhance our interoperability,
and whether missions are carried out under the
auspices of the United Nations or those of other
organizations.
My second point concerns consultations. There is
a need to develop closer mechanisms for consultation
among the various actors involved in peacekeeping.
The report outlines a number of concrete
recommendations on how that could be done. We must
seek mechanisms that bring various stakeholders on
board at an early stage, while ensuring a proper
balance between effectiveness and inclusiveness and
without creating unnecessary bureaucracy. The
implementation of the 2003 and 2007 joint statements
on United Nations-European Union Cooperation in
Crisis Management are important contributions in that
respect.
Thirdly, concerning mission management, the
“Peace Operations 2010” agenda should be carried
through and steps taken to continue to enhance
professionalism and the management of missions to
ensure that they have the resources and support
necessary to carry out their mandates effectively. As
recognized in the report, peacekeeping missions cannot
be planned or carried out in isolation from the political
context in which they are to operate. Devising a
political strategy is a fundamental task that should
include exit perspectives.

29

S/PV.6178

The European Union welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on peacebuilding (S/2009/304),
which highlights some of the challenges in that respect
and demonstrates the close links between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
In December, 10 years will have passed since the
launching of the European Security and Defence
Policy, which is the basis for the European Union’s
peacekeeping efforts. Some 20 European Union
civilian and military peacekeeping missions have been
carried out so far, several of them in close cooperation
with the United Nations. The experiences of the
European Union over the past decade in this area have
ranged from those of small observer missions to those
of complex undertakings including both civilian and
military components. Cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations has been
enhanced along the way — most recently, through the
transfer of responsibilities between the two
organizations in Chad and Kosovo. The European
Union has also developed close collaboration with
important regional actors, in particular through its
strategic partnership with the African Union.
It has rightly been stated that, in peacekeeping,
no one size fits all. The process of forming
partnerships and sharing the burden must continue with
a view to finding the best collective response to global
and regional conflicts on the basis of our various
perspectives, experiences and capabilities. The New
Horizon non-paper should be the starting point for new
political momentum in that regard. The European
Union intends to be an active partner in that process.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address this
important issue. We also thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra and General Agwai for
their important briefings. The challenges to United
Nations peacekeeping must continue to be a top
priority on our agenda, and we appreciate the efforts of
the Security Council to intensify dialogue with
Member States on that issue.
Let me begin by reiterating a point made by our
French colleague in the Security Council debate on
29 June (see S/PV.6153). He said that our ability to
protect civilians is the standard by which United
Nations peacekeeping will be judged. The renewed

30

fighting in eastern Congo last week reminded us of
how much that ability is needed. Thousands of
civilians have been forced to flee their homes, and we
know only too well the suffering that follows in the
wake of such incidents. Girls and women face the
additional horrors of sexual violence, and we must put
forces in place that can effectively deter such crimes.
We look forward to discussing this further on Friday.
My second point concerns the need to meet the
ever-increasing demand for peacekeepers and to secure
the necessary resources. While we need to solicit more
contributions from present contributors, we also need
greater commitment from countries not yet
contributing to their full potential. Peacekeeping is a
global responsibility and calls for the widest possible
engagement of the international community.
My third point concerns the need for mandates to
be accompanied by sufficient resources. Committing
men and women in uniform to potentially lifethreatening assignments in foreign countries is one of
the most difficult decisions a country can take. But
when such decisions are made, Governments and their
people must be certain that missions have the resources
to fulfil their mandates, with the lowest possible level
of risk for personnel in the field. That means proper
training, proper equipment and full capacity in line
with the demands made.
We need to move from a somewhat obsessive
focus on troop numbers to a focus on quality and total
capability. That means that we have to develop
standards and link them to training, equipping and
delivery on the ground. We are pleased to see that this
is another key point made in the New Horizon
non-paper. In addition, let me emphasize the need to
develop common standards with key partners, such as
NATO, the African Union and the European Union.
That will facilitate cooperation, whether it is a joint
effort, as in Kosovo, or a sequential arrangement, as in
Chad.
My fourth and final point relates to the
relationship among peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. Peacekeeping is part
of a wider United Nations and global peace, security
and development effort. Mandates must be aligned
with other, complementing initiatives and supported
politically and financially.
Norway
supports
the
Secretariat’s
recommendation that missions be requested to include

09-44283

S/PV.6178

information on progress in peacebuilding in their
assessment of mandated tasks. Missions should also
report on related actions of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and other partners, and all
partners must be called upon to draw attention to
critical gaps.
In conclusion, let me underline the fact that the
most important partner in the United Nations
peacekeeping partnership is the host country. That
needs to be foremost in our minds when we continue
this discussion in the coming months. The international
community can and should assist, but it is the host
country that bears the responsibility for finding
solutions that will last. We need an open and honest
discussion on how we in the international community
can work together to better keep the promises we make
to those in need, and how we can make peacekeeping
deliver more at a time when so much is called for.
Norway looks forward to being an active participant in
that process and to continuing the dialogue.
The President: I now call on the representative
of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join preceding
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and in thanking you
for convening this debate. I also thank UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and General
Agwai for their comprehensive briefings and their
work.
Peacekeeping is one of the primary instruments
that we, the Members of the United Nations, have
created to fulfil our Charter aspiration to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Peacekeeping is the Organization’s most difficult and
highest-profile activity, and it is the one by which we
are most critically judged. That is as it should be, for
our peacekeeping successes and failures are matters of
life and death for those whom we are entrusted to
protect.
New Zealand has long supported the United
Nations peacekeeping cause. We join those who
gratefully salute our peacekeepers. Theirs is an activity
that has undergone a dramatic transition from
traditional ceasefire monitoring to today’s complex,
multidimensional,
robust
and
non-conventional
missions in a significantly expanded number of conflict
zones. All that has imposed an unsustainable burden on
United Nations resources and led to serious challenges

09-44283

in respect of mandate implementation, sustained
political support, supply of personnel, management,
leadership and financing.
Against that background, if we are to achieve our
shared goals, we — the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat, contributing countries and
host States — need an open and honest discussion and
must accept a shared responsibility for addressing
those challenges and shortcomings. We cannot allow
United Nations peacekeeping to be discredited by our
failure to respond to and address today’s peacekeeping
reality.
Many of the ideas before us today are not new.
The recommendations of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), made nearly 10 years ago, are still valid,
but many have not been implemented and some have
not even been addressed. New Zealand believes that, in
10 years time, we should not find ourselves still
lamenting over recommendations that have not been
the subject of concerted and timely action. To ensure
that that does not happen, we must take a structured,
focused and practical approach to working through the
issues.
We take this opportunity to comment on six
issues which warrant further attention.
First, effective logistical support is critical to the
success of every mission. The deployment of larger
missions into areas with long supply chains and the
need for partnership with private-sector providers
obliges the United Nations to take a fresh look at the
whole issue of mission support, which we anticipate
will be addressed by the forthcoming field support
strategy.
Secondly, significant benefit can be gained from
a partnership of States and regional organizations to
provide sustained political and practical support for a
mission. We know this from our own practical
experience. New Zealand is fortunate to work closely
with Timor-Leste, Australia, Portugal and others in
promoting United Nations peace efforts in TimorLeste. But we also know that, to ensure success, such
support must continue well beyond the creation of a
mandate.
Thirdly, we reiterate the ongoing importance of
conflict prevention. Obviously, preventing conflict
eases demand for future deployments, but to avoid a
relapse into conflict, conflict prevention must also be

31

S/PV.6178

undertaken within and during peacekeeping missions.
The United Nations can now focus its peacebuilding
efforts through the standby team of mediation experts
and the Mediation Support Unit. The team has already
achieved encouraging results, but it is still
underutilized, and we should encourage the special
representatives of the Secretary-General and others to
access this important resource.
Fourthly, New Zealand supports the ongoing
work on robust peacekeeping and protection of
civilians, and acknowledges the inevitability that, at
times, peacekeepers will have to undertake both
activities.
Fifth, the Brahimi report called for a major shift
toward rule of law teams, with combined police,
judicial, legal and human rights experts and with a
rapid deployment capacity similar to that of military
and police missions. We support the development of
such a capacity by the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), but it must be
focused in scope and duration to avoid duplicating the
efforts of others.
Finally, New Zealand believes that the Office of
Human Resources Management and DPKO need more
capacity to deal with recruitment for peacekeeping
missions. “People” is one of five key elements of the
“Peace Operations 2010” reform agenda. Efficient
recruitment and retention of quality people are crucial
to the future of United Nations peacekeeping. We are
hopeful that that will be improved and streamlined by
the human resources system for United Nations
peacekeepers. This issue is not addressed in depth in
the New Horizon paper, but it is integral to the success
of peacekeeping and deserves a renewed focus.
Two weeks ago, addressing this Council on
peacebuilding, I observed that the image of the Blue
Beret interposed between previously warring parties
has become one of this Organization’s successes. But
we know that that is a fragile image that is challenged
by imperfect logistics and chains of supply, by lack of
coordination, by underutilization of mediation
resources, by the ongoing vulnerability of civilians, by
limited local legal frameworks, and by inadequate
recruitment and retention. Any one of those
shortcomings or any of those identified by others in
this debate puts a peacekeeping mission at risk. Taken
collectively, they could put the whole peacekeeping

32

framework at risk. Therefore, all of them must be
addressed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of August, and
thank Ambassador Rugunda for ably steering the
Council in July. I thank you for organizing this open
debate. The fact that the Security Council is holding
two debates on the future of peacekeeping in a span of
a few weeks shows its commitment to a strengthened
dialogue with the membership and the Secretariat on an
extremely crucial issue.
I also thank Under-Secretary-Generals Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their informative
briefings and the considerable efforts their
Departments have made in producing the non-paper
entitled “A new partnership agenda: charting a new
horizon
for
United
Nations
peacekeeping”.
Furthermore, I want to thank General Martin Luther
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, for his valuable
comments from the perspective of realities on the
ground. I note with satisfaction the presence at this
meeting of almost all of the commanding officers of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The Secretariat’s non-paper highlights the
challenging gap between the magnitude and complexity
of modern United Nations peacekeeping and the
resources — human, institutional and material —
available to it. Addressing this gap is vital not only for
international peace and security, but also for the
Organization. Its long-term legitimacy and prestige
will be influenced by how effectively we manage
peacekeeping in the coming years.
That is why we need a true partnership among the
Security Council, the wider membership, in particular
troop-contributing countries, and the Secretariat. In
order to be fully productive, our cooperation must be
all-encompassing in making strategic decisions on the
future of peacekeeping as such; in assessing, in
concrete cases, whether there is a peace to keep or
whether peacekeeping is appropriate; and in defining
sustainable drawdown and exit strategies.
As noted in the non-paper, our success will
ultimately depend on the commitment and political will

09-44283

S/PV.6178

of Member States, which will be easier to obtain if the
decision-making process is — and is perceived to be —
as fair, objective and inclusive as possible.
Today, my delegation wishes to comment on but
one substantive issue discussed in the Secretariat
non-paper,
namely,
the
relationship
between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As an increasing
number of missions have been sent to developing
countries, where conflict is often related to one form of
deprivation or another, we have started to better
understand the linkages between peace and
development. Many of us believe that, just as
peacekeeping becomes a mere crutch in situations
where political actors do not commit to reconciliation,
peacekeeping cannot fully succeed when the
socio-economic roots of many conflicts are not
successfully addressed.
That does not mean that peacekeeping missions
should replace United Nations funds, agencies and
programmes in development assistance, or that the
Security Council should act in matters beyond its
competence under the Charter. Rather, it means that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, although distinct,
have synergies that must not be overlooked or denied.
On the contrary, without prejudice to the functions
proper to peacekeeping missions, we must actively
look for such synergies and, in each case,
pragmatically choose the best available response to the
concrete needs of a given conflict or post-conflict
situation.
Quite often, especially in early recovery
scenarios, some tasks are crucial to the short- and
medium-term sustainability of fragile peace: rebuilding
indispensable infrastructure, including that associated
with or enabling law and order functions; resuming
basic services and generating peace dividends that will
ensure the support of the population for the difficult
political decisions usually required for making and
keeping agreements.
When confronted with such situations and others
with similar needs, we must ask ourselves whether
peacekeepers might not be part of our response.
Sometimes they are the only or main United Nations
presence on the ground and directly face a population
reeling from the effects of conflict. They often have the
institutional, logistical and human capabilities needed
to perform some of those tasks, at least on an
emergency basis.

09-44283

Why should we not tap those resources, at least
while other parts of the system and its partners get
ready to make a meaningful contribution on the
ground? Even when they are present or in later-stage
post-conflict scenarios, peacekeeping missions may, in
some cases, be in a position to help close critical gaps.
In addition to assisting the host country, an active
contribution
by
peacekeeping
operations
to
peacebuilding is advantageous to the missions
themselves and the United Nations at large. The first
see public support for them consolidated; the latter sees
its name associated with concrete gains in the living
standards of many people.
Exploring synergies between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding may also have systemic benefits to the
Organization and its Member States. It may help to
expedite an early transition from one to the other and
thereby reduce the demand for peacekeeping, with
gains for the efficiency of the system as a whole.
In sum, in pursuing international peace and
security, we should be pragmatic and flexible, while
maintaining full conformity with the Charter. Clarity of
functions and priorities should not give way to
compartmentalized thinking that does not maximize
scarce resources and prevents the United Nations from
delivering as effectively as possible.
As to the other important issues discussed in the
Secretariat’s non-paper, Brazil stands ready to give
them full consideration in the coming months both in
the General Assembly, especially its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and, to the
extent possible, in the Council. A series of thematic
discussions in the Special Committee in the fall might
be a productive way to address the many crucial
aspects raised by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support. The
Council can count on Brazil’s active participation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this
open debate, which is helping to generate a rich
exchange of ideas and viewpoints on peacekeeping
operations in the light of the challenge facing the
Organization in meeting increased demands for more
operations with fewer resources.

33

S/PV.6178

My delegation also welcomes the valuable
briefings of Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support, Ms. Susana Malcorra, and Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, as well as that of General Martin Luther
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Peru is firmly committed to the efforts of the
Organization to ensure peacekeeping in the different
regions of the world. Peru is present with military
observers and officials in four peacekeeping operations
in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur. We also contribute a company in
Haiti and an official of our armed forces as the current
Force Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus.
We welcome the fact that the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support have
submitted a document that provides concepts and ideas
for the establishment of a new agenda for peacekeeping
operations.
We also acknowledge the efforts and interest of
the delegations of France and the United Kingdom, as
reflected in the document on peacekeeping operations
that they submitted to the Security Council in February.
That document sets out interesting approaches to
addressing the challenges that the Organization faces in
the area of peacekeeping operations.
Almost 10 years after the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) was issued, we have no choice but to
begin a process that, following a thorough assessment,
would allow us to rethink peacekeeping operations in
order to make them more effective and capable of
effectively ensuring the transition to peacebuilding,
which, after all, is the desired goal.
Peru believes that the objective that must be
pursued by peacekeeping operations is the commitment
to and ownership of the peacekeeping process itself on
the part of the country or countries involved.
Operations must gear all their efforts to strengthening
the institutions of those States, their capacities to
resolve conflicts, and national sovereignty. The
required international cooperation must also fit in with
the framework established by Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, maintaining the universal
nature and maintaining the standards and principles of
peacekeeping operations.

34

In connection with this point, my delegation
agrees with the document presented by the delegations
of France and the United Kingdom in the sense that we
are all responsible for promoting and ensuring
peacekeeping. That is why it is important that we
establish in the short term mechanisms to provide
greater coordination between the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat, the troopcontributing countries and the Member States that host
peacekeeping operations.
Similarly, this dialogue must be intensified and
include other bodies that have some influence in the
areas where peacekeeping operations are taking place,
such as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, among
others.
Peacekeeping operations are a part of the set of
instruments with which the Organization and the
Member States respond to the demands of
peacekeeping and regional and international security.
They coexist with conflict prevention, the protection of
civilians, the mediation and good offices of the
Secretary-General, as well as the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Peru acknowledges the growing and valuable role
that is played by regional and international
organizations. The evolution of each of these elements
and its impact on every peacekeeping operation require
us to be flexible and to approach every case differently,
with firm adherence to the Charter’s principles.
We believe that it is important to generate a peace
dividend or a stability dividend as a result of
peacekeeping
operations.
Short-term
activities,
including quick impact projects, contribute to the
success of our efforts. We also believe that we must
explore different ways to better exploit the potential of
peacekeeping forces in order to create synergies
between mission mandates and the developing needs of
countries where the missions are deployed.
As we have said in other open debates concerning
issues that are directly related to peacekeeping
operations, conflicts are multidimensional and, as a
result, matters such as peace, security, development
and human rights are all interrelated. Peacekeeping
operations need to evolve towards a more
comprehensive approach to the peace and security
problems that they face. Such an approach must not
only address the immediate causes of the conflicts but,

09-44283

S/PV.6178

as previous speakers have noted, contribute effectively
to developing coherent and consistent action on the
part of international community that, in turn, make it
possible to establish conditions conducive to
sustainable peace and security — in other words, an
effective peacebuilding process. Strengthening military
adviser teams would promote strategic planning that
takes all the elements involved in implementing a
peacekeeping operation into account and ensures that
they will achieve the desired results.
In this regard, my delegation notes that the new
architecture of peacekeeping operations we seek to
define, and the resulting changes in operational
mandates, will require us to take a comprehensive,
consistent approach in each of the corresponding
purviews of the Organization. Today, the Security
Council enjoys the valuable support of the
Peacebuilding Commission and is developing contacts
and coordination with troop-contributing countries. It
also relies in its work on the ad hoc mechanisms of the
Economic and Social Council and on the activities of
the funds and programmes. We must strengthen these
mechanisms and promote greater coordination and
interaction among these bodies in order to make
peacekeeping operations more effective and efficient.
An excellent example of this comprehensive
vision is the case of the United Nations Stabilization

Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), to which Peru is fully
committed. The Mission has adapted to the changing
situation on the ground, and established indicators and
benchmarks in the areas of security, development and
institutions. I take this opportunity to reiterate Peru’s
firm support for Haiti through its participation in
MINUSTAH.
In order to bring about this positive change in
peacekeeping mandates and for the United Nations to
maintain its credibility in international public opinion,
it is essential that the political and strategic visions of
the main actors — the Security Council, the regions
concerned and the parties involved in individual
conflicts in particular countries — all converge. That
vision should be complemented by rapid action by the
forces available to the United Nations, without
conditions and with a pre-established mandate.
In conclusion, I stress our interest in continued
cooperation in developing the conceptual exercise of
shaping a new alliance within the Organization in order
to create a more flexible, workable and effective
framework for peacekeeping operations.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council. to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

09-44283

35
