Resolutions adopted withont reference to a Main Committee

of the United Nations, as International Co-operation
Year,
Recognizi-ng the contributions which Member States,
the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations
concerned made to the activities undertaken during the
International Co-operation Y ear,
Considering that the idea of designating a year as
International Co-operation Y ear represented a valuable
contribution towards increasing the awareness oí the
benefits of international co-operation,
Notes with appreciation the final report oí the Committee for International Co-operation Y ear. 19
1486th plenary meeting,
7 December 1966.
2175 (XXI). Admission of Barbados to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
H aving received the recommendation oí the Security
Council of 7 December 1966 that Barbados should be
admitted to membership in the United Nations,20
Having considered the application for membership
oí Barbados,21
Decides to admit Barbados to membership in the
United Nations.
1487th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2189 (XXI). lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting oí Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) oí 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII) oí 17 December 1962, 1956
(XVIII) oí 11 December 1963 and 2105 (XX) oí 20
December 1965,
R.ecalling also its resolutions 1805 (XVII) oí 14
December 1962 and 1899 (XVIII) oí 13 November
1963, by which it assigned to the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation
of the Declaration on the Granting oí Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples tasks relating to
South West Africa, and its resolution 1970 (XVIII)
of 16 December 1963, by which it entrusted to the
Special Committee additional functions relating to information transmitted under Article 73 e oí the Charter
of the United Nations,
Having considered the report oí the Special Committee covering its work during 1966, 22
N oting with deep regret that six years aíter the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination, and deploring the negative
attitude oí certain colonial Powers, and in particular
the intransigent attitude of the Governments oí Portugal
1 0 [bid., agenda item 24, documents A/6Z27 and Add.l.

20 [bid., agenda item 20, document A/6559.
21 A/6545. For the printed text of this document,

see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1966, document S/7607.
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1).

5

and South Africa, which refuse to recognize the right
of colonial peoples to self-determination and independence,
Concerned at the policy followed by colonial Powers
oí circumventing the rights oí colonial peoples through
the promotion oí the systematic influx oí foreign immigrants and the displacement, deportation or transfer
of the indigenous inhabitants,
B earing in mind that the preservation oí colonialism
and its maniíestations, including racism and apartheid,
and the attempts oí sorne colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
and the use oí armed force against peoples are incompatible with the Charter and the Declaration,
Deploring the attitude oí certain States which, despite
the resolutions oí the General Assembly and of the
Special Committee, continue to co-operate with the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa and with
the illegal racist minority régime of Southern Rhodesia,
which are continuing to repress the African populations,
H aving considered the sections oí the report oí the
Special Committee dealing with the activities of foreign
economic and other financia! interests operating in
South West Africa, the Territories under Portuguese
domination and Southern Rhodesia, and the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein,
Convinced that further delay in the complete and
universal implementation oí the Declaration remains
a source oí international conflicts and differences, which
are seriously impeding international co-operation and
endangering world peace and security,
N oting the action taken and envisaged by the Special
Committee with respect to the list oí Territories to
which the Declaration applies,
H aving adopted resolutions on specific Territories
considered by the Special Committee,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 1654
(XVI), 1810 (XVII), 1956 (XVIII) and 2105
(XX);
2. No tes with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of. Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to that Committee for
its efforts to secure the implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work during 1966 and again invites the
administering Powers to implement the recommendations contained therein;
4. Approves the action taken and envisaged by the
Special Committee for the year 1967 with respect to
the list oí Territories to which the Declaration applies;
5. Approves the programme of work envisaged by the
Special Committee during 1967, including the sending
of visiting missions and the possibility of holding a
series oí meetings away from Headquarters, and requests the administering Powers to allow visiting
missions to be sent to the Territories under their administration ;
6. Declares that the continuation oí colonial rule
threatens international peace and security and that the
practice oí apartheid, as also ali forms oí racial discrimination, constitutes a crime against humanity;
7. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy oí the
struggle of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise

6

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

their right to self-determination and independence and
urges all States to provide material and moral assistance
to the national liberation movements in colonial Territories;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other international relief organizations
and the specialized agencies concerned to increase their
economic, social and humanitarian assistance to the
refugees from those Territories;
9. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the international institutions of which they are
members, including the specialized agencies, to withhold assistance of any kind to the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa and to the illegal racist minority régime of Southern Rhodesia until they renounce
their policy of racial discrimination and colonial domination;
10. Draws the attention of all States to the grave
consequences of the formation in the southern part
of Africa of an entente between the Governments of
South Africa and Portugal and the illegal :racist
minority régime of Southern Rhodesia, and calls upon
all States to withhold any support or assistance to this
entente, whose existence and activities run counter
to the interests of international peace and security;
11. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle their
military bases and installations in colonial Territories
and to refrain from establishing new ones and from
using those that still exist to interfere with the liberation of the peoples in colonial Territories in the
exercise of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence;
12. Condemns the activities of those foreign financial
and economic interests in colonial Territories, in particular in South W est Africa, Southern Rhodesia and
the Territories under Portuguese domination, which
support colonial régimes and thus constitute a serious
obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, and calls upon the Governments concerned
to take the necessary measures to put an end to those
activities;
13. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain administering Powers in the Territories under their
domination, of imposing non-representative régimes
and constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign
financia! and economic interests, misleading world public
opinion and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign
immigrants while displacing, deporting and transferring
the indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls
upon those Powers to desist from such manceuvres;
14. Requests the Special Committee to apprise the
Security Council of developments in any Territory
examined by the Committee which may threaten international peace and security and to make any concrete
suggestions which may assist the Council in considering appropriate measures under the Charter of the
United N ations;
15. Invites the Special Committee, whenever it
considers it proper and appropriate, to recommend a
deadline for the accession to independence of each Territory in accordance with the wishes of the people and
the provisions of the Declaration ;
16. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend
to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations

of those Territories to exercise fully the right to selfdetermination and independence ;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to perform its tasks and to seek suitable means for the
immediate and full implementation of the Declaration
in all Territories which have not yet attained independence;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to promote,
through the various organs and agencies of the United
N ations, the continuous and large-scale publicizing of
the Declaration and of the work of the Special Committee, in order that world opirtion may be sufficiently
aware of the situation in the colonial Territories and
of the continuing struggle for liberation waged by the
colonial peoples ;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with all the financing
and facilities necessary for the implementation of its
mandate;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled "Activities
of foreign economic and other interests which are
impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, South W est Africa and
Territories under Portuguese domination and in ali
other Territories under colonial domination".
1492nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1966.

2193 (XXI). Co-operation hetween the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity
The General Assernbly,
Recalling its resolution 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965, by which it invited the Secretary-General to explore the means of promoting co-operation between
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on this question, 23
l. Expresses its satisfaction with the progress
achieved in the implementation of the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 2011 (XX);
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts, particularly with respect to liaison and technical
co-operation between the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, and to report to the General Assembly
as appropriate.
1494th plenary meeting
15 December 1966.
2201 (XXI). Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16
July 1965 to 15 July 1966. 24
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2s !bid., agenda item 22, document A/6408.
24 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/6302).
