S/2015/894

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 November 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 17 November 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), by
which the Council established the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), and resolution
2217 (2015), by which the Council extended its mandate to 30 April 2016, as well
as Council resolution 2162 (2014), by which the Council established a quick
reaction force within the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
As you are aware, I am deeply concerned about the heightened tensions in the
Central African Republic. On 26 September, the killing of a young man in Bangui
triggered intercommunal strife and clashes between elements of the anti -balaka and
former Séléka armed groups, which lasted approximately four days and left some
77 civilians dead and 414 injured. This rapid escalation highlighted the fragility of
the situation and the destabilizing effect of actions taken by spoilers. A violent mob
sought to take control of the national radio station, attacks by armed elements
targeted the headquarters of the gendarmerie and attempts were made to control
access to the airport. There were also widespread roadblocks and lootings. During
the events, nearly 700 prisoners, including some high -profile individuals, escaped
from the central prison with the complicity of the Central African armed forces, who
were in charge of access to the facility. The period also saw attacks directly
targeting MINUSCA and humanitarian personnel and premises. The events brought
Bangui to a standstill for more than a week.
A month later, the deadly attack on 26 October in Bangui on a delegation from
the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique faction of the former Séléka in Bambari
triggered a cycle of reprisal attacks between Christian and Mu slim communities,
leaving some 26 people dead, scores injured and a further 2,000 displaced. Since
then, regular attacks and reprisals have continued in Bangui, the robust posture
adopted by MINUSCA notwithstanding. Tensions have also been high elsewhere i n
the country, including in Kaga Bandoro (Nana -Grébizi Province) where the
movement of armed former Séléka elements from the Front populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) towards Dekoa led to the temporary
displacement of some 10,000 people and culminated in a clash, on 10 October,
between the Sangaris force and MINUSCA and the FPRC elements near Sibut,
resulting in at least 12 deaths.
Meanwhile, preparations for the elections have continued. On 9 November, the
National Electoral Authority announced a revised electoral calendar that foresees
the holding of the constitutional referendum on 13 December, the first round of
15-20514 (E)

241115

*1520514*

S/2015/894

presidential and legislative elections on 27 December, a second round on 31 January
2016 and the proclamation of final results by 24 February 2016.
In view of the volatile security situation and the revised electoral calendar, it
will be critical for the United Nations to do its utmost to assist the Central African
authorities to ensure and promote a calm environment in Ban gui and throughout the
country that would be conducive to the timely holding of free and fair elections in
order to bring the political transition to an end. MINUSCA, pursuant to its mandate,
will need to effectively support this important process in terms of security, logistics
and taking robust action against spoilers. The planned visit to Bangui of Pope
Francis in late November will also require MINUSCA to provide additional
assistance in support of the transitional authorities.
The full complement of the authorized strength of MINUSCA should be
deployed shortly. However, the Mission is still in the deployment phase of its
authorized military and police units. Lessons from the crises of October 2014 and
September 2015 demonstrate that the situation in the capital has a direct impact on
security and stability throughout the country. Therefore, ensuring security on the
ground, upholding public order and the rule of law, preventing increased tensions and
containing spoilers will be key. The current presence of MINUSCA in the capital
includes one full and two reduced infantry battalions, eight formed police units and
two police protection support units. However, the Mission is still facing considerable
challenges in securing Bangui, even with the welcome support of the Sangaris force.
The deployment on 7 November of two Senegalese attack helicopters, which
are expected to be operational by 17 November, and the planned deployment of a
250-strong advance party of the Egyptian battalion, together with the plann ed
deployment of a Mauritanian formed police unit in November, will provide much needed reinforcements in Bangui. However, pending their full deployment and
operationalization, as well as that of the special forces company from Bangladesh,
additional capabilities will be needed to provide the degree of support to the Central
African authorities required for creating an environment conducive to the holding of
elections and in ensuring security during the polls and the papal visit.
To address the challenges in the critical period ahead, taking into account the
ongoing logistical challenge that deploying reinforcements to the Central African
Republic represents, I should be grateful if the Security Council would approve the
temporary deployment and the immediate transfer to MINUSCA of a detachment of
300 personnel from the quick reaction force deployed in UNOCI, for a period of
eight weeks after its induction, under inter-mission cooperation arrangements. The
detachment would provide additional security at this critical time, including by
undertaking robust patrolling to deter spoilers and protect civilians and rapid
reaction tasks. In conjunction with other arrangements being put in place in Bangui,
this would enable MINUSCA to significantly improve the security situation in its
area of operations, thus ensuring a safer and more secure environment for the
elections and enhancing security during the upcoming papal visit. The rest of the
unit would remain operational in UNOCI, which would assess its own operation al
requirements and identify the risk mitigation measures necessary to ensure the
continued implementation of its mandate.
The Secretariat is obtaining the formal consent of the troop -contributing
country concerned, of the host country and of Côte d’Ivoire for these arrangements.
To ensure the timely redeployment of personnel and assets from UNOCI to

2/3

15-20514

S/2015/894

MINUSCA, I should be grateful if the Security Council would grant advance
approval of the proposed arrangements.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-20514

3/3
