A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/215
19 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 22
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/L.8/Rev.1)]
49/215.

Assistance in mine clearance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/7 on assistance in mine clearance, adopted
without a vote on 19 October 1993,
Affirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian problem caused
by the presence of mines and other unexploded devices that have serious and
lasting social and economic consequences for the populations of mine-infested
countries and constitute an obstacle to the return of refugees and other
displaced persons, to humanitarian aid operations and to reconstruction and
economic development, as well as to the restoration of normal social
conditions,
Stressing its grave alarm at the ever-increasing presence of mines and
other unexploded devices as a result of armed conflicts,
Deeply concerned that the number of mines being laid each year
exponentially outweighs the number of such mines that can be cleared during
that time, and convinced of the necessity and urgency of an increase in mineclearance efforts by the international community,
Recognizing the importance of recording, where appropriate, the location
of mines,

95-76321

/...

A/RES/49/215
Page 2

Reiterating its dismay at the high number of victims of mines,
especially among civilian populations, and taking note in this context of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/94 of 9 March 1994 on the effects
of armed conflicts on children’s lives, 1/
Bearing in mind the serious threat that mines and other unexploded
devices pose to the safety, the health and the lives of personnel
participating in humanitarian, peace-keeping and rehabilitation programmes,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 48/79 of 16 December 1993 on
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects 2/ and the convening by the Secretary-General of a
conference to review and amend that Convention, noting in particular, in this
regard, the work of the group of governmental experts at present engaged in
preparing the review of the Convention and especially the Protocol on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other
Devices (Protocol II) 2/ as a matter of priority,
Recalling also its resolution 48/75 K of 16 December 1993, calling for a
moratorium on the export of anti-personnel land-mines,
Bearing in mind that significant progress needs to be achieved in these
fields,
Recognizing that, in addition to the primary role of States, the United
Nations has an important role in the field of assistance in mine clearance,
Welcoming, in this regard, the efforts made by the United Nations to
foster the establishment of national mine-clearance capacities in countries
where mines constitute a serious threat to the safety, health and lives of the
local population,
Noting with satisfaction the inclusion in the mandates of several peacekeeping operations of provisions relating to mine-clearance work carried out
under the direction of the Department of Peace-keeping Operations of the
Secretariat, in the context of such operations,
Commending the activities already undertaken by the United Nations
system, donor and recipient Governments, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and non-governmental organizations to address solutions of problems
relating to the presence of mines and other unexploded devices,
Commending in particular the activities already undertaken by the
Secretary-General, especially the establishment in the Secretariat of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs as a focal point within the United Nations
for coordinating de-mining and related issues,
____________
1/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1994/24), chap. II, sect. A.
2/
See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
/...

A/RES/49/215
Page 3

1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on assistance in mine clearance, 3/ and takes note with
interest of the proposals contained therein, as well as of the contributions
by Member States and bodies that have observer status with the General
Assembly, contained in the addendum to the report;
2.
Welcomes the establishment by the Secretary-General of a voluntary
trust fund to finance, in particular, information and training programmes
relating to mine clearance and to facilitate the launching of mine-clearance
operations;
3.
Appeals to Member States as well as to intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and foundations to contribute to the voluntary
trust fund;
4.
Invites all relevant multilateral and national programmes and
bodies to include, in coordination with the United Nations, activities related
to mine clearance in their humanitarian, social and economic assistance
activities;
5.
Emphasizes again, in this connection, the importance of
coordination by the United Nations of activities related to mine clearance,
including those by regional organizations, in particular activities relating
to information and training;
6.
Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to make use of
available resources to strengthen the coordination role of the United Nations,
and encourages him to continue those efforts with a view to improving the
effectiveness of assistance in mine clearance by the United Nations;
7.
Notes, in this regard, the creation, in the context of the current
reorganization of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat,
of a Mine Clearance and Policy Unit, which, with the support of other
Secretariat units, especially the technical expertise provided by the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations, is responsible for carrying out the
Department’s functions as a focal point;
8.
Urges Member States, regional organizations, governmental and
non-governmental organizations and foundations to continue to extend full
assistance and cooperation to the Secretary-General and, in particular, to
provide him with all information and data as well as other pertinent resources
which could be useful in strengthening the coordination role of the United
Nations in the fields of mine awareness, training, surveying, mine detection
and clearance, scientific research for mine-detection and clearance technology
and information on and distribution of medical equipment and supplies;

____________
3/

A/49/357 and Add.1

/...

A/RES/49/215
Page 4

9.
Calls upon all States, especially those that have a capacity to do
so, to provide the necessary information and technical and material
assistance, as appropriate, and to remove or otherwise render ineffective
minefields, mines and booby-traps in accordance with international law;
10.
Calls upon Member States and governmental and non-governmental
organizations that have the ability to do so to promote scientific research
aimed at the rapid advancement of mine detection and clearance technology;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider the convening, as early
as possible, of an international meeting on mine clearance, to include a
meeting of experts and a meeting of potential donors, in order to promote the
work of the United Nations and international cooperation in this field;
12.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly before its fiftieth session a report covering the activities of the
United Nations on assistance in mine-clearance activities during the past year
and especially the operation of the voluntary trust fund;
13.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Assistance in mine clearance".
95th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
