S/2020/473

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2020
Original: English

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 8 of its resolution 2485 (2019), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to conduct and provide the Council, no later than 1 June 2020, with
an assessment of the continued relevance of the resources of the Unit ed Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and options for improving the efficiency and
effectiveness between UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, taking into consideration the troop ceiling and the civilian
component of UNIFIL.
2.
Pursuant to that resolution, the Department of Peace Operations launched the
assessment in consultation with relevant stakeholders at Headquarters, including
political consultations with Member States, and the development of terms of refe rence
and a methodology. Within that process, UNIFIL created a working group that
conducted an internal review of the mission, in close coordination with Headquarters,
with a view to exploring options for the enhanced effectiveness of UNIFIL to better
address future challenges to mandate implementation. The Assistant Secretary -General
for the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific led an interdisciplinary assessment mission
from various departments and offices of the Secretariat to Lebanon from 29 February
to 7 March 2020. The assessment team reviewed and developed the preparatory work
conducted by UNIFIL, held consultations with leaders of the Government of Lebanon
and met with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon on the
question of efficiencies and effectiveness between the two missions. The assessment
team met the Speaker of Parliament, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, the Chief of the Lebanese
Armed Forces and the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces South Litani Sector.
A planned visit to Israel could not proceed owing to travel restrictions related to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In addition to consultations at
Headquarters in New York, Israel communicated its views on the assessment in writing.
3.
The present assessment report includes a tactical review of the UNIFIL military
force structure (land, air and maritime component) and the civilian components to
ensure that the mission’s staffing structure is aligned with the mission mandate, taking
into account the evolving context. Options are identified for enhancing UNIFIL
mandate implementation efforts, on the basis of a review of its activities and their
impact in terms of prevention and deterrence and in terms of monitoring the cessation
of hostilities and assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces in taking steps towards the

20-06856 (E)

050620

*2006856*

S/2020/473

establishment between the Blue Line and the Litani River of an area free of
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons. Options for enhanced technology
and data collection, analysis, and reporting were reviewed. Also explored in the
assessment are the context of and prospects for advancing the transition of
responsibilities from the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force to the Lebanese Armed Forces,
with a focus on what is realistic in the near future.
4.
Taken into consideration in the assessment are previous review processes and
evaluations of the mission, including the 2018 military capability study, the 2012 and
2017 strategic reviews of UNIFIL and the civilian staffing review undertaken in
2013/14, the latter of which was subsequently implemented over a three-year period.
The implementation of these reviews has resulted in reductions in major equipment
and troop strength, from 10,600 in 2016/17 to the current 10,155. Also explored in
the assessment are different ways of doing business, including the use of new or
alternative equipment and technology. Synergies with other United Nations entities
in Lebanon were also looked at, taking into account policy frameworks such as Action
for Peacekeeping (2018) and resolution 2436 (2018) on peacekeeping performance,
as was the UNIFIL support role to the United Nations Disengage ment Observer Force
(UNDOF), the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon in logistical and
administrative matters and to other missions regarding conduct and discipline. In line
with the system-wide strategy on gender parity, gender balance is a key principle
guiding any future configuration of the mission’s staffing. As a pilot mission of the
Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, some of its preliminary findings
informed an evaluation of the mission’s strengths and weaknesses and helped to
articulate priorities for the coming years, as reflected in the present assessment.
5.
Consultations on the assessment with the parties, members of the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries have been held at the senior and working
levels since the adoption of resolution 2485 (2019). Both parties emphasized their
continued commitment to implementing resolution 1701 (2006).

II. Purpose, evolution and impact of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon
6.
UNIFIL was established pursuant to Security Council resolutions 425 (1978)
and 426 (1978) to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern Lebanon,
restore international peace and security and assist the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area. On 11 August 2006, the
Council adopted resolution 1701 (2006), enlarging the presence of UNIFIL to up to
15,000 troops. At the request of the Government of Lebanon, a Maritime Task Force
was established in October 2006, with an initial 18 ships. Resolution 1701 (2006) also
provided the mission with an enhanced mandate to monitor the cessation of hostilities,
ensure that the area of operations is not utilized for hostile activities of any kind and
accompany and support the Lebanese Armed Forces as they d eployed throughout the
south of Lebanon. UNIFIL assists the Lebanese Armed Forces in taking steps towards
the establishment between the Blue Line and the Litani River of an area free of any
armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the Govern ment of Lebanon
and of UNIFIL. The mission is also authorized to take all action necessary in areas of
deployment and as it deems within its capabilities to protect civilians under imminent
threat of violence and to ensure the security and freedom of movem ent of United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers.
7.
With the exception of some isolated, albeit serious, incidents, the cessation of
hostilities has been maintained and the situation along the Blue Line has remained
2/11

20-06856

S/2020/473

calm for the most part since 2006. However, occasional violence has underscored the
fragility of the cessation of hostilities and the lingering danger of a rapid escalation.
On 24 June 2007, six UNIFIL peacekeepers were killed during a car bomb attack in
Sahl al-Dardarah. On 3 August 2010, an exchange of fire in Udaysah resulted in one
Israel Defense Forces officer and three Lebanese soldiers killed. On 15 December
2013, an incident in Rosh HaNikra led to the killing of one Israel Defense Forces
soldier, and on 28 January 2015, anti-tank missiles were fired in the Shabʻa Farms
area by Hizbullah, resulting in the death of two Israel Defense Forces soldiers and
injuries to seven others. The subsequent fire by Israel also killed a UNIFIL
peacekeeper. As detailed in S/2019/889, in September 2019, following the unmanned
aerial vehicle incident of 25 August in the southern suburbs of Beirut, Hizbullah
claimed responsibility for launching three anti-tank missiles from the vicinity of a
Green Without Borders location north of the Blue Line in Marun al-Ra’s, at an Israel
Defense Forces moving armoured vehicle, prompting the Israel Defense Forces to fire
artillery rounds into Lebanon in the vicinity of Marun al -Ra’s and Aytarun. The
incident did not result in casualties on either side. UNIFIL liaison and coordination
efforts with the parties, as well as with members of the diplomatic community in
Beirut and Tel Aviv, led to a quick restoration of the cessation of hostilities following
those incidents.
8.
UNIFIL liaison and coordination mechanisms, including the Liaison Branch, the
tripartite forum and the day-to-day bilateral engagement with the parties, are critical
to ensuring calm along the Blue Line. When tension along the Blue Line increased in
December 2018 as the Israel Defense Forces announced that it had discovered several
tunnels crossing the Blue Line, UNIFIL liaised between the parties to establish the
facts and prevent misunderstandings. Furthermore, when the Israel Defense Forces
commenced T-wall construction south of the Blue Line in the Lebanese reservation
area, in Misgav Am, across from Udaysah (Sector East), in January 2019, UNIFIL
troops interposed between the parties and the Liaison Branch deployed preventively
at locations where works were undertaken, while the tripartite forum facilitated
interaction between the two sides, urging them to reach a mutually acceptable way
forward. The works were eventually completed without incident. The visible marking
of the Blue Line, while stalled since 2017, also remains an essential tool for the
mission to maintain calm along the Blue Line.
9.
The present configuration of UNIFIL is based on a saturation model, having the
highest density of troops and major equipment among all United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Its density of troops and its intense patrolling have proved
essential to its ability to deter, de-escalate, prevent and deconflict, where and as
necessary. The high concentration of troops in a relatively small area of operations
and the significant operational tempo, wherein the mission is conducting
approximately 400 operational activities daily, are an important deterrence. The
presence of more than 10,000 troops from more than 40 different countries serves as
a reminder to the parties that the international community is strongly committed to
assisting them in the maintenance of the cessation of hostilities and the prevention of
new tensions, with the expectation that political progress will resolve underlying
causes of the conflict.
10. Since 2006, relative calm and a perception of security in the south have allowed
for the return of many southerners. Population growth in the south is reflected in the
increase in the number of eligible voters (21 years of age and above) from 373,646 in
2005 to 492,725 in 2018. During the holiday season, population density increases
further, as members of the diaspora return.
11. Having adapted its operations since the onset of the pandemic in 2020, UNIFIL
continues to fulfil its mandate, while minimizin g health risks to staff and the local
community. UNIFIL has been supporting coping mechanisms in southern Lebanon,
20-06856

3/11

S/2020/473

including by providing medical equipment to local authorities. While UNIFIL has
reduced its training and outreach activities as a precautionary measure, it has
maintained the operational tempo of its patrolling and monitoring activities, including
independently, to ensure continued mandate implementation and the continued
commitment by both Lebanon and Israel to the cessation of hostilities. Th ere is an
understanding with the United Nations country team that UNIFIL medical facilities
will be available to all members of the United Nations family in case of need. Medical
evacuation options are envisaged for any serious illnesses.

III. Challenges to mandate implementation
12. While the underlying drivers of conflict and the dynamics between the parties
have not dramatically changed since 2006, UNIFIL does face new challenges in the
way that it is able to conduct its operations. UNIFIL has main tained the cessation of
hostilities, but both parties have outstanding obligations under resolution 1701
(2006). The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and
other groups in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) continues to restrict the ability of
the State to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. There has been
no progress in terms of a political process towards a permanent ceasefire or the
demarcation of the land and maritime borders between Lebanon and Israel. The
parties remain unwilling to engage, other than at the tactical level (in the tripartite
forum). Blue Line demarcation has been stalled since 2017, with discussions to
resolve the 13 Lebanese reservation areas yet to resume in the tripartite forum. While
UNIFIL, by maintaining stability, has contributed to conditions conducive for a
political process – which lies outside the scope of the mission’s mandate – any
meaningful progress towards a permanent ceasefire remains elusive.
13. The deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces to south Lebanon has been
progressing slowly since the establishment of the strategic dialogue between them
and UNIFIL in 2010. The engagement of the Lebanese Armed Forces along the
northern and eastern borders of Lebanon to contain spillover from the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic since 2011 has delayed the deployment of troops to the south.
Such deployment was even reversed, as Lebanese Armed Forces units assigned to the
UNIFIL area of operations were redeployed in August 2014 to address threats posed
by Security Council-listed terrorist groups in north-eastern Lebanon. A model
regiment, for which international partners have pledged support in terms of
accommodation (barracks), equipment and training, was officially established in
February 2018 but is yet to be staffed and deployed. Furthermore, with the start of
nationwide protests in October 2019, Lebanese Armed Forces personnel were
assigned to crowd control functions elsewhere in the country. The deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the south therefore remains tentative and uncertain, with
only an estimated 3,000 troops deployed and a lack of proper defensive and other
infrastructure and heavy (armoured personnel carriers, armour, artillery) equipment.
14. The Lebanese Armed Forces also lack infrastructure, equipment, funding, fuel
and spare parts owing to budgetary constraints. Since June 2019, austerity m easures
have been adopted in the State budget, including a three-year freeze on recruitment,
a reduced operational budget and reduced benefits and pensions. With further
austerity measures expected in the coming three to five years, deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces in the area of operations is unlikely to improve.
15. Lebanon also lacks capabilities to secure its territorial waters. The Lebanese
Navy has a few aging, donated vessels with limited ability to operate full -time across
Lebanese waters. The Lebanese ships “Tabarja” and “Naquora” were certified in
August 2018 and January 2019, respectively, to conduct operations with the UNIFIL

4/11

20-06856

S/2020/473

Maritime Task Force. The crew of a third vessel, “Trablous”, is undergoing training
with the aim of conducting operations in close coordination with the Maritime Task
Force in 2020. However, these vessels do not have the capacity to stay at sea for long
periods of time or under bad weather conditions. Notwithstanding these limitations,
the Lebanese Navy plans to assume Maritime Task Force responsibilities in part for
four days a week in the central maritime corridor on the basis of existing naval assets
and in close coordination with the Task Force. The partial transition plan, pending
formal approval by the Lebanese Armed Forces leadership, was enabled by the
upgrade of the Lebanese coastal radar system at the end of 2019, which significantly
enhanced the Lebanese surveyance capacity over Lebanese territorial waters. The
acquisition of additional vessels required for a sustainable gradual takeover of
functions from the Maritime Task Force is affected by budgetary constraints, while
donor support remains a necessity. The French donation of four rigid -hull inflatable
boats to the Lebanese Navy on 25 March 2020 constitutes a slight increase in naval
capabilities; further support will be needed to significantly upgrade the capability of
the Lebanese Navy.
16. Since 2017, UNIFIL has experienced an increasing number of incidents in which
the freedom of movement of its patrols is hindered. Local residents are sometimes
fencing off new areas for farming, preventing UNIFIL from gaining access to public
spaces that were previously accessible, including close to the Blue Line. Locals are
also at times stopping UNIFIL patrols from entering villages, on the grounds that the
use of heavy vehicles in narrow streets is disturbing and damaging roads and
infrastructure. In other instances, the population hinders UNIFIL patrols unless they
are accompanied by the Lebanese Armed Forces. It is evident that cooperation
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces is fundamental to the success of
UNIFIL operations and to the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers. At
the same time, the ability of the mission to conduct independent patrols and activities
must continue to be a priority in accordance with th e mandate of UNIFIL.
17. UNIFIL perception surveys, conducted annually since 2007, indicate that the
population’s recognition of the Lebanese Armed Forces as the sole security provider
in the south has significantly improved. Findings in the same surveys show that, since
2017, local residents have been questioning the impartiality of peacekeepers more
and more, which negatively affects troop acceptance and results in more frequent
restrictions on the movement of UNIFIL troops. Another phenomenon affecting
access is the presence of Green without Borders, which has established fenced sites,
thus cordoning off areas that were previously accessible to UNIFIL, including close
to the Blue Line. To date, the continued and regular access of UNIFIL to these sites
has not been facilitated by the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL continues to work
with the Lebanese Armed Forces to expand the mission’s presence in areas outside
main routes and municipal centres, including on private roads.
18. Of critical importance is the reality that UNIFIL has not been granted access to
investigate the sites of serious violations of resolution 1701 (2006), including the
cement factory in Kafir Kila, which was proven to be connected to one of the cross
Blue Line tunnels discovered by the Israel Defense Forces, and the site of the missile
strike of 1 September 2019 claimed by Hizbullah. The ability of UNIFIL to swiftly
investigate such incidents constitutes a core part of its mandate and of its efforts to
prevent actions by the parties that could undermine the cessation of hostilities. Going
forward, the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to provide access without
hindrance to all areas that UNIFIL determines to be a mandated priority will remain
key to the meaningful implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
19. The occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of northern Ghajar and an adjacent
area north of the Blue Line Forces continues. Overflights by the Israel Defense Forces
of Lebanese airspace also continue, on an almost daily basis. UNIFIL regularly raises
20-06856

5/11

S/2020/473

and records these violations of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006)
in tripartite meetings with the parties, in the reports of the Secretary -General to the
Security Council on the implementation of the resolution and in letters to the Israel
Defense Forces. The Government of Lebanon continues to underline that violations
occur not only in the south, but also throughout the entire Lebanese airspace. The
Government also asserts that UNIFIL should bring these violations to a halt and that
the fact that Israel persists in these violations undermines the credibility of the
mission. Hence, successfully addressing airspace violations and ensuring that Israel
ceases overflights remains one of the main challenges of UNIFIL.
20. The Israel Defense Forces also reportedly use Lebanese airspace to conduct
raids in the Syrian Arab Republic. These dynamics, although outside the UNIFIL area
of operations and not within the remit of its mandate, threaten to undermine the
cessation of hostilities between Israel and Lebanon.
21. UNIFIL continues to focus on the gender parity of civilian staff and has made
steady progress in reaching close to parity in some staffing categories, including
National Professional Officers and some levels of international professional staff. The
overall distribution of female civilian staff is 37 per cent, while 6 per cent of military
personnel serving with UNIFIL are women. As a result, only 5 per cent of UNIFIL
operational activities include women.

IV. Key findings: options and recommendations for increased
efficiency of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
22. To address the challenges outlined above, the options outlined below to adjust
the mission to the changing environment are proposed.
Capabilities
23. The pattern of operations of UNIFIL and the frequency of its patrols, including
close to the Blue Line, serve as a deterrent to potential spoilers and provides UNIFIL
with the capacity to deter, prevent, de-escalate and deconflict rapidly. This has proved
to be instrumental during incidents of heightened tension. UNIFIL will maintain a
robust Force Reserve (Force Commander ’s Reserve and Sector Mobile Reserves) at
different levels to enable effective intervention on the ground, as required.
24. While the current robust posture of UNIFIL serves as a deterrent and has
prevented a return to hostilities, the frequency of patrols has led to some issues of
contention with local residents, who oppose the use of heavy military vehicles on
narrow roads going through their villages. In particular, standard armoured personnel
carriers are not entirely suitable for crowded areas, narrow streets and mountainous
terrain. Smaller vehicles such as high-mobility light tactical vehicles and
reconnaissance vehicles, as defined by the 2020 Working Group on ContingentOwned Equipment, are more suitable. Relevant troop-contributing countries will be
encouraged to deploy smaller combat vehicles such as high-mobility light tactical
vehicles and reconnaissance vehicles in appropriate locations, taking security
considerations into account. The structure of infantry battalions also needs to be
tailored to cater to different terrains in the UNIFIL area of operations. Some
battalions, on the basis of operational requirements and proximi ty to the Blue Line,
will be requested to replace up to 50 percent of their armoured personnel carriers with
high-mobility light tactical vehicles.
25. To further adapt the posture of UNIFIL to fit its current and future operational
environment and challenges would require the creation of a more agile and mobile
force, with improved monitoring capacity, by replacing some heavy infantry functions
6/11

20-06856

S/2020/473

used for day-to-day activities with reconnaissance functions. The shift would result
in a force sufficiently protected but with a lighter footprint, geared towards better
situational awareness. UNIFIL could decrease the density of troops near the Litani
River, while maintaining troop density close to the Blue Line and at a number of
strategic locations that are the focus of counter-rocket-launching operations.
Checkpoints along the Litani River, which are critical to efforts to prevent the inflow
of unauthorized weapons and equipment into the UNIFIL area of operations, would
not be affected. A reconfiguration of second echelon battalions in the middle depth of
the area of operations could also be considered. Overall, adaptation of the force
posture would result in an increase in the number of troops suited for monitoring and
observation assignments and in a reduction in the number of troops for those
battalions in the centre of the area of operations, as the mission focuses on the density
of troops along the Blue Line. Such a reconfigured force would have a reduced
environmental impact, with less strain on roads and bridges, and could result in
reduced support and maintenance requirements. The expectation would also be that
patrols would face fewer restrictions of movement on narrow roads in smaller
communities.
26. The liaison and coordination mechanisms of UNIFIL continue to provide a
widely appreciated capability towards the maintenance of calm along the Blue Line.
The physical presence of liaison teams on the ground when the parties undertake work
in the vicinity of the Blue Line has proved crucial in defusing tension s and avoiding
escalation. Furthermore, the contribution to tactical and strategic communications
between the parties has been vital when defusing tensions, maintaining stability and
avoiding escalation. Currently, liaison officers comprise a small percent age of
UNIFIL forces. It is recommended that UNIFIL increase the number of liaison staff,
with two additional teams, one on each side of the Blue Line. To further improve a
rapid flow of information, liaison UNIFIL officers can also, in rotation, be positi oned
in the divisional command in Israel, as well as at Lebanese Armed Forces
headquarters. The long-standing proposal of UNIFIL for a liaison office in Tel Aviv
is also endorsed.
27. The existing tripartite forum has proved to be a valuable tool to discu ss and
resolve specific issues of mutual interest and contribute constructively to prevent
miscommunication, mitigate risk and promote deconfliction with regard to the
implementation of the UNIFIL mandate and Blue Line marking. It is recommended
that UNIFIL explore with the parties the creation of additional ad hoc subcommittees
within the existing tripartite system to ensure systematic coordination with regard to
salient, recurring matters.
28. It is also recommended that there be some adjustments to the force headquarters
configuration, with the aim of enhancing civil-military functional integration in the
areas of information analysis, air operations, training, gender and technology. Such
increased coordination would mitigate the impact of rotations, improve the
institutional knowledge and memory of each section, ease information flow and
prevent the duplication of effort.
Consolidation of United Nations positions
29. UNIFIL has 55 positions in its area of operations. Some of these positions have
limited visibility owing to the construction of T-walls by the Israel Defense Forces very
close to the positions. There are also some positions located very close to one another.
(Some positions, while lacking visibility south of the Blue Line owing to T-wall
construction, remain critical for their visibility and patrolling north of the Blue Line,
especially where located in areas with a history of cross-Blue Line incidents and at a
considerable distance from the next United Nations position.) The closure of some
United Nations positions could result in the more efficient use of resources from an
20-06856

7/11

S/2020/473

operational point of view, with a lower number of troops needed for force protection
duties. The colocation of different contingents in the same position could also be
explored. The consolidation of troops may also result in improved living conditions,
while consideration could be given to handing over some of the vacated positions,
where possible, to the Lebanese Armed Forces.
30. UNIFIL is envisaging a consolidation of up to five United Nations positions
(representing 10 per cent of its total number of positions) in the area of operations,
without major operational impact. The construction of watchtowers and the use of
technology (further outlined below) may compensate for some of these observation
gaps. The force levels and current saturation model, which have proved to be a
deterrent to a resumption of hostilities, would not be affected, but efficiencies in terms
of logistics support are expected. In general, savings related to facilities management
may be gained within a four-year time frame.
Improved use of new technology
31. UNIFIL employs a large set of new technology to fulfil requirements related to
force protection, situational awareness and the detection and reporting of violations
of resolution 1701 (2006). To further increase operational efficiencies, UNIFIL may
consider employing additional new technology. While simple technology such as
closed-circuit television, sensors and automated access control systems are being used
for perimeter security and to monitor the areas immediately outside the mission ’s
compounds, more advanced technology such as thermal cameras, high-tech
binoculars and unmanned aerial vehicles could enhance monitoring along the Blue
Line and other parts of the area of operations. UNIFIL is undertaking force protection
upgrades at 19 positions close to the Blue Line and intends to augment them with
long-range, night-enabled cameras or other high-tech equipment or services that can
be deployed to increase force protection and observation capabilities. The use of
unmanned aerial vehicles for monitoring the Blue Line a nd area of maritime
operations could also be considered. In accordance with established policies, rules
and regulations, it would be appropriate to have such high-tech equipment available
either as contingent-owned equipment or under a letter of assist with troopcontributing countries, or commercial sourcing, depending on which option provides
the best value for the United Nations, recognizing that these capabilities require
significant ongoing financial resources, maintenance, familiarization and training .
32. Increased technical capacity will require appropriate training of personnel. An
increase in the amount of data gathered by UNIFIL will also require specialized
capabilities (i.e., specialized human resources, secure information technology
support) for analysis to ensure that data contribute to an enhanced integrated
operational picture and to situational awareness and understanding (insight, context,
foresight) for effective decision-making.
Reconfiguration of the Maritime Task Force
33. The Maritime Task Force of UNIFIL is an all-corvette fleet of six ships from six
different Maritime Contributing Countries. It continues to support the Lebanese Navy
to prevent the unauthorized entry of arms or related materiel by sea into Lebanon,
through maritime interdiction operations and joint training. In order to maintain
comprehensive coverage of the entire area of maritime operations and ensure the
hailing of every ship entering or transiting Lebanese waters, with a view to preventing
the unauthorized entry of arms or related materiel by sea into Lebanon, the Maritime
Task Force maintains three ships at sea on a 24/7 basis. Some progress was noted in
the assessment noted regarding the technical upgrade of coastal radar stations, the
certification of the first seaworthy Lebanese vessels in 2018 and 2019, and the crew
of the third vessel, “Trablous”, undergoing training, with the aim of that vessel being
8/11

20-06856

S/2020/473

certified in 2020. In order to achieve the strategic end state of a gradual transition of
United Nations responsibilities to the Government of Lebanon, the Lebanese Navy
has begun to participate in the maritime interdiction operations along with the
Maritime Task Force for a one-year trial period, in order to validate that the Navy is
all-weather capable (both professionally and platform-wise) to take over partial
responsibilities of the Task Force in one sector of the area of maritime operations,
while maintaining the same operational tempo of the Task Force.
34. Given these developments, the Maritime Task Force may be in a position to
make a partial transition of some maritime interdiction responsibilities to the
Lebanese Navy. In doing so, the reduction in the size of the Maritime Task Force to
five vessels could be realized in a way that preserves the overall operational capacity
to ensure the monitoring and interdiction operations in the area of maritime
operations. This evolution would require maintaining the efforts to build the
capacities of the Lebanese Navy. An enhanced training schedule and a schedule for
the handover of command and control of maritime interdiction operations to the
Lebanese Navy are also under development. The Lebanese Navy fleet, while certified,
is ageing and in need of replacement. Continued international support, including from
UNIFIL and from bilateral partners, therefore remains critical in order to ensure an
increase, with adequate sustainability, in Lebanese Navy capabilities.
Efficiencies between the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
35. In their day-to-day work, the two missions’ substantive components have
distinct functions. The political team of the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon supports the Special Coordinator ’s engagement at the
strategic level, while the UNIFIL political team works in support o f the Head of
Mission and Force Commander’s engagement with the parties, bilaterally or through
the tripartite forum in accordance with the UNIFIL mandate. In the absence of a
permanent ceasefire, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 1701
(2006), UNIFIL continues to implement all aspects of its mandate to preserve the
cessation of hostilities and maintain a stable and secure environment, including along
the Blue Line, while the Office uses its good offices to explore and promote a
resolution of the protracted political elements of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
support the political, security and socioeconomic stability of Lebanon t o enable the
country to comply with obligations pursuant to the resolution. The coordinated
engagement by the Office and UNIFIL is intended to enable the parties to fulfil their
outstanding obligations.
36. A thorough cost-benefit analysis in all areas of support was undertaken, and
several services where efficiencies could be realized through the provision of
administrative and logistics capacity by the entity holding comparative advantage
were identified. Accordingly, the two missions have implemented a p rovision of
services mechanism whereby UNIFIL delivers administrative support and service
delivery to the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon in the
areas of finance, procurement, write-off, claims, disposal, supply, engineering, field
technology, vehicle support services, internal air transportation, medical,
transportation of goods, customs clearances, property management, contracts
management and security. UNIFIL has optimized its service delivery and
administrative support to the Office.
37. At the substantive level, cooperation, coordination and information -sharing
between the two missions was also optimized. Heads of Mission of UNIFIL and the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon coordinate routinely,
and the political sections engage in regular meetings to undertake joint risk
assessments and analysis and explore further complementarity and concerted efforts
20-06856

9/11

S/2020/473

towards leveraging international donor support to the Lebanese Armed Forces. To
institutionalize coordination and collaboration further, a strategic forum was created
between the two missions’ political components. During the escalation of tensions in
late August and early in September 2019, both missions collaborated on preventing
conflict and de-escalating tensions, including through the complementary good
offices of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and liaison by UNIFIL
with their relevant political and military counterparts in both Lebanon and Israel, as
well as through alignment of messaging.
38. UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
also continue to encourage a coordinated donor approach, including through joint
participation in donor consultations and alignment of messaging with regard to
pledges of support for the deployment of the model regiment and the build -up of the
Lebanese Navy and to the implementation by the Government of Lebanon of those
obligations.
Operational support
39. The assessment also contained a review of operational support to UNIFIL in the
context of its support to United Nations entities in Lebanon and the region with the
aim of realizing the opportunities offered by the management reforms of the
Secretary-General. By understanding the different mandates and the political
sensitivities, current arrangements between the missions can be strengthened by
sharing best practices and lessons learned, with a view to promoting improved
collaboration in the short and long terms. Once the security situation improves in
Lebanon, UNFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon can jointly revisit the alternate premises options in Beirut, in cooperation
with other United Nations entities, with a view to increasing efficiencies. The
structure of the UNIFIL mission support components can also be further streamlined.
40. The performance and configuration of organic and dedicated military enabling
capabilities should be evaluated and streamlined to ensure that the mission maintains
an effective mix of enabling troop-contributing country capabilities and civiliancontracted services. The levels of major equipment in UNIFIL continue to be
excessive relative to the needs as determined in the last military capability study, in
2018. All identified excessive contingent-owned equipment should be adjusted and
removed from the UNIFIL memorandums of understanding with troop -contributing
countries as soon as possible. UNIFIL has declared such equipment as surplus, and it
is currently reimbursed at 50 per cent of the regular rate, pending repatriation. If such
equipment is required owing to national standards, troop-contributing countries, in
close coordination with UNIFIL, might explore the retention of such capacity under
the national support element modality at no cost to the United Nations.
41. UNIFIL shall gradually downsize its reliance on United Nations-owned
equipment. Ageing United Nations-owned equipment should be written off, while the
United Nations shall request troop-contributing countries to obtain modern
contingent-owned equipment and specialized equipment that meet the mission ’s
military operational needs. The United Nations shall allocate appropriate resources
for contingent-owned equipment.
42. A technical review of regional information and communications t echnology
(ICT) support arrangements should be undertaken, given that UNIFIL plays an
important role by providing ICT services to regional United Nations entities (Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, UNDOF, Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, UNTSO-Observer Group LebanonObserver Group Golan) under the Middle East regional structure. The review shall
include an analysis of effective technological solutions and support arrangements to
10/11

20-06856

S/2020/473

enhance the effectiveness of the implementation of the mission’s mandated
objectives.
43. The closer alignment of the workforce with the mission’s needs and priorities
warrants a civilian staffing review to take into account any reconfiguration
subsequent to the recommendations of the present report, including the use of new
technologies. The review will look at all mission pillars and substantive and
operational support. The structure of the Mission Support Division of UNIFIL should
be reviewed to comply with the most current operational support guidance.
44. Within existing resources, the requirement to establish strategic planning
capabilities in the Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander should be
supported in order to strengthen and align integrated strategic and op erational
business planning in key cross-cutting programmes, including the Comprehensive
Performance Assessment System, results-based budgeting, Umoja strategic
management, risk management, business continuity, contingency planning, gender
and environment.

V. Observations
45. The stability of the UNIFIL area of operations remains fragile amid increasingly
complex conflict dynamics in the region and the absence of political progress to
resolve the underlying causes of the conflict between Israel and Lebanon, including
through a permanent ceasefire, the respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Lebanon, border demarcation and a Lebanese-led and -owned national dialogue to
determine a national defence strategy. Protracted tensions in the region, the security
concern of Israel regarding Hizbullah’s military capabilities, the Syrian conflict and
the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict remain key factors that affect the stability
of the region and of the Blue Line, with an undiminished risk of a resumption of
hostilities between the parties, even if accidentally triggered.
46. Pending a final agreement on the boundary between Lebanon and Israel, and as
long as the Lebanese Armed Forces is not able to deploy to southern Lebanon in
significantly larger numbers, the operational and liaison activities of UNIFIL continue
to provide valuable deterrence and prevention and a critical de -escalation mechanism
in a context in which escalation can spark easily. The leverage and ability of UNIFIL
to continue to perform its mandated tasks are inextricably linked to its capabilities,
and I believe that UNIFIL, with its robust posture, remains necessary to prevent a
security vacuum until conditions on the ground change in the direction of a permanent
ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel.
47. If the options for optimizing UNIFIL capabilities outlined in this report are
supported and endorsed by the Security Council, the Secretariat will commence
discussions with the Government of Lebanon, the Government of Israel and troop contributing countries. Initial steps towards implementation could commence
promptly, with resource implications most likely reflected in the 2021 –2022 budget
cycle and beyond.
48. It is my belief that the recommendations proposed in this report would enhance
the capacity of UNIFIL to fully and efficiently implement its mandate. However, it is
important to note that this capacity also depends to a very large extent on the full
support and cooperation of the parties. I am grateful for the continued commitment
of both parties to implement resolution 1701 (2006) and call upon them to further
extend their full support and cooperation to UNIFIL as it implements its mandate.

20-06856

11/11
