United Nations

A/RES/57/261

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 87 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/532/Add.6)]

57/261. Promoting an integrated management approach to the
Caribbean Sea area in the context of sustainable
development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and commitments enshrined in the Rio Declaration
on Environment and Development 1 and the principles embodied in the Declaration
of Barbados 2 and the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, 3 as well as other relevant declarations and
international instruments,
Recalling the Declaration and review document adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-second special session, 4
Taking into account all other relevant General Assembly resolutions, including
resolutions 54/225 of 22 December 1999 and 55/203 of 20 December 2000,
Taking into account also the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development 5 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 6
Noting with interest the respective partnership initiatives voluntarily
undertaken by Governments, international organizations and major groups and
announced at the Summit,

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions
adopted by the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
See resolution S-22/2, annex.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.

02 55654

A/RES/57/261

Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 7 which
provides the overall legal framework for ocean activities, and emphasizing its
fundamental character,
Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need
to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral
approach,
Emphasizing the importance of national, regional and global action and
cooperation in the marine sector as recognized by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in chapter 17 of Agenda 21, 8
Recalling the Convention for the Protection and Development of the Marine
Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region, signed at Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, on 24 March 1983, 9 which contains the definition of the wider Caribbean
region of which the Caribbean Sea is part,
Welcoming the adoption, on 6 October 1999 in Aruba, of the Protocol
Concerning Pollution from Land-based Sources and Activities 10 to the Convention
for the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider
Caribbean Region,
Welcoming also the entry into force, on 18 June 2000, of the Protocol
Concerning Specially Protected Areas and Wildlife 10 to the Convention for the
Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean
Region,
Recalling the relevant work done by the International Maritime Organization,
Considering that the Caribbean Sea area includes a large number of States,
countries and territories, most of which are developing countries and small island
developing States that are ecologically fragile, structurally weak and economically
vulnerable and are also affected, inter alia, by their limited capacity, narrow
resource base, need for financial resources, high levels of poverty and the resulting
social problems and the challenges and opportunities of globalization and trade
liberalization,
Recognizing that the Caribbean Sea has a unique biodiversity and highly
fragile ecosystem,
Emphasizing that the Caribbean countries have a high degree of vulnerability
occasioned by climate change and climate variability, associated phenomena, such
as the rise in sea level, the El Niño phenomenon and the increase in the frequency
and intensity of natural disasters caused by hurricanes, floods and droughts, and that
they are also subject to natural disasters, such as those caused by volcanoes,
tsunamis and earthquakes,
_______________
7

See The Law of the Sea: Official Texts of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 and of the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 with Index and Excerpts from the Final Act of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).
8
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions
adopted by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1506, No. 25974.
10
Available on the Internet at www.cep.unep.org/law/sub_law/htm.

2

A/RES/57/261

Underlining the importance of the ongoing work of the working group on
climate change and natural disasters established by the Inter-Agency Task Force for
Disaster Reduction,
Bearing in mind the heavy reliance of most of the Caribbean economies on
their coastal areas, as well as on the marine environment in general, to achieve their
sustainable development needs and goals,
Recognizing the Caribbean Environment Outlook process currently being
undertaken by the United Nations Environment Programme, and welcoming the
support being provided by the Caribbean Environment Programme of the United
Nations Environment Programme towards its implementation,
Acknowledging that the intensive use of the Caribbean Sea for maritime
transport, as well as the considerable number and interlocking character of the
maritime areas under national jurisdiction where Caribbean countries exercise their
rights and duties under international law, present a challenge for the effective
management of the resources,
Noting the problem of marine pollution caused, inter alia, by land-based
sources and the continuing threat of pollution from ship-generated waste and sewage
as well as from the accidental release of hazardous and noxious substances in the
Caribbean Sea area,
Taking note of resolutions GC(44)/RES/17 of 22 September 2000 11 and
GC(46)RES/9 of 20 September 2002 12 of the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency on safety of transport of radioactive materials,
Mindful of the diversity and dynamic interaction and competition among
socio-economic activities for the use of the coastal areas and the marine
environment and their resources,
Mindful also of the efforts of the Caribbean countries to address in a more
holistic manner the sectoral issues relating to the management of the Caribbean Sea
area and, in so doing, to promote an integrated management approach to the
Caribbean Sea area in the context of sustainable development, through a regional
cooperative effort among Caribbean countries,
Noting the efforts of the Caribbean countries, within the framework of the
Association of Caribbean States, to develop further support for their concept of the
Caribbean Sea as an area of special importance, in the context of sustainable
development and in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea,
Welcoming the decision by the Association of Caribbean States to establish the
Working Group of Experts on the Caribbean Sea Initiative to further advance the
implementation of resolution 55/203, inter alia, through the preparation of a
technical report,
Cognizant of the importance of the Caribbean Sea to present and future
generations and its importance to the heritage and the continuing economic wellbeing and sustenance of people living in the area, and the urgent need for the

_______________
11
See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other Decisions of the General Conference,
Forty-fourth Regular Session, 18–22 September 2000 (GC(44)/RES/DEC(2000)).
12
Ibid., Forty-sixth Regular Session, 16–20 September 2002 (GC(46)/RES/DEC(2002)).

3

A/RES/57/261

countries of the region to take appropriate steps for its preservation and protection,
with the support of the international community,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 13

2.
Recognizes the importance of adopting an integrated management
approach to the Caribbean Sea area in the context of sustainable development;
3.
Encourages the further promotion of an integrated management approach
to the Caribbean Sea area in the context of sustainable development, in accordance
with the recommendations contained in resolution 54/225, as well as the provisions
of Agenda 21, 8 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States,3 the outcome of the twenty-second special session of the
General Assembly,4 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development, 5 the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation 6 and the work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, and in conformity with relevant international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; 7
4.
Also encourages the continued efforts of the Caribbean countries to
develop further an integrated management approach to the Caribbean Sea area in the
context of sustainable development and, in this regard, to continue to develop
regional cooperation in the management of their ocean affairs in the context of
sustainable development, in order to address such issues as land-based pollution,
pollution from ships, physical impacts on coral reefs and the diversity and dynamic
interaction of, and competition among, socio-economic activities for the use of the
coastal areas and the marine environment and their resources;
5.
Calls upon States to continue to prioritize action on marine pollution
from land-based sources as part of their national sustainable development strategies
and programmes, in an integrated and inclusive manner, and also calls upon them to
advance the implementation of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection
of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, 14 and the Montreal
Declaration on the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based
Activities; 15
6.
Calls upon the United Nations system and the international community to
assist, as appropriate, Caribbean countries and their regional organizations in their
efforts to ensure the protection of the Caribbean Sea from degradation as a result of
pollution from ships, in particular through the illegal release of oil and other
harmful substances, and from illegal dumping or accidental release of hazardous
waste, including radioactive materials, nuclear waste and dangerous chemicals, in
violation of relevant international rules and standards, as well as pollution from
land-based activities;
7.
Calls upon all relevant States to take the necessary steps to bring into
force, and to support the implementation of, the Protocol Concerning Pollution from
Land-based Sources and Activities 10 to the Convention for the Protection and
Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region9 in order
to protect the marine environment of the Caribbean Sea from land-based pollution
and degradation;
_______________
13

A/57/131.
A/51/116, annex II.
15
E/CN.17/2002/PC.2/15, annex, sect. 1.
14

4

A/RES/57/261

8.
Calls upon the international community to support the efforts of the
Working Group of Experts on the Caribbean Sea Initiative of the Association of
Caribbean States to further implement resolution 55/203, and invites the Association
to submit a report on its progress to the Secretary-General for consideration during
the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
9.
Calls upon all States to become contracting parties to relevant
international agreements to promote the protection of the marine environment of the
Caribbean Sea from pollution and degradation from ships;
10. Supports the efforts of Caribbean countries to implement sustainable
fisheries management programmes by strengthening the recently established
Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism;
11. Calls upon States, taking into consideration the Convention on Biological
Diversity, 16 to develop national, regional and international programmes for halting
the loss of marine biodiversity in the Caribbean Sea, in particular fragile
ecosystems, such as coral reefs;
12. Invites intergovernmental organizations within the United Nations system
to continue their efforts to assist Caribbean countries in becoming parties to the
relevant conventions and protocols and to implement them effectively;
13. Calls upon the international community, the United Nations system and
the multilateral financial institutions, and invites the Global Environment Facility,
within its mandate, to support actively the above-mentioned approach;
14. Calls upon Member States to improve as a matter of priority their
emergency response capabilities and the containment of environmental damage,
particularly in the Caribbean Sea, in the event of natural disasters or of an accident
or incident relating to maritime navigation;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at its fifty-ninth session,
under the sub-item entitled “Further implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” of the item entitled
“Environment and sustainable development”, on the implementation of the present
resolution, taking into account the views expressed by relevant regional
organizations.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

_______________
16

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.

5
