S/2016/1095

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the first 90-day report on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Colombia. The Mission ’s ceasefire
monitoring and verification responsibilities were activated, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2261 (2016), following the signing, in Cartagena,
Colombia, on 26 September 2016, of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Much has transpired in that short period to
both challenge and ultimately reaffirm the peace process. The present report is
focused, in particular, on developments since my letter dated 26 October 2016
addressed to the President of the Council (S/2016/902). In that letter, I requested
that the Council authorize the Mission to verify the implementation of the ceasefire
protocol signed on 13 October 2016 until a new final agreement had been reached
by the Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP). As the period concludes, and as noted in
my letter dated 14 December 2016 to the President of the Council ( S/2016/1063), a
new peace agreement has now been signed and ratified and has entered into force,
signalling the beginning of peace implementation in Colombia and paving the way
for the Mission to carry out the full range of its mandated tasks.

II. Major developments in the peace process
2.
The narrow victory of the “No” vote in the plebiscite of 2 October 2016 made
it legally impossible for the Government of the President, Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón, to implement the agreement signed in Cartagena. Although that result
opened a period of uncertainty in the peace process, all Colombian political actors,
including those opposed to the agreement, underscored their commitment to the
attainment of peace through dialogue and the preservation of the ceasefire and their
support for the verification role of the Mission. Large public mobilizations in favour
of peace were held throughout Colombia in the weeks following the plebiscite.

16-22916 (E)

301216

*1622916*

S/2016/1095

A.

Protocol of 13 October
3.
Immediately after the results of the plebiscite had been made known, the
President and the leader of FARC-EP, Timoleón Jiménez, reiterated their
commitment to the bilateral and definitive ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
declared by both parties on 29 August 2016.
4.
On 3 October 2016, the Government’s chief negotiator, Humberto de la Calle,
and the Colombian High Commissioner for Peace, Sergio Jaramillo, travelled to
Havana for discussions with the FARC-EP leadership. My Special Representative
for Colombia joined the parties for consultations. Those discussions culminated in a
joint communiqué, issued on 7 October 2016, in which the parties agreed to make
adjustments to the agreement following a government-led political dialogue with
various Colombian sectors, including promoters of the “No” vote in the plebiscite of
2 October. The parties also agreed to develop a temporary protocol to consolidate
the ceasefire by establishing a clear separation of forces and defining the rules to be
observed by both sides. In the communiqué, the parties requested the Security
Council to authorize the Mission to verify the ceasefire protocol as the international
component and coordinator of a tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism, in
line with the mandated tasks set for the Mission in resolution 2261 (2016), except
for the verification of the laying down of arms by FARC -EP, which would be
undertaken following the adoption of a new agreement.
5.
On 13 October 2016, the parties signed a ceasefire protocol, developed during
the course of discussions in which my Special Representative and the Mission ’s
Chief Observer participated. It outlined a transitional separation of forces to last
until a new agreement was concluded. In it, the parties called for FARC-EP to locate
its forces in temporary pre-grouping points and the Colombian armed forces to
redeploy their units to ensure a minimum distance of 3 km between them and
FARC-EP camps located at the points. The Government agreed to bear
responsibility for providing logistical support to the points beginning 30 days after
the signing of the protocol. The protocol also contained rules of behaviour for the
parties designed to avoid the possibility of armed confrontation and threats of
violence or risk to the civilian population.
6.
The tasks of the Mission with regard to verification of the protocol were to
organize the operations of the mechanism, taking into account the coordination of
tasks, threat analysis and logistical requirements; to monitor and visit FARC-EP
camps; to monitor the security zones and visit redeployed army units; and to visit
neighbouring population centres in order to interact with the local population and
authorities.

B.

National dialogue
7.
In the meantime, the search for a new peace agreement involved talks between
the Government and FARC-EP in Havana, and a “national dialogue for union and
reconciliation” in Bogotá, led by the President, and involving discussions with
various sectors, including leaders of the “No” campaign.

2/12

16-22916

S/2016/1095

8.
The national dialogue gathered proposals throughout October 2016 from
various sectors with regard to adjustments to the agreement signed in Cartagena.
The dialogue included contact with opponents and supporters of t he agreement,
churches, victims’ associations and civil society organizations. On 5 November, the
President indicated that the Government had received more than 500 proposed
amendments. The Supreme Court also suggested modifications to provisions
regarding the transitional justice framework.
9.
On 7 October, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to the President for hi s
determined efforts to bring an end to the long-standing armed conflict. That decision
gave further impetus to efforts to conclude a new peace agreement.
10. Following weeks of discussions in Bogotá and Havana, delegations of the
Government and FARC-EP reached a new peace agreement in Havana on
12 November, which was later signed in Bogotá on 24 November. They stressed that
it incorporated changes and contributions provided by diverse groups participating
in the national dialogue. The parties invited all Colombians and the international
community to accompany and support the new peace agreement and its prompt
implementation.

C.

New peace agreement
11. The new peace agreement includes changes and clarifications in relation to the
previous text. While its conclusion was widely welcomed, opponents continued to
insist on tougher sentences for FARC-EP leaders responsible for grave crimes and
their ineligibility for elected political office until they complied with the sanctions
imposed by the special jurisdiction for peace. The parties did not concede on those
points, insisting that it would be unrealistic to expect guerrilla leaders to negotiate
their own incarceration and reiterating that the essence of a political settlement was
to ensure that the armed group was able to make the transition from armed conflict
to politics.
12. The new peace agreement does not include changes to the chapter on
verification of the ceasefire, the cessation of hostilities and th e laying down of arms,
which has not been the subject of commentary or critique by the opponents to the
agreement signed in September. The functions of the Mission remain unchanged and
in line with the provisions of resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016). The new
text indicates, as did the previous one, that the parties will request a General
Assembly mandate for a follow-on United Nations political mission to verify the
commitments regarding the process of the reintegration of FARC -EP elements into
civilian life and the implementation of personal and collective security measures.
The new peace agreement also provides a role for that political mission to supervise
compliance with sentences imposed by the special jurisdiction for peace, in
coordination with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. In addition, the new peace agreement expands the role of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in support of its implementation.
13. Both parties to the peace agreement agreed that its ratification would be
effected through Congress. Shortly after the signing, both chambers of Congress
overwhelmingly ratified it. The parties agreed that 1 December 2016 would be

16-22916

3/12

S/2016/1095

considered “D-Day”, marking the beginning of the timetable of action by the
Government and FARC-EP leading to the grouping of FARC-EP combatants and
militias in 27 transitional local zones and points for normalization where the laying
down of arms would take place. Nevertheless, preparatory work for that grouping
and for the verification by the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism was not
completed at that time, raising questions as to whether subsequent deadlines could
be met.
14. On 2 December, the Government and FARC-EP set up a follow-up, promotion
and verification commission, which is to review and verify the implementation of
the peace agreement and resolve any differences that may arise between the parties.
They also set up a national council in charge of developing plans for the
reintegration of FARC-EP members. The Government later convened a ministeriallevel national commission on security guarantees, chaired by the President, which is
aimed at dismantling criminal structures responsible for homicides and massacres
threatening those participating in the implementation of the peace agreement and in
peacebuilding.
15. A critical step towards a more rapid implementation of the peace agreement
was taken on 14 December when the Constitutional Court endorsed a broadening of
the President’s authority to issue decree-laws relating to its implementation and a
fast-track congressional procedure for the consideration and approval of its
legislative agenda. In that regard, the Government submitted a draft amnesty law
with the expectation that it would be approved by the end of D ecember. In a related
development, FARC-EP designated six representatives who, in compliance with the
agreement, would participate without the right to vote in congressional debates on
draft legislation relating to peace implementation.

D.

Security context
16. The fragility of the ceasefire, in the absence of a definitive peace agreement,
was dramatically illustrated on 13 November when two FARC -EP members were
killed in Bolívar department, the first casualties since 2015 in the conflict between
the Government and FARC-EP. This was widely viewed as evidence of the urgent
need to proceed rapidly towards the conclusion of a peace agreement and the full
implementation of the ceasefire provisions. This incident was investigated by the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, as explained in paragraph 25 below.
17. A series of homicides and threats in November and early December targeting
community leaders in rural areas long affected by the conflict generated widespread
concern. Many of those targeted were also reportedly members of the leftist
movement Marcha Patriótica, raising questions regarding possible political
motivations and the degree of coordination behind the incidents. There is no
consensus on the mix of various factors, namely, criminal, econo mic and political,
that may be involved in the violence. Nevertheless, those incidents demonstrated the
relevance and timeliness of the establishment of a national commission on security
guarantees and the importance of the effective functioning of the spe cial
investigative unit of the office of the Attorney-General, among other provisions of
the peace agreement.

4/12

16-22916

S/2016/1095

III. Mission tasks
A.

Activities relating to the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and
coordination of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
Deployment and monitoring of the separation of forces
18. In accordance with resolution 2261 (2016), the Mission began its monitoring
and verification functions on 27 September 2016, follo wing the signing of the
original agreement. By that time, the Mission had already deployed observers and
substantive staff to the eight agreed regions and had established offices in five of
them where facilities were available: Florencia, Popayán, San José del Guaviare,
Valledupar and Villavicencio. The Mission had deployed to temporary locations in
the other three regions, namely, Bucaramanga, Medellín and Quibdó, while
permanent office premises were identified.
19. By the end of September, the tripartite Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism was established in Bogotá, with the participation of observers from the
Government and FARC-EP. Since then, the deployment of those observers to the
regions has been taking place gradually and is nearly complete, with the exception
of the Quibdó regional headquarters, where FARC-EP observers have not yet been
deployed. In Bucaramanga and Medellín, the three components remain in temporary
locations.
20. The result of the plebiscite, however, brought to a halt the Mission ’s formal
monitoring and verification activities, given that the agreement signed in September
had not entered into force. The Mission reinitiated monitoring and verification
activities on 7 November, following the letter dated 31 October 2016 from the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/923), in which he noted that the Council
would authorize the Mission to verify the separation of forces between the national
armed forces and FARC-EP units located in the temporary pre-grouping points, as
agreed to in the ceasefire protocol.
21. Monitoring by the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism of the
implementation of the ceasefire protocol has proved difficult owing to a series of
factors, including a lack of definition in the number of temporary pre-grouping
points (56 were initially agreed upon and then increased to 72); an inadequate flow
of information, until early December, from the parties to the mechanism and
between them; and, more generally, the impediments to normal functionality
inherent to carrying out such a complex arrangement as a tripartite monitoring
mechanism. On the ground, the separation of forces was carried out largely through
direct bilateral coordination of army and FARC-EP movements, and several
incidents were avoided thanks to the level of confidence between members of the
national armed forces and FARC-EP in the field. Mechanism coordination as
foreseen in the protocol did take place, but to a limited extent. The Mission and its
partners in the Mechanism are working to improve coordination and information
flow within the framework of the Mechanism.
22. Early in December, the United Nations, government and FARC -EP observers
began to deploy to their 27 local headquarters. At the time of wr iting, 10 local
headquarters were occupied, which has allowed the Monitoring and Verification

16-22916

5/12

S/2016/1095

Mechanism to monitor an increasing number of temporary pre -grouping points and
to begin planning for the monitoring of the local zones and points of which FARC EP will concentrate its forces and of which the laying down of arms should be
completed. The trust between members of the Armed Forces and FARC -EP has been
confirmed during the deployment of the Mechanism both regionally and locally.
There has been a remarkable level of integration and cooperation among observers
from all three components of the Mechanism.
Monitoring of the provision of logistics
23. The ceasefire protocol provided for the Government to deliver logistical
support consisting of food, health care and communications to FARC-EP units in the
temporary pre-grouping points beginning 30 days after the protocol’s entry into
force. Inadequate information from both parties with regard to logistical
arrangements made it difficult for the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism to
monitor the process. Communications needs were adequately addressed through the
provision of cellular phones. Arrangements were made to provide food supplies at
40 locations. In several cases, however, perishable products spoil ed during transport
or due to a lack of refrigeration. In early December, FARC -EP refused to receive
further supplies until the Government complied with its commitment under the
protocol to provide locally obtained food. The first public tenders to that ef fect were
advertised in mid-December. At the time of writing, there was no system in place in
either the temporary pre-grouping points or the local, regional and national
Mechanism headquarters for FARC-EP health care. In the meantime, however, the
Mechanism has undertaken efforts to ensure that assistance is provided on a case by-case basis.
24. With regard to the establishment of FARC-EP camps in the zones and points,
the decision reached in August 2016 that FARC-EP members would build their own
camps with the help of material provided by the Government was reaffirmed early
in December. In 17 of the 27 zones and points, construction is about to begin.
Investigation of incidents
25. The definitive ceasefire and cessation of hostilities declared by the parties on
29 August 2016 held during the reporting period, notwithstanding the fragile
environment owing to uncertainty surrounding the future of the peace agreement.
Since the entry into force of the ceasefire protocol, the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism has received 27 requests for investigation of incidents. The most serious
incident took place on 13 November when two FARC -EP members were killed and
a third was captured in the municipality of Santa Rosa del Sur, Bolívar department.
The investigation of the incident by the Mechanism concluded that commitments
made under the ceasefire protocol had been breached. In addition, an investigation
was carried out of an incident on 12 November in Tumaco, Nariño department, in
which two people died and two were wounded. FARC-EP took full responsibility for
that violation of its commitments. Although isolated incidents, they still deeply
contradict the popular clamour for an end to all deaths on account of the conflict.

6/12

16-22916

S/2016/1095

Liaison with civil society
26. In accordance with its mandate, the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
has been regularly meeting civil society organizations that have expressed interest
in supporting its activities. The organizations have shared information with the
Mechanism about the situation in the zones and points to which the Mechanism is to
deploy and about the hopes, fears and misgivings of the local population. They have
stressed the need for sustained information and outreach to the public in these
sensitive regions and their willingness to assist.
Assessment of activities to date
27. On 7 December, the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism issued a
communiqué in which it assessed steps taken by D+5, the date by which FARC -EP
was to begin to move towards the zones and points. On the positive side, it noted
that local zones and points had been identified, that the parties had complied with
their commitment to share information with the Mechanism regarding the
deployment of their forces, that FARC-EP had initiated movement towards zones
and points as part of its commitment under the ceasefire protocol and that the
Mechanism had deployed to the regions, trained its staff and initiated verification of
incidents. On the other hand, the Mechanism noted that the implementation of
commitments had been affected by the adverse result of the plebiscite of 2 October.
The Mechanism drew attention to the following key challenges requiring urgent
attention: setting up camps at the 27 zones and points so that FARC -EP members
could establish themselves there; meeting the needs of pre-grouped FARC-EP
members, in compliance with the ceasefire protocol; and deploying the Mechanism
to the remaining regional offices and to the 27 local sites. The Mechanism also
noted, as mentioned above, the need for improvement in the information flows
within it to allow it to fulfil its role.

B.

Activities relating to the laying down of arms
28. In accordance with resolution 2261 (2016) and the peace agreement, the
Mission is responsible for monitoring and verifying the laying down of arms by
FARC-EP, including verification of the destruction of unstable explosive materiel.
29. Preparations have been undertaken for the Mission to perform these tasks. By
the time that the present report is issued, the Mission will be in a position to register
the weapons of FARC-EP when its members arrive at the local zones and points and
to store the weapons that are to be handed over by the senior member s of FARC-EP
who will be engaging in the political process and those who are observers within the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism.
30. Preparations are also under way for the storage of weapons at a dedicated
United Nations site within the FARC-EP camps in the local zones and points. The
Mission has been working with both parties to agree to a final design for the United
Nations laying down of arms sites, including the associated accommodation where
United Nations observers will be present. The procurement process for the building
of these camps is under way and is being fast-tracked to ensure that the sites will be
ready on time.

16-22916

7/12

S/2016/1095

31. A key task of the Mission within the laying down of arms process will be the
verification of the destruction of unsafe materiel in FARC-EP weapons caches. This
is a complex task owing to the estimated number of caches and the inherent risk in
dealing with unsafe weaponry. The Mission will require technical expertise and the
ability to access remote locations in a safe and timely manner.
32. While the Mission has been undertaking detailed preparations with regard to
the laying down of arms, the costing for this activity and a request for financing
were not included in the Mission’s budget proposal for 2017 because, at the time of
submission, the provisions of the peace agreement on the laying down of arms were
not yet in force. The Security Council was informed in my letter dated 14 December
(S/2016/1063) that the Mission would proceed with the full range of tasks set out in
its resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016), including the laying down of arms.
The Mission will seek supplementary resources associated with the completion of
this task.

C.

Liaison, coordination and substantive support
33. The Mission has reached out to national, departmental and local authorities,
communities and civil society organizations with the goal of explaining its mandate
and the work of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and of receiving
feedback about their perceptions and recommendations relating to the Mission ’s
tasks. Visits were carried out to numerous locations, including most of the
municipalities that will house zones and points for the laying down of arms. With a
view to firming up support for the verification of the ceasefire and the laying down
of arms, the Mission has maintained a dialogue with sectors critical of the
agreement signed in September.
34. A special effort has been made to engage with women’s groups to include their
perspective, views and recommendations on the Mission’s activities and to establish
the confidence necessary to receive information regarding potenti al gender-based
violence.
35. A solid relationship has been established with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes in Colombia, and the Mission participates regularly in the main
coordination bodies of the United Nations country team. The latter h as been
reviewing the peace agreement and is designing common strategies to maximize
support for its implementation. In particular, it is identifying the capacities that it
can collectively bring to bear on the stabilization of conflict areas, in particula r the
zones and points of which the laying down of arms will take place and the
municipalities in which they are located. Attention to socioeconomic and
humanitarian needs in these sensitive areas will contribute to consolidating the
ceasefire, the laying down of arms and the initial reintegration of FARC-EP
combatants.

IV. Mission set-up and structures
36. On 15 September, the Government and the United Nations signed a status -ofmission agreement.

8/12

16-22916

S/2016/1095

37. The Mission is now operational at the national level and in the eight regions.
At the national, regional and local headquarters, the Mission is co -located with the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. At the local level, Mission staff were
undertaking initial operational activities from 10 locations a s of mid-December and
were expected by the time of issuance of the present report to be deployed in
16 local headquarters. Shortly thereafter, an additional eight local Mechanism
headquarters are scheduled to be established. Of the 27 local zones and point s at
which local Mechanism headquarters are planned, 3 remain for which negotiations
for the rental of land for use by the Mechanism are continuing. At the time of
writing, there was no confirmed date for the opening of the remaining locations.

A.

Observers
38. Deployment of observers stands at 280 of the 450 needed for the full
monitoring and verification of the ceasefire and laying down of arms. Of the
observers currently deployed, 43 (15 per cent) are women. The arrival of the
remaining observers is planned in stages, with full deployment scheduled to be
attained by February 2017.

B.

Civilian staff
39. The Mission has adopted a proactive approach to the recruitment of civilian
staff by identifying needs and advertising posts pending the appro val of the United
Nations budgetary authorities. This approach has been required in the light of the
very short period between the entry into force of the peace agreement and the
requested activation of the Mission and the Monitoring and Verification Mecha nism.
40. Prior to the signing of the peace agreement, the Mission had identified staff
and United Nations Volunteers for potential deployment to local sites. Since the
signing, the Mission has begun deploying these staff for service at the local level.
Currently, the Mission has 68 civilian staff and 22 Volunteers.

C.

Mission support
41. The Mission continued to rely on existing United Nations capacity in
Colombia to facilitate administrative, logistical and financial services, primarily
through the United Nations Development Programme. Letters of assist setting out
the scope and description of logistical and administrative support to be provided by
the Government to the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the Mission are
currently under negotiation, following extensive discussions between the Mission
and the Government. An area of continued concern remains medical coverage for
observers, which is to be provided under the ambit of one of the letters of assist.
Every effort is being made to conclude this letter of assist before the end of 2016.
42. As authorized in resolution 2307 (2016), costs relating to the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism are to be shared equally with the Government. The Mission,
in coordination with Headquarters and the Government, is developing methods for

16-22916

9/12

S/2016/1095

capturing and reimbursing these costs. A reimbursement for an initial submission of
expenses by the Government is forthcoming.
43. In accordance with these cost-sharing provisions, the Government has, to date,
provided 63 of a total of 158 vehicles required for the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and the Mission. The remaining vehicles are scheduled for deployment
in accordance with the opening of the local Mechanism headquarters. Of the 158
vehicles, 102 will be utilized by the Mechanism and 56 by the Mission. For
operational air transportation, the Mission is currently dependent on government provided assets, but it is working with Headquarters to position dedi cated aviation
capacity. For mobile and static communications in remote regions, the Mission has
been expanding the existing Department of Safety and Security radio network with
additional repeaters and equipment to serve the needs of the Mechanism and the
Mission. Five of the eight regions already have enhanced radio connectivity and
work is under way to connect the remaining regions using high -frequency, VHF and
satellite telephony.

D.

Security
44. The Government, specifically the national police, continues to provide
permanent security to the Mission and the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism.
The United Nations security management system covers the country team and the
Mission in an integrated security structure. Regional security officers have been
deployed to each regional office to ensure compliance with the policies and
procedures of the security management system. They advise the Mission ’s heads of
regional office and the Chief of Regional Observers on security issues. Mission
security focal points have been designated at each local headquarters. Security
officers have participated in the tripartite teams that carried out technical visits to
the zones and points at which the laying down of arms will take place. On the basis
of these visits, and provided that all the proposed security risk management
measures are effectively and timely implemented, the residual and expected risk
levels would be medium. The Department of Safety and Security has determined
that the Mission’s activities are viable from a security viewpoint as long as those
measures are in place.

E.

Conduct and discipline
45. The Mission is committed to preventing incidents of misconduct involving its
personnel, in particular sexual exploitation and abuse. To that end, a situationspecific risk analysis at the Mission headquarters and regional offices was carried
out to identify internal and external factors that may influence the behaviour of
United Nations personnel. A sexual exploitation and abuse task force, establishe d
during the month of November, has been tasked with identifying and recommending
mitigating measures, including the establishment of a list of off -limit places at
which the presence of Mission personnel would be prohibited.
46. As part of its prevention and outreach efforts, the Mission maintains regular
contact with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and with the
humanitarian community and women’s associations at the national and local levels

10/12

16-22916

S/2016/1095

in order to provide information on United Nations zero-tolerance policy and on
preventive measures taken by the Mission. The Mission has also requested support
to establish an effective reporting mechanism for potential incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse and to facilitate assistance to victims.

V. Observations
47. Much has happened over the reporting period to test, and ultimately reaffirm,
the Colombian peace process. It has been a time of protracted political uncertainty
compounded by at least two challenges: continued violence in the conflic t zones and
growing pains in the implementation and monitoring of the ceasefire protocol.
Nevertheless, the parties’ ability to maintain the ceasefire confirms their
determination to accomplish the transition from war to peace, backed by
overwhelming popular support for an end to the conflict. The successful separation
of forces provided under the protocol, which was achieved through cooperation on
the ground between members of the national armed forces and FARC -EP, confirms
the importance of that relationship and the need to consolidate it further.
48. Following the decision of 14 December of the Constitutional Court to allow
the fast-track adoption of the legislative agenda of the peace agreement,
implementation can now begin in earnest and with the undivided attention of the
parties and those national and international actors committed to the success of the
peace process. It is critical that it does. I welcome the parties ’ rapid establishment of
key implementation commissions and the Government’s decision to redouble efforts
with regard to the logistics of the FARC-EP camps and the deployment of the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. I encourage international actors to
accompany what should be a committed and sustained effort by all to rapidly deliver
tangible peace dividends to the areas affected by the conflict, including improved
security. I take this opportunity to thank the Security Council for its commitment to
supporting the peace process and to the Member States that have provided the
observers that the Mission needs to fulfil its mandate. I should also like to once
again commend the guarantor countries, Cuba and Norway, as well as the
accompanying countries, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile, for their
critical role in the peace process.
49. I have taken note of the fact, recently announced by the FARC -EP leadership,
that several field commanders refused to embrace the peace process, but that this
does not reflect the position of the FARC-EP membership as a whole. However, it
does remind us that the transition from conflict to peace in Colombia faces unique
difficulties, including a pattern of insecurity in rural areas bypassed by State
institutions, a thriving illicit economy and entrenched social, economic and political
fractures inherited from a long history of conflict. A concrete example of the
challenges that the country’s transition to peace faces is the movement of some
armed groups, paramilitary or otherwise, towards areas vacated by FARC -EP, where
they may attempt to violently establish their control.
50. It is important to keep in mind that the provisions of the peace agreement
extend beyond the ceasefire and the laying down of arms to measures such as rural
reform, the combating of illicit drugs and the expansion of guarante es for inclusive
political participation. I therefore support the parties ’ strategy to simultaneously

16-22916

11/12

S/2016/1095

move forward along all these lines. A successful transition will not be attained
piecemeal.
51. Achieving momentum in the implementation process is impor tant. The fasttrack procedure makes it possible. The approaching launch of the campaign for the
national elections in 2018 makes it necessary. Joint efforts that transcend existing
political divisions about the peace agreement are also needed to consolida te peace.
The cessation of hostilities and the laying down of arms are subjects of national
consensus, as are many other steps that derive from them, including the
reintegration of FARC-EP members in conditions of security and the broader
objective of stabilizing conflict areas. I encourage efforts to forge the broadest
possible unity around the implementation of the peace agreement, in particular in
the rural areas in which polarization, combined with the widespread use of violence,
can have a deadly effect.
52. While remaining confident of the overall commitment of the parties to
achieving peace, I have noted some initial difficulties in the implementation of the
ceasefire protocol, including missed timelines, logistical flaws and inadequate
compliance. It is critical that these issues be remedied as the process of
implementation begins in earnest and that the implementation process be permeated
by a spirit of detailed and uncompromising compliance with obligations assumed in
Havana. This is equally important to the national and international credibility of,
and support for, the peace process. In close cooperation with both parties, the
United Nations Mission in Colombia will continue to do its utmost to ensure that
those high standards are met.
53. I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative, Jean Arnault,
and to the international observers and civilian personnel serving under his
leadership for their continued dedication in support of the peace process in
Colombia.

12/12

16-22916
