S/PRST/2009/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 April 2009
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6102nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 April 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent progress towards
implementing the recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue, held in
Bangui from 8 to 20 December 2008. It reiterates its full support for this
process, as an effective framework to foster national reconciliation and
stability in the Central African Republic. The Council calls on all parties to
sustain the momentum created by the dialogue and the spirit of compromise
and cooperation that enabled its successful holding.
“The Security Council demands that all armed groups which have not yet
done so, particularly those recently operating in the northern Central African
Republic, cease violence immediately. It calls on all parties to respect and
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed in Libreville on
21 June 2008 and their earlier commitments contained in the Sirte Agreement
of February 2007 and the Birao Agreement of April 2007. It invites countries
in the region to support efforts to bring all groups into the peace process.
“The Security Council calls on all armed groups to immediately cease the
recruitment and use of children and release all children associated with them.
The Council calls on all parties, as a matter of priority, to develop and
implement, in close collaboration with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic, action plans in the
framework of Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
“The Security Council stresses the urgency and imperative necessity of
carrying out the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
(DDR). It calls on all parties in the Central African Republic to work with
determination to that end. The Council welcomes the pledge made by the
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) on
30 January 2009 to contribute to fund the DDR process, and calls on the
international community to provide timely and adequate support to the
process.
“The Security Council calls on the Government of the Central African
Republic and all political stakeholders to ensure the timely, effective and

09-29513 (E) 070409

*0929513*

S/PRST/2009/5

transparent preparation for the 2009 and 2010 municipal, legislative and
presidential elections.
“The Security Council welcomes the recommendation by the SecretaryGeneral, in his letter dated 3 March 2009 (S/2009/128), to establish a United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) to succeed the current United Nations peacebuilding office
(BONUCA). It notes with satisfaction that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office will perform the following tasks:
(a) To assist national and local efforts in implementing the dialogue
outcomes, in particular through support for governance reforms and electoral
processes;
(b) To assist in the successful completion of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and the reform of security sector
institutions, and support activities to promote the rule of law;
(c)

To support efforts to restore State authority in the provinces;

(d) To support efforts to enhance national human rights capacity and
promote respect for human rights and the rule of law, justice and
accountability;
(e) To closely coordinate with and support the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding and projects supported through the
Peacebuilding Fund;
(f) To exchange information and analysis with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) on emerging
threats to peace and security in the region.
It also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the integrated office
undertakes the following additional task:
(g) To help ensure that child protection is properly addressed in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the DDR process,
including by supporting the monitoring and reporting mechanism established
according to resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
“The Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the smooth
transition to the new integrated office take place as soon as possible, including
through the early deployment of the new Special Representative and deputy.
The Council further requests the Secretary-General to inform it in his next
report on the structure and strength of the new office, bearing in mind that
resources for Special Political Missions are limited.
“The Security Council welcomes the support provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission to the Central African Republic, looks forward to
the finalization of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding, and calls on the
donor community to work with the Commission to identify sectors that are
critical for long-term stability and development in the Central African
Republic and to intensify their support in those sectors.”

2

09-29513
