UNm?ARy
UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

m

C@l?!N~:3;;

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2607th

I 4 1995

MEETING:

:

20 SEPTEMBER 1985

1

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2607)

. .. ... . ... .... .. .. .... ... .. ... ... .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda ..*.............................................

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17474). .

1

The situation in Cyprus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........................

14

S/PV.2607

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appearsorin which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2607th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 20 September 1985, at 4.30 p.m.
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

President: Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following, States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Oramas Oliva
(Cuba), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. AI-Kawari (Qatar)
took the piaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2607)
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/17481, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt,
India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago.

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17474)

4. Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark): I shall’ be very brief,
since the facts speak for themselves.
5. It is indeed saddening that the Council has to meet
repeatedly to discuss South Africa and its aggressive policy
towards neighbouring countries.

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

6. During the Council’s deliberations on 20 June last on
Angola’s complaint against South Africa, we already had a
foreboding of the possibility of a renewed meeting in the
foreseeable future. At that time there was ample evidence
of a considerable concentration of South African troops in
northern Namibia along the border with Angola. Our
Angolan colleague established convincingly that these
troops were going to be used in the future. Regrettably,
this has now proved to be the case.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Angola against Sooth Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17474)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the previous meeting, I invite the representative of
Angola to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Cyprus, Guyana, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. Whatever official explanation is given by the South
African Government, there is no doubt that South Africa
has yet again committed a blatant violation of Angola’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. South Africa’s, premeditated act of aggression against Angola is under all
circumstances indefensible in international law. Denmark
has repeatedly voiced its strong condemnation of South
Africa’s behaviour. It‘ is encouraging to note that even
within the white minority in South Africa itself this policy
is now being called seriously into question.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Rgueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr; Muriiz (Argentina), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr.
Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. von Schimding
(South Africa)). Mr. Wgewardane (Sri Lanka) and Mr.
Sikaulu (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.

8. In our view the Council must reiterate its strong condemnation of South Africa’s flagrant violation of Angola’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and of its utilization of
the Territory of Namibia as a springboard for armed
attacks against Angola. Furthermore, the Council should
reinforce its demand for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all South African troops from Angola.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Cuba, Greece and Qatar in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
1

..

9. It is the duty of the Council to see to it that South
Africa finally heeds its decisions.

death and destruction. Needless to say, Cabinda is
nowhere near South Africa or the Territory of Namibia,
which the Pretoria regime continues to occupy illegally.

10. Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia): I shall also be brief. It
is only three months since the Council was called into
session to discuss South Africa’s raid against Cabinda. On
that occasion, the Council, in resolution 567 (1985),
strongly condemned South Africa’s actions and its use of
Namibia as a springboard for armed aggression against
Angola.

IS. Now South Africa has committed aggression against
Angola in the Province of Cuando-Cubango, more than
200 kilometres from the border with Namibia. Innocent
Angolan lives have been lost. Other Angolan nationals
have been maimed, and valuable property has been
destroyed.
19. The South African act of aggression against Angola
in the Province of Cabinda surprised and even angered
South Africa’s friends in the Western world, coming as it
did not long after the purported completion of the withdrawal of its troops from that country in keeping with the
Lusaka agreement and, indeed, as vital American Gulf Oil
installations were earmarked for sabotage and destruction.
The Council, as did world opinion in general, strongly
condemned South Africa and demanded an end to all such
acts of aggression, as well as strict respect by South Africa
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola. But, as it has consistently done since Angola’s
independence, South Africa ignored the demand of the
Council. It treated resolution 567 (1985) with contempt, as
its present aggression against Angola clearly demonstrates.

11. The Australian Government has never accepted that
South Africa has any right to dispatch or station forces
anywhere on Angolan territory without the consent of the
Angolan Government.
We therefore welcomed the
announcement in April 1985 that South Africa had
decided finally to withdraw its troops from southern
Angola. Our hopes, however, have been sadly dashed.
Once again, South Africa has mounted a cross-border mid
into Angola in defiance of international law, in defiance of
the Charter of the United Nations and in defiance of the
resolutions of the Council.
12. South Africa’s duplicity has been exposed. Its policies of apartheid are tearing South Africa apart; its policies
of regional destabilization in Mozambique, in Botswana
and in Angola give the lie to its proclaimed wish for good
relations in southern Africa. Its most recent attack, deep
into Angola, does nothing to bring closer a peaceful settlement in Namibia. That option is available through Council
resolution 435 (1978), which provides the means for an
’
early and peaceful transition to independence.

20. South Africa, of course, always has a pretext for its
mischievous conduct. It is a master at concocting excuses
for its actions and will insist on them no matter how ridiculous they may be to reasonable people everywhere. Now
South Africa is seeking to convince the world that it
invaded Angola in pursuit of freedom fighters of SWAP0
(South West Africa People’s Organisation). That, in the
twisted logic of the South African regime, should impress
the world and legitimize the act of aggression itself.

13. South Africa has chosen the path of the gun over the
path of negotiation, and its representative had the effrontery in the Council today to try to justify South Africa’s
action against Angola on the grounds that it was necessary
to maintain stability in Namibia-a
Territory which South
Africa occupies illegally.

21. We know from the facts vrovided by Angola that
there was no contact at all between the SWAP0 freedom
fighters and the South African troops of aggression,
because the SWAP0 freedom fighters were simply not in
the area invaded. South Africa attacked, killed and
wounded Angolan soldiers. Its mission was to render support to the UNITA (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) forces fighting against the legitimate
Government of Angola. That is, indeed, in keeping with the
well-known position of South Africa in support of UNITA
in Angola, the so-called Mozambique National Resistance
Movement in Mozambique and other dissident elements in
front-line and other independent States in the region.

14. South Africa’s actions in southern Angola must be
deplored by the international community. Australia unreservedly condemns these actions and calls on South Africa
to cease all aggression against its neighbours.
15. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
16. Mr. SIKAULU (Zambia): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the high offtce of
President of the Council for the month of September. I
also thank you and your colleagues on the Council for
allowing my delegation to participate in this debate concerning yet another act of aggression by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola.

22. But South Africa would still be guilty of aggression
against Angola even if it had sent its troops to attack
SWAP0 freedom fighters more than 200 kilometres inside
Angolan territory. South Africa, which is illegally clinging
to Namibia, has no right whatsoever, under any pretext, to
violate the territory of Angola.

17. The Council last considered a similar complaint by
Angola against South Africa barely three months ago.
South Africa had the audacity then to dispatch its military
forces to the Angolan Province of Cabinda and to sow

23. This is the same South Africa which, in order to
perpetuate its illegal occupation, introduced the so-called
linkage between the independence of Namibia and the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Because of that
2

totally unjust and extraneous issue, resolution 435 (1978)
remains unimplemented to date. The refusal by South
Africa to co-operate in the implementation of that resolution, aimed at the peaceful transition of Namibia to independence, has left the Namibian people with no choice but
to struggle by all means possible for the freedom and independence of its country. And by what right can South
Africa, which is dedicated to the destabilization and even
overthrow of the Government of Angola, demand the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from that country?

29. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of Asian States for the
month of September. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
30. Mr. WIJEWARDANE
(Sri Lanka): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to express the
views of Sri Lanka, Chairman of the Group of Asian
States for this month, on the armed invasion of Angola by
South African forces. The Council is indeed fortunate in
having you, Sir, to guide its deliberations during the
month of September, and I am sure we shall benefit from
your wide experience and wisdom. Let me also express the
thanks of my delegation to Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet
Union for the exemplary manner in which he presided over
the Council’s work last month.

24. Angola has put before the Council a convincing case.
By coming to the Council, Angola has once again demonstrated that it is a peace-loving State and a faithful
Member of the United Nations. Zambia, needless to say,
fully supports all the demands of Angola articulated in the
statement by my brother, Mr. Ellsio de Figueiredo. For its
part, Zambia strongly and unreservedly condemns South
Africa’s latest act of aggression against Angola.

31. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka participated in the Conference of Foreign Ministers of nonaligned countries, held at Luanda barely two weeks ago.
Speaking on behalf of the Asian members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, he said:

25. For many years the Council has been discussing the
problem of South Africa’s acts of aggression against
Angola and other independent countries in the region. For
many years the Council has been discussing the problem of
South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia.
Indeed, the Council has been confronted with the problem
of aparzheid in South Africa. Those three problems are the
problems of our region of southern Africa. They are
responsible for the absence of peace and security in the
region and for the tension and turmoil that prevail.

“The choice of Luanda as venue for the Conference is
more than symbolic. It sharply focuses the attention of
the non-aligned on the crisis that confronts the African
continent. At the political level, Angola stands in the
front line in the battle against apartheid and racist
minority rule. The people of Angola deeply cherish freedom and resolutely oppose racism. This commitment
has been demonstrated by Angola’s ceaseless battle to
preserve its independence against the evil empire of

26. In reality, the main problem of our region is apartheid. It is in defence of apartheid that South Africa relent-

apartheid.”

lessly commits acts of aggression against, and destabilixation of, independent countries in the region. It is in
defence of apartheid that South Africa persists in its refusal
to yield to the demands of the Namibian people for freedom and independence.

32. Angola must not be alone in its struggle against
aparzheid. These meetings of the Council have been con-

vened to draw attention to and take suitable international
action against the acts of aggression being committed by
Pretoria against the independent State of Angola. The rep
resentative of Angola has given the Council a clear and
detailed report of the aggressive actions that the South
African regime has taken and continues to take in Angola.

27. The scourge of apartheid is therefore the heart and
soul of the ,problems of southern Africa. Beyond any
action that the Council may take in this specific case of the
aggression against Angola, it is important that there be
proper and adequate focus on the need urgently to take
effective measures for the eradication of the evil system of
apartheid in order to establish conditions of durable peace
and security in southern Africa. Now is the time for the
Council to act decisively, particularly in the light of the
grave situation in South Africa.

33. My country, along with the other members of the
Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries, has always
deplored the actions of the minority Government of South
Africa as it has continued to engage in acts of aggression
against the front-line States, in the latest instance a fellow
country member of the Movement, Angola.

28. In his report’ to the General Assembly on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General has suggested that
the Security Council should, in the near future, make a
deliberate and concerted effort to solve one or two of the
major problems before it by making fuller use of the measures available to it under the Charter of the United
Nations. Zambia fully agrees, and ventures to suggest that
apartheid be one such problem for action by the Council.
Only then will the probiems of southern Africa be resolved
once and for all.

34. The Council has demanded that South Africa scrupulously respect the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Angola. Despite the resolutions that we
have adopted and despite the universal condemnation
heaped upon South Africa for its perfidious conduct in
destabilizing Angola, the racist Government of South
Africa continues to divert attention from its putrid policy
of apartheid at home by forays which the international
community condemns in unequivocal terms as the desperate acts of a doomed regime.
3

The assurances we have received in the n&t have come to
naught in practice, and the responsibility for that situation
does not lie with the front-line States, SWAP0 or the
Government of Angola. The time is now at hand when the
Council must call upon the Government of South Africa
to halt its campaign of terrorism against its neighbours
and its own black majority. The lives of thousands of
innocent victims have been taken in the inhuman and criminal violations that South Africa’s white minority regime
continues to perpetrate in its campaign of terror.,

35. South Africa, in this instance and in the instances
that we have recently seen, continues to,serve its own selfish purposes by mounting from time to time aggressive
incursions into the front-line States. By now the international community in general and the Security Council in
particular must surely recognize these acts of cowardice as
threats to the peace and security not only of southern
Africa but of the entire world.
36. These aggressive acts and raids into the front-line
States will no doubt be resisted by ,the peoples of those
States. When aggression’ is heavily backed up with the
exploited resources of an oppressed black people, such acts
of aggression are all the more deplorable. Resources that
could ‘be used to develop black southern Africa, which has
suffered for so long, and provide it with some relief after
the exploitation of penturies are now being .wasted in inhuman and. criminal forays against Angola on the spurious
grounds that these are pre-emptive strikes, against an
enemy which only the myopic leaders of South-Africa can
see, sitting as they do on a powder barrel which might at
any moment now blow up.
_

42. Therefore, I have no hesitation, as the representative
of a non-aligned country which has the highest respect and
regard for the democratic process and for law and order, in
calling upon the’Counci1 to put an end to the senseless
inhumanity that the minority regime in South Africa -continues to practise.
43. bnce again, Sir, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak on behalf of Sri Lanka and the Group of
Asian States, of which I am Chairman for this month.

38. Without recognizing the legitimate claim of the black
majority to their rights, as citizens of their country, to
self-determination and independence, the white minority
Government of South Africa continues to use its policies
of apartheid both internally to oppress the black majority.
within South Africa and externally to hurl brute force
against the front-line independent States striving to liberate their peoples from the shackles of economic want and
deprivation.

44.. Mr. ALLEYNE (Trinidad and Tobago): On 20 June
1985, the Council wasseized of the questfon’of the raid by
South Africa’s ‘racist military force in the province of
Cabinda, Angola. Resulting from its. deliberations at that,
time, the Council unanimously adopted resolution ‘567
(1985), which condemned South Africa for that act of
aggression against the territoryof Angola as well as for its
renewed, intensified, premeditated and unprovoked acts of
aggression against that country. The resolution demanded
that South Africa unconditionally and immediately withdraw its occupation ,forces’ from the territory of Angola
and cease all acts. of aggression against that State.
Moreover, the Council decided to remain seized of thematter.
.’

39. The non-aligned countries are committed to supporting the black majority people of South Africa against the
racist policies that are being imposed on them by brute
force. The non:aligned countries are deeply committed to
‘safeguarding the interests of the front-line States-and to
protecting them against ,the armed aggression, expansionism and destabilization that the racist South African
Government continues .periodically to launch ,against
them. These periodic strikes and forays are, in our perception, the last desperate strikes of a regime that is doomed.
No longer is the international community prepared to
watch in stony silence these acts of aggression against
Angola and the front-line States.

45. Three months to the day after the unanimous adoption of that resolution, which signalled to the Pretoria
regime the Council’s unreserved condemnation of. South
Africa’s aggressive attacks on Angola, we are once more
considering a South African military incursion against’
Angola. The raid by South Africa’s racist forces in southem Angola beginning on 16’September 1985 is but the
latest in the long chain of aggressive acts and territorial
violations by the apartheid regime against Angola and,
indeed,’ against other neighbouring States in southern
Africa. These unprovoked and persistent acts -of aggression constitute a flagrant and callous violation of intemational law.
‘_

40. By its actions, &South African regime cainues to
demonstrate that its credibility has dipped below the bottom line. The international community is not prepared to
accept the hypocritical protestations of this racist regime
that it is acting in self-defence.
:

46. ‘Mv delegation wishes to register its total reiection of
the South Afi&an regime’s pretext for violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. From the standpoint of international law, there is no inherent right to
engage in military activity across one’s borders on the basis
of that activity being a preemptive strike or hot pursuit.
Accordingly, under contemporary international law there
can be no-legality for ‘a military action or a military preemptive action across borders into the territory of another
country.

37. The leaders of the present South African Government demonstrate time and again their incapacity to recognize their, true purpose and continue to act narrowly in a
single-track vision of
‘... their own claim to superior thought.

d

41. We are aware that the .front-line States, along with
SWAPO, have co-operated, with the United Nations .and
the Security Council at all times. They have borne a heavy
burden .and are paying a bloody price for their patience.
4

47. -The action of the South African forces against
Angola is therefore clearly in violation of international
law. That is particularly the case since this adventurism
was supposedly undertaken on behalf of a Territory which
is illegally occupied by South Africa in defiance of United
Nations resolutions and contrary to the Advisory Opinion
of the International Court of Justice.z Accordingly, the
fact that South Africa launches military attacks from Namibia under the doctrine of -hot pursuit or pre-emptive
strike compounds the unacceptability and illegality of the
act.

by the international
Pretoria regime.

community

as a whole against the
:

51. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his-statement.
52. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): ‘It is a pleasure to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of September, We are fully convinced
that, with your well-known experience and diplomatic
skill, you will successfully guide the deliberations of the
Council. I should also like to take this opportunity to
extend our congratulations to your predecessor, Mr.
Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union.

48. The question, then, is what is to be done in this year
of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, when
Member States are seeking to reaffirm the role and authority of the,United Nations and of the Council in respect of
the non-use of force in international relations and other
principles of international law. What action must be taken
against a State that constantly, persistently and callously
disregards international law and the will of the intemational community in the area of the non-use of force in
international relations?

53. This is the second time in three months that the,
Council has met at the request ‘of the Government of the
People’s Republic of Angola as a result of South African
aggression.
54. On 20 June, the Council was informed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola of the aggression committed against Angola by South African insurgent forces.
Despite the overwhelming condemnation by the intemational community of the racist regime of South Africa for
its acts of aggression and destabilization against ‘the nonaligned neighbouring country of Angola, the Pretoria
regime has paid no heed, instead, it is once again involved,
as was lucidly described this morning by the representative
of Angola, in a new escalation of aggression against his
country-this time with the excuse’that it is defending itself
from attacks by forces of SWAPO.

49. The Trinidad and Tobago delegation wishes to’reiter-.
ate that the appropriate mechanisms for taking action
under these circumstances exist in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are of the view that
South Africa’s policy of aggression towards ‘Angola must
be condemned unanimously by the’ Council. We of the
Trinidad and Tobago delegation are convinced that a
strong signal should be sent to the racist regime. It must be
made abundantly clear that the international community
will not allow a State, on the basis of an archaic and
abhorrent theory of human relations or some, alleged
manifest right, to use the Territory of Namibia as a springboard for perpetrating armed attacks or for the occupation
of the territory of Angola. Such actions by South Africa
threaten international peace and security. That a Territory
for which the United Nations is responsible should be used
in this manner by South Africa shows the callous nature of
the racist South African regime..The Council must act with
unanimity on the draft resolution before it and thereby
dispel any illusions on the part of the uparrheid regime
about the commitment of the Council to maintain intemational peace and security and fully to implement the Charter. Our actions in the Council today should serve as a
clear and unambiguous warning to South Africa of the
Council’s determination to oppose violations of intemational law relating to the non-use of force, and should also
serve as a deterrent against future armed attacks by South
Africa in Angola.

55. The South African regime, which maintains the largest and by far the best equipped military force in southern
Africa, launches massive ground and air strikes against
Angola, expecting the world to believe that that is done in
self-defence.

50. At a time when the apartheid regime is desperately
seeking to divert world attention from its crumbling racist
society and when, in the face of the inevitable demise of the
apartheid system, the regime is attempting to bolster the
waning confidence of the racist minority, it is imperative
that the Council take decisive action now by instituting
certain provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, The
Council must condemn these acts of aggression. But condemnation has not so far proved a deterrent. The Council
must unanimously decide that strong sanctions be imposed

58. The fact that South Africa uses the Territory of Namibia as a springboard for military operations and other
subversive acts against neighbouring States adds another
dimension to its disrespect for international law and its
contempt.for the international community. By intensifying
its aggression against the front-line and neighbouring
States and, in this particular case, against Angola, the
apartheid regime of South Africa is aiming at intimidating
those countries into submitting to political ,arrangements
that would neutralize them as opponents of apartheid.
Moreover, through this naked aggression the Pretoria

56.. The contempt of the Pretoria regime for the international community and international law is well known,
and has been condemned repeatedly by this body.
57. The termination of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and the establishment of the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority of the
Territory until-independence make South Africa’s oppressive presence in the Territory illegal.

5

rtgime is trying to prevent the inddpendence of Namibia
for as long as possible.

68. In our statement to the Council on 20 June last, we
said that the repeated violations of the territorial sovereignty of Angola and other African States by South Africa
deserved the unanimous repudiation of the international
community and a fitting response from the Council. We
now reiterate that position. We condemn with the utmost
emphasis the new and unwarranted armed aggression by
South Africa against Angola, and we repeat our appeal to
the Council to respond appropriately and effectively to this
latest demonstration of the expansionism and intolerance
which are the driving force behind Pretoria’s policies. It is
essential that the Council, which bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should ensure the preservation of the political and moral
authority of the United Nations by not allowing conduct
such as that which we are now examining to go unchallenged. The Council should demand the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the South African invasion
forces.

59. The latest round of military aggression against
Angola clearly shows that the aparrheid regime has never
been interested in peace and stability in the region. The
assertion of South Africa that the ongoing military operations in Angola were undertaken to protect Namibia from
attacks by SWAP0 forces must be considered totally unacceptable and to be a cover for Pretoria’s disrespect for the
territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Angola.
60. Only a few weeks ago, Angola hosted the Conference
of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, which
considered, among other international issues, the situation
in southern Africa. The Ministers condemned the continued occupation of part of Angolan territory by South
African troops, declared that they considered that occupation as an act of aggression against the Movement of NonAligned Countries and demanded the unconditional
withdrawal of the South African troops.

69. During the Conference of Foreign Ministers of NonAligned Countries held recentlly at Luanda, Governments
represented there had a chance to see for themselves the
seriousness of the situation created by the repeated armed
attacks by South Africa against the sovereign territory of
Angola. At the same time they were able to gauge the spirit
of sacrifice of the Angolan people and their determination
to resist those attacks unflinchingly. The paragraphs of the
Final Political Declaration adopted by the ministerial Conference which were iead out this morning by the representative of India are eloquent testimony to the firm backing
of the non-aligned countries for Angola in this difficult
time.

61. It is the Council’s duty to act firmly and effectively in
order to put an e’nd to the South African aggression
against Angola. The aparrheid regime must be made to
understand in very clear terms that its aggression cannot
be tolerated. Otherwise, international peace and security
will continue to be seriously threatened, and the prestige of
the Organization will be further tarnished.
62. To the people and Government of Angola, the
people and Government of the Republic of Cyprus extend
their fullest solidarity and support.
63. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

70. The general situation in southern Africa is develop
ing in a direction which is increasingly dangerous for international peace and security. The gravity of the global
conflict covering the region cannot be disregarded, nor
should it be minimized. Aparrheid and South Africa’s refusal to implement immediately and unconditionally the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia are
the factors Ijrimarily responsible for this situation. As the
General Assembly has repeatedly stated, the inhumane
r&ime of apartheid, which every day subjects millions of
human beings to the horror and degradation of racism, is
an affront to the conscience of the world. In the closing
phase of a century which has witnessed unprecedented
social, political and technological progress, the survival of
this anachronistic vice of intolerance is damaging not just
to its most ‘direct victims but to the entire international
community.

64. Mr. mIZ
(Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to begin by congratulating
you on your assumption of the presidency for September.
Throughout the three years in which we have shared work
together at the United Nations, my delegation has always
appreciated your qualities as a gentleman and your diplomatic skill. These qualities have greatly facilitated the
important work of the Council this month,
65. I also wish to congratulate the representative of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Troyanovsky, on the equanimity and
sense of responsibility with which he presided over the
meetings of the Council in August.

71. That same intolerance is impeding the long delayed
independence of Namibia, unjustly denying the people of
that Territory the exercise of their inalienable right to selfdetermination. The South African Government itself has
acknowledged that the current aggression against Angola
is aimed at tracking down and eliminating the forces of
SWAPO, which has been recognized by the General
Assembly as the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people.

66. At the same time, Sir, through you, I should like to
thank the other members of the Council for giving me an
opportunity to take part in this debate.
67. The critical situation in southern Africa is a subject
of special concern to my Government which shares the
anxieties of the international community as to the uncertain future of that important region.
6

72. As we have pointed out on other occasions, Argentina tirmly supports the quest for peaceful and negotiated
solutions to the crisis in southern Africa. We continue to
encourage dialogue and the quest for formulas which will
ensure the establishment of free, democratic and egalitarian societies in that region.

cliaue of South Africa and its regular troops, with the
support of its air force, again viilated the borders of
Angola and made incursions deep into Angola’s territory
and airspace. The armed forces of South Africa are conducting hostilities against the people’s army of Angola in
order to give direct military support to the terrorist gangs
of UNITA mercenaries, organized and supplied by Pretoria. As a result of the bandit-like attack by South Africa,
Angola has suffered casualties; people, including civilians,
have been killed and wounded, and senseless destruction
has been caused.

73. Pretoria and those which advocate the continued
existence of apartheid should realize that an harmonious
and balanced way out of the present conflict will be possible only by means of a profound and fundamental change
in the unjust internal order of South Africa. The South
Africa Government should realize that rigidity and intransigence are the worst enemies of its own interests. It is the
responsibility of the international community to ensure
that that Government is persuaded of this fact. The actions
which the Council may take will play a fundamental role
in this context.

80. These criminal actions by the South African racists
are a gross violation of the Charter and international law.
This is a new escalation of the racist aggression against
Angola. This act of aggression has increased the threat to
peace and security not only in southern Africa but far
beyond its borders. For many sovereign African States, it
has increased the danger of war that constantly emanates
from that hotbed of racism in South Africa.

74. For our part, we have unilaterally taken measures in
the diplomatic, economic, cultural and sporting spheres
against South Africa. As long as aparrheid, the illegal occupation of Namibia and attacks against African States continue, Pretoria can only expect mounting support by my
country, Argentina, for the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples of southern Africa to gain the full realiration of their inalienable rights.

81. By continuing this undeclared war against Angola,
the Pretoria regime has defied the United Nations and the
entire world community, which has demanded that an end
be put once and for all to South Africa’s aggression against
neighbouring sovereign States.
82. The statement by the representative of South Africa
in the Council this morning has shown that the racist Pm-.
toria regime is not demonstrating any readiness to heed the
loud and clear voices of protest and corrdemnation in the
Council. The Government of South Africa has turned a
deaf ear to the demands of the majority of the States of the
world and continues to issue threats against neighbouring
countries; it presumes to act as an international policeman
in Africa and is using Namibia, which it illegally occupies,
as a springboard for the expansion of its aggression against
its neighbours.

75. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Council has
met today urgently to consider the question of the recent
acts of aggression by the racist regime of South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola.
76. Just three months ago, on 20 June, the Council
strongly condemned South Africa for its act of aggression
against Angola and the gross violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of that country. It further strongly
condemned South Africa for its utilization of the Territory
of Namibia as a springboard for perpetrating its armed
attacks against Angola, and demanded that South Africa
should unconditionally withdraw forthwith all its occupation forces from Angola, that it cease all acts of aggression
and scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola.

83. As before, the South African’racists have been trying
to cover up their crimes against the African peoples by
using hackneyed inventions about the Soviet-Cuban
danger.
84. The aggressor has been acting cynically and treacherously, in the hope, which it still maintains,. that its outrages
will go unpunished, that it will get away with them because
it has influential protectors and supporters in the West. No
one has any doubt at all that Pretoria would not dare to
counter the will of the overwhelming majority of States in
the world if it did not have the support of a number of
Western Powers, primarily the United States, which has
blocked in the Security Council the imposition against the
racist South African regime of the effective collective
enforcement measures that are clearly spelt out in the
Charter.

77. Thus, the Council clearly and firmly stated its attitude to the aggressive actions by the racist regime of Pretoria and, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, described them as a threat to international peace
and security.
78. How did Pretoria react to that clear condemnation of
its actions by the Security Council, the body of the United
Nations primarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security? Not only did it disregard that
decision by the Council, not only did it not put an end to
its policy of aggression against independent Angola, but it
significantly increased the scale of its aggressive war
against that neighbouring sovereign country.
.
79. Continuing the policy of State terrorism and armed
intervention against its sovereign neighbours, the military

85. The oral statements by some Western Powers, with
references to regret and friendly chiding of Pretoria, and
their trifling micro-sanctions delude no one, because these
statements are at variance with their deeds, their real policies. Today too there are no real signs that the Western
7

Powers are finally prepared not to stand in the way of the
adoption by the Council of effective measures to curb the
wanton aggressor, to put an end to its policy of aggression
and State terrorism against neighbouring States.

against Angola, causing the Angolan people to suffer very
serious losses in life and property.
93. On 16 September, South Africa once again dispatched troops to invade Angola, thus grossly trampling
on the norms of international relations. This constituted a
new threat to the peace and security of southern Africa as
a whole. It was both necessary and timely for the Council
to hold an emergency meeting to deliberate on this emergency situation.

86. These long overdue effective measures-and this has
been repeatedly stated by African countries-can
and
must be the binding comprehensive sanctions against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter. This has
been repeatedly suggested by African and other countries
in the
’
_- Council.:,

94. The South African authorities, on the pretext of safeguarding their security, wilfully carry out aggression
against their neighbouring countries. At the same time,
South Africa claims that it is ready for peaceful talks. It
accuses the African front-line States and national liberation organizations of disrupting the peace in this area.
However, over the years its record on internal suppression
and external expansion fully demonstrates that it is pre-.
cisely the perverse acts of the South African racist regime
that cause turmoil in the region of southern Africa.

87.’ ‘:Those are,the facts; those. are the realities.
88. The Soviet Union decisively condemns the aggression
of the South African racists against Angola and other African countries, and. also the military and political support
given to Pretoria by :a number of countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization in their attempts to break
South Africa’s political isolation and to stand in the way of
the imposition. against South Africa .of comprehensive
binding sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. Our
country expresses its solidarity with friendly Angola, with
which the Soviet Union has a treaty of friendship and
.
co-operation.
_‘-,
‘
89. The Soviet Union appeals to all States and to ‘the
Security Council to take effective measures that would
force the racist regime to heed the demands of world public opinion, halt its policy of aggression and State terrorism
against neighbouring States and abide by United Nations
decisions on the granting of independence to Namibia. The
Soviet Union calls for an immediate halt to aggression
against Angola and for the withdrawal by the South African racist troops from the territory of Angola.

95. The new acts of aggression committed by South
Africa against Angola further demonstrate that, contrary
to what it claims, South Africa has no intention of solving
the problems of southern Africa through peaceful talks. It
tries to use its armed forces to intimidate the weak and to
violate the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the neighbouring countries.
96. At a time when the Conference at Luanda of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries had come to a close,
when the fortieth session of the General Assembly was
about to begin and when more and more countries in the
world were condemning the South African authorities for
persisting in their policy of apartheid and other eviI acts,
South Africa once more launched aggression against
Angola-; This is indeed an open challenge to the intema:
tional community.

90. We are convinced that the Council should not confine itself to another mere condemnation of South Africa’s
acts of aggression. It should take decisive, effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter! This is necessary in
order to maintain international peace. It is necessary in
order to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola and the other States in southern Africa. It is necessary, finally, in. order to strengthen the authority of the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole and
their influence in Questions relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

97. The Security Council, as an important organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must fulfil the functions entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations. It must demand that South Africa immediately. and unconditionally withdraw all, its forces of
aggression’from Angola. It must also compel South Africa
to implement all Security Council-resolutions.
If South
Africa persists in its obstinate position, then the Council
should consider adopting appropriate measures as called
for by the Charter.

91. Mr. LI Luve (China) (intermetation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation. has listened very carefully to the
forceful complaint by the representative of Angola against
the recent armed aggression into Angolan territory by the
South African authorities. We express our indignation and
strong condemnation of the acts of aggression by the
South African racist regime. We also express our sympathy with and support for the Government and people of
Angola, the victims of aggression. ,

98. The Chinese Government and’ people have ‘always
resolutely opposed and strongly condemned the system of
apartheid practised by the South African authorities, its
acts of aggression and destabilization against a neighbouring State and its illegal occupation of Namibia. We maintain that, in the interest of peace and security in southern
Africa, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of-Angola
and other front-line States shot$d be respected. Namibia
should be independent as soon as possible, and the system
of apartheid of the South African regime should be
abolished.
._

92. The South African authorities have for a long time
occupied Namibia, using it as a springboard for the carrying out of repeated acts of aggression and .destabilization
8

99. While commemorating the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations, the international community should
close its ranks, co-ordinate its action and strive for the
implementation of all the relevant resolutions on southern
Africa adopted by the Council.
100.’ The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish):’ I wish first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month. I also
wish to express our gratitude to Mr. Troyanovsky, repre-.
sentative of the Soviet Union, for the diplomatic skill and
manifest ability with which he guided the work of the
Council in August.
102. Once again, South Africa, by its aggressive and
criminal policy, has obliged the members of the Council to
convene, even though barely three months ago we saw
with what indignation
the international
community
responded to the cowardly and unsuccessful act of aggression carried out against Malongo, in Cabinda.
103.. On this occasion, using unjustifiable pretexts and’
invoking the dangerous doctrine of preemptive strikes
which is fraught with such grave consequences for international peace and security, the racist armed forces crossed
the sovereign frontiers of the People’s Republic of Angola
and pressed on 250 kilometres inside Angolan territory in
order to carry out indescribable acts of brutality and their
brand of State terrorism.
104. We listened to the explanation of the representative
of the racist regime of Pretoria, who, this morning yet
again, gave us an example of the unbelievable defiance and
contempt with which the apartheid regime treats this lofty
body. In a cynical manner, he lied as to the true motives
behind this act of aggression, which was designed, first, to
check the offensive of the forces of FAPLA (People’s
Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola) against the bandits of UNITA in the south of Angola, where they have
suffered heavy casualties in the last few months, and
secondly, to divert the attention of the international community from the current situation in South Africa and the
brutal and cowardly manner with ‘which the racist forces
have killed hundreds of black citizens and gaoled and tortured thousands of people merely because of their opposition to the apartheid regime. Yet the ,representative of
apartheid still has the gall to speak before the Council
about freedom and violations of human rights.
105. How long will South Africa go on taxing the
patience of the peoples? How long will racist South Africa
continue to benefit from the pious and indulgent attitudes
of certain Western countries, which thereby are merely
encouraging the disciples of Hitler who hold the reins of
power in Pretoria?
106. We salute all those who have sincerely adopted resolute measures against South Africa, and we hope that

those who, through their actions, could contribute to
changing the insane course upon which Pretoria has
embarked will abandon the policy of constructive engagement and join in the efforts of the international community to end the ignominious system of apartheid, which is
not just a nightmare for the black masses of South Africa
but also a grave threat to peace.
107. Angola and the other African countries which have
been victims of systematic aggression by ,South Africa are
entitled to live in peace and to devote all of thier resources
to the rebuilding of their countries and to their social and
economic development in the interest of the well-being of
their peoples. It is high time that the Council which bears
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, allows itself to act in keeping with its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations. It is high
time that the obstacles be eliminated so that the Council
can apply against South Africa the sanctions provided for
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
108. On this occasion, we wish to reiterate the unswerving solidarity of the people and the Government of Cuba
with the fraternal people and Government of Angola, and
we urge the international community to redouble its political, moral and material support for Angola in the,face of
the brutal acts of aggression committed by the Pretoria
racists.
109. The PRESIDENT:‘The
next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement:
110. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to thank you and the members of the Council for acquiescing to my request to address the Council on
the subject under discussion.
111. I should like to avail ‘myself of this ,opportunity to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of ‘October. I am certain that
with your wide experience and diplomatic skills you will
successfully carry out your duties.
.
112. I should like also. to extend my congratulations to
the representative of the Soviet Union Mr. Troyanovsky,
on the way in which, in his usual exemplary manner, he
guided the deliberations of the Council last month.
113. Upon instructions from my Government, I have
asked to speak to state before the Council the Greek position on the deplorable events which have led to the present
meeting of the Council. I am referring to the raid into the
sovereignty territory of the People’s Republic of Angola by
armed forces of South Africa. We consider this armed
intrusion an act of aggression, which we condemn, as we
have consistently condemned all such acts of agression no
matter where they have occured, no matter who the perpetrator has been. Such acts are in flagrant violation of the
fundamental provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law in general and should not
remain without consequences.
+

114. It is not the first time that the armed forces of South
Africa have violated the sovereign territory of Angola.
Their raid into Cabinda is fresh in our memories.

countries. Now it is South Africa that seeks to justify its
acts of aggression against Angola. We condemn this attitude in both cases and call upon the Organization and the
Security Council to redress the situation. We call upon the
Council to reject emphatically these flimsy pretexts in
order to strengthen the foundations of the international
system, to deter aggression and ultimately to maintain
international peace and security, which these insane adventures have placed in jeopardy.

115. This last ongoing invasion is not an isolated phenomenon. It falls within the pattern of South African palicy both in its domestic dimension and as regards its
attitude towards its neighbours. On the one hand, South
Africa attempts to show that it wishes better relations with
its neighbours by signing agreement with them; on the
other, it ignores the very agreements it has signed, and
perpetuates its policy of aggression and destabilization. As
long as South Africa continues to enforce internally the
universally detested system of aparrheid, which deprives
the majority black population of elementary human and
political rights, and as long as it oposes the full implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978) with regard to Namibia, the situation in the whole of southern Africa will
continue to deteriorate. The population of South Africa
will continue to suffer immensely. The legitimate interests
of its neighbours will be subject to its abuses.

122. We are confident that the Council will shoulder its
responsibility and adopt a strong resolution, consistent
with the provisions of the Charter which reject the use of
force in international relations and seek to safeguard international peace and security.
123. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, may I begin by joining my
colleagues in expressing our great pleasure upon having
you in the Chair, with the qualities which we know you to
possess, and in wishing you full successat the presidency in
a month which is so important in the life of the United
Nations and, naturally, of the Security Council.

116. We express the hope that the Government of South
Africa will finally take the necessary steps in order that
apartheid may be eliminated and the human and political
rights of the population of South Africa restored.

124. I should also like to join with those who have paid
tribute to the representative of the Soviet Union, our friend
and colleague, Mr. Troyanovsky, for his wise presidency
and for the experience he lent to our proceedings.

117. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Qatar, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States for the
month of September. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

125. For the second time in a few months, the Council is
convened to consider a complaint from Angola against
South Africa, which has unleashed a new armed attack on
its territory. This policy of aggression, of which Botswana
also was a victim last June, shows that serious tension in
the region persists.

118. Mr. AL-KAWARI
(Qatar) (interpretation from
Mr. President, I should like to thank you for
allowing me to participate in the deliberations of the Council on the item before us.
Arabic):

126. The operation launched by the South African
armed forces in southern Angola from Namibian territory
is a clear violation of international law. Hence, my
Government most vigorously condemns this unprovoked
attack. We demand the immediate withdrawal by South
Africa of all its troops and respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Angola.

119. I will not repeat the details of the act of aggression
committed against that African country detailed by previous representatives. It is important, however, that I reaffirm, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, that the acts
of aggression by South Africa against the territory of a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations, Angola,
are a flagrant violation of the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law on
which is based the legal system of the international
community.

127. We cannot accept the pretexts put forward by the
South African Government, according to which this attack
is to be viewed as preventive action against the forces of
SWAPO. They do not threaten the territory of South
Africa, and nothing authorizes Pretoria to conduct military operations in Angola in the name of the inhabitants
of Namibia.

120. The Group of Arab States strongly condemns these
repeated acts of aggression. It is high time to put an end to
those acts, to deter the aggressor State and to impose the
sanctions provided for in the Charter so that that State
ceases its unjust policies, returns to legitimacy and respects
the provisions of the Charter.

128. Whatever the objectives or the reasons given for
these military operations by South Africa, they are directly
linked with the continued illegal South African presence in
Namibia and the refusal of the Pretoria Government to
accept the immediate and unconditional implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). In his report of 6 September 1985
[S/Z7444 to the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 566 (1985), the Secretary-General had to note
that the South African Government maintained its position regarding the “linkage” of the implementation of the

121. The flimsy pretexts put forward by the South African regime are baseless and illegal. We have heard such
pretexts concerning preventive attacks before in our region
of the world. Israel has resorted to such flimsy pretexts in
order’ to justify its acts of aggression against neighbouring
10

“We strongly condemn this incursion into Angolan
sovereign territory by ‘South African defence forces.
Such acts can only undermine the stability of the region
and damage efforts to achieve Namibian independence.

United Nations settlement plan and the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. My delegation deplores this
intransigence and recalls that we want an unconditional
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) without any preconditions.

“We urge South Africa to withdraw her forces at
once. The British Government believes that the longerterm prospects for the security of the region depend on
mutual respect for borders and on urgent progress
towards implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) leading to internationally recognized independence for Namibia.

129. Once again the French Government reaffirms its
solidarity with the Government of Angola. We once again
appeal to South Africa to put an end to the cycle of violence in southern Africa and to embark upon a course of
dialogue and understanding with its neighbours in the
region. It is therefore first and foremost important for
South Africa to put an end forthwith to a military operation which-and let me strongly emphasize it againFrance most strongly condemns.

“We are making these views known to the South
African Goveinment through diplomatic channels.”

130. Mr. OKUN (United States of America): The United
States strongly deplores all cross-border actions. They are
totally inimical to the search for peaceful solutions to the
problems besetting southern Africa. We have communicated our concern and displeasure regarding this largescale South African incursion into Angola to the South
African Government. It is the long-standing position of
the United States Government as well as the international
community that South Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal. Consequently, we are not sympathetic to South .African assertion of any right to conduct military expeditions
into Angola under the theory of defending its illegal presence in Namibia. We have asked that all parties in the
border areas between Namibia and Angola act with
restraint.

There is. therefore. no ambiguity in our attitude to these
deplorable events and no room for confusion about where
the United Kingdom stands.
136. The reoresentative of Angola has properly seized
the Council of this renewed attack, and the Council has
before it a draft resolution [S/17481] with which we are in
general sympathy and for which my delegation will vote.
The text of the draft resolution does not fall within the
terms of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
nor constitute a formal determination thereunder, but it
expresses in clear and strong terms the Council’s condemnation of the South African attack. My delegation does
not interpret operative paragraph 5 as endorsing the intervention of combat troops from other countries in the
affairs of the region. As is well known, my Government is
concerned that any such intervention risks widening the
conflict and is likely to exacerbate the problems of finding
peace in the region.

131. This has been and continues to be our position. We
urge, therefore, the immediate withdrawal of South African forces.
132. The PRESIDENT: As there are no more speakers, I
should like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the UNITED KINGDOM.

137. However, I do not need to remind the Council of
the United Kingdom’s support for the stability and territorial integrity of all the front-line States, support which
has been expressed in a practical, effective and appropriate
way by our bilateral assistance to those States over many
years.

133. The United Kingdom maintains friendly relations
with the People’s Republic of Angola. No one is better
placed to attest to this than the representative of Angola,
who, to our pleasure, is also the Angolan Ambassador
accredited at the Court of St. James in London.

138. The United Kingdom accordingly hopes that the
Council will adopt the draft resolution and that this will
serve as a clear signal to the South African Government of
the unambiguous views of the international community.
We call upon South Africa to withdraw .its forces
immediately.

134. The United Kingdom ‘sees no justification in the
violation of Angola’s sovereignty and- territorial integrity
by South African forces. Time and again we have
expressed this view in debates in the Council on Angola.
Time and again we have joined other members of the
Council in calling upon South Africa to withdraw completely its forces from Angola and to respect Angola’s
sovereignty. Time and again we have deplored all crossborder military actions, which cannot but undermine the
prospects for peace and stability in the southern African
region. As recently as June this year we expressed strong
condemnation of the South African attacks on Cabinda in
Angola and on Gaborone in Botswana.

139. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

140. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft resolution to
the vote.

135. Following the latest South African incursion into
Angola, the Foreign and Commonwealth Offtce in London stated the British Government’s view as follows:

141. I have been informed by the sponsors of the draft
resolution of the following revisions: In paragraph 5 there
is a small revision, which consists in deleting the words
11

“capabilities in the face of’ and substituting the words
“capacity against”; the words “against these countries”
should be deleted.

154. The PRESIDENT:
Before the suspension of the
meeting, the President had got to the point of putting to
the vote the draft resolution as orally revised. We are now
back at that point.

142. In order to make this quite clear, I will read paragraph 5 as it now stands after the revisions:

155. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): I wish
to thank all the members of the Council for their understanding of my request for a short pause, as I have the
slowest pencil in the West.

“Retie+
Member States urgently to extend all
necessary assistance to the People’s Republic of Angola
and other front-line States, in order to strengthen their
defence capacity against South Africa’s acts of
aggression;“.
143: ‘If there is’no objection,’ we will now proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution as orally revised.

156. Since the only paragraph with which we have any
difficulty is operative paragraph 5, I should like to ask
whether, under rule 32 of the provisional rules of procedure, we could have a vote on paragraph 5 and then proceed with a vote on the rest of the draft resolution.

144. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): Could
we possibly have, under rule 33 of the provisional rules of
procedure, a short recessto discuss this matter a bit further
before we put it to a vote?
‘.

157. The PRESIDENT:
Is there any objection to that?
There being no objection, it is so decided. I shall now put
to the vote operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution as
orally revised.

145.. The PRESIDENT:
request?

A vote was taken by show of ham&.

Does the Council agree with this
I..

In favour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great ‘Britain and Northern Ireland.

146. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet. Socialist
Republics): Is that possible under the rules of procedure,
since we have started the process of voting?
147. The PRESIDENT: I am open to expert opinion, but
my personal understanding is that once the voting procedure has started, it should not be interrupted. However,
perhaps in the circumstances, the request of the representative of the United States might be met.

Against: None.
Abstaining: United States of America.
Operative paragraph 5 of the &aft resolution as orally .
revised was adopted by I4 votes to none, with 1 abstention.

148. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): How long would
you intend this break to be, Mr. President?
149. The PRESIDENT:

158. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as orally revised.

Let us say 10 minutes.

A vote war taken by show of hands.

150. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Could we, through you,
Mr. President, request all members of the Council to stay
in the chamber or nearby so that we can reconvene in 10
minutes?
151. The PRESIDENT:
that proposal.

The &aft resolution, as oraI& revised, was adopted
unanimousIy [resoiution 571 (1985)].
159. The PRESIDEm
Angola.

I am very clearly in favour of

I call on the representative of

160. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): On behalf of my
delegation, I should like to thank you, Sir, and all those
who spoke out in support of the Angolan position in connection with the South African aggression against my
country and people. I also wish to thank all of our friends
and well-wishers for the assistance rendered to us with
regard to this meeting.

152. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics): I presume it is understood that this will’not set
a precedent or introduce any changes in the provisional
rules of procedure.
153. The PRESIDENT: That is certainly my understanding. In that case we will postpone the next step for 10
minutes.

161. During the time between this morning’s meeting
and this afternoon’s meeting of the Council, I wondered
briefly whether it was at all worth our collective time and
trouble for me to respond to the ludicrous issues and allegations contained in the statement made by the representa-

”

l2e meeting was suspended at 6.45p.m. and resumed at
ZO.5 p.m.12

tive of the apartheid rigime

of South Africa. But then I
reconsidered- and decided that such outrageous charges
should not be allowed to go unanswered, charges which, if
they were not so dangerous, would simply be pathetic. It
was obvious that the apartheid regime really had to dig
long and hard to locate quotable quotes to bolster its very
weak and even nonexistent case. And when I referred to
the charges as dangerous, I did not mean that others
would give them credence, but that the racists themselves
would believe their own lies.

losing its most trusted allies and partners; a regime which
is in illegal occupation of Namibia-while,
I say, the representative of such a r&gime dares to refer to selfdetermination, free elections (in a country where the
majority inhabitants do not have the vote) and human
rights?
166. The “ravenous tiger” referred to by the racist representative is well known to him-it is none other than the
animal of apartheid itself. And it is equally ridiculous to
hear the Pretoria representative speak’ of “imperialism”,
again a subject well known to him, since today the only
imperialists in southern Africa are the South African
racists. And when he says “we, the people of Africa”,
surely he jests; for him, “we, the people of Africa” refers
only to the minority that rules South Africa. When for the
Pretoria racists “we, the people of Africa” really means the
people of Africa, then there will be no further Security
Council meetings on that subject.

162. I wish to state very briefly that no Cuban intemationalist has ever crossed the borders of Angola. What the
Government and people of Angola do inside our territory
is entirely our own business. Angolan territory belongs to
the Angolans. Pretoria’s assertions about “an increasing
flow of evidence that SWAP0 was intent on staging some
major terrorist operation” are so patently false that they
need not have bothered with this feeble excuse. What
increasing flow of evidence? What major operation?

167. In conclusion, I wish to thank all members of the
Council once again. My Government is indeed gratified at
the show of support it has received from the ,Council
today.

163. The reputation of the South African armed forces,
their military intelligence unit and their state security apparatus is so well known that “admissions” obtained by them
are of no worth and would never stand up in any court of
law except that of the racists and run by the racists. The
mysterious “deaths” and “suicides” of people under racist
detention are also a matter of international knowledge and
public record. And the description of the present massive
armed invasion of Angola has been described by the racists
as “a follow-up operation”. Follow-up to what? Followup to the confession of a tortured Namibian patriot, even
if the story of the arrest is true-which it is not? Follow-up
to an imagined, unimplemented ghost operation? By
whom, where, and when?

168. The struggle continues. Victory is certain!
169. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the occasion of this Council meeting to reiterate our call for an immediate withdrawal of
South African troops from Angolan territory. We join all
the members of the Council in deploring the South African
incursion into Angola. Acts of this nature can only-frustrate the hopes and endeavours of all those seeking peacefully to resolve the problems besetting southern Africa.

164. Even a cursory look at past Council records will
reveal that the racists undertake a brutal invasion, and
then, as soon as a Council meeting is called on the subject,
they announce the “commencement” of the withdrawal of
their troops. Sometimes the “withdrawal” takes years to
complete, and more often than not it is never completed
before yet another violent operation is put into effect.

170. My Government is one of those convinced that
southern Africa needs fewer guns, fewer soldiers and fewer
bullets. What will the introduction of more weapons of
war into the area-which would result from the implementation of paragraph 5 of the resolution we have just
adopted-accomplish?
The answer is simple: an escalation
of violence .in an already volatile situation, more death,
more misery. Our diplomatic efforts are aimed at the
achievement of a peaceful settlement in this region. South
Africa has no justification for violating Angolan sovereignty. Angola needs peace, not more foreign troops, foreign intervention and imported arms.

165. My Government, my delegation and I myself have
always had the highest regard for the proceedings of the
United Nations, and in particular for those of the Security
Council. We are conscious of the need for a serious
approach, especially when the circumstances are so serious
and even tragic. But without disturbing the seriousness of
the intent, purpose and proceedings of the Council, may I
be permitted to regale all members with a moment of levity. Can we sit here with serious faces while the representative of the racist, minority apartheid rkgime of South
Africa-a country whose so-called Government is rejected
by the majority of South Africans, a r&ime that kills children, little children, a rigime where the country’s majority is
at war with its minority, a rkgime that denies even the basic
human rights to the people it has systematically disenfranchised, a rkgime whose violence against the people of
South Africa is daily displayed in the world press, in newspapers, on television, over the radio, a @ime which is fast

171. The United States supports the territorial integrity
of Angola and deplores the fact that it has been violated.
We call on South Africa to halt this and any further acts of
aggression against neighbouring States. But we cannot
vote in favour of a call to arms. For that reason, my
delegation abstained in the vote on paragraph 5 of the
resolution. Since the rest of the resolution was acceptable
to us, I had no hesitation in voting for it.
172. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on the agenda.
13

,’

l%e situation in Cyprus
173. The PRESIDENT: Before we adjourn, I should like
to make the following presidential statement on behalf of
the members of the Council.
174. The Security Council has been seized with the
Cyprus question since 1964. The members of the Council
have been kept informed of the efforts begun by the
Secretary-General in August 1984 as part of the mission of
good offices entrusted to him by the Council.
175. On 20 September 1985, the members of the Council
heard an oral report from the Secretary-General, in the
course of which he conveyed his assessment that his initiative had brought the positions of the two sides closer than
ever before and expressed his conviction that what had
been achieved so far should lead to an early agreement on
the framework for a just and lasting settlement of the
Cyprus question in accordance with the principles of the

Charter of the United Nations. Recalling their support for
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity
and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus, members of
the Council expressed strong support for the mission of the
Secretary-General under his mandate from the Council.
176. The members of the Security Council, therefore, call
upon all parties to make a special effort in co-operation
with the Secretary-General to reach an early agreement.
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.

NOTFS

’ Oflciat Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Supplement
No. 1 (A/40/1).
’ Legal Consequencesfor States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South WestAfrica) notwithstanding Security Council
resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports, 1971. p. 16.
