S/2001/391

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, by which
the Security Council established the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (the “International
Tribunal”).
I also have the honour to refer to Security Council resolutions 1166 (1998) of
13 May 1998 and 1329 (2000) of 30 November 2000, by which the Council
amended the statute of the International Tribunal, as adopted in resolution 827
(1993).
Articles 13 and 13 ter of the statute of the International Tribunal, as amended,
provide as follows:
“Article 13
“Qualifications of judges
“The permanent and ad litem judges shall be persons of high moral
character, impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications required in
their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices. In the
overall composition of the Chambers and sections of the Trial Chambers, due
account shall be taken of the experience of the judges in criminal law,
international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights
law.
“Article 13 ter
“Election and appointment of ad litem judges
“1. The ad litem judges of the International Tribunal shall be elected by the
General Assembly from a list submitted by the Security Council, in the
following manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal from States Members of the United Nations and
non-member States maintaining permanent observer missions at United
Nations Headquarters;

01-34245 (E) 200401

*0134245*

S/2001/391

(b) Within sixty days of the date of invitation of the Secretary-General,
each State may nominate up to four candidates meeting the qualifications set
out in article 13 of the Statute, taking into account the importance of a fair
representation of female and male candidates;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the nominations received to
the Security Council. From the nominations received the Security Council
shall establish a list of not less than fifty-four candidates, taking due account
of the adequate representation of the principal legal systems of the world and
bearing in mind the importance of equitable geographical distribution;
(d) The President of the Security Council shall transmit the list of
candidates to the President of the General Assembly. From that list the General
Assembly shall elect the twenty-seven ad litem judges of the International
Tribunal. The candidates who receive an absolute majority of the votes of the
States Members of the United Nations and of the non-member States
maintaining permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters,
shall be declared elected;
(e) The ad litem judges shall be elected for a term of four years. They
shall not be eligible for re-election.
“2. During their term, ad litem judges will be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, upon request of the President of the International Tribunal, to serve in
the Trial Chambers for one or more trials, for a cumulative period of up to, but
not including, three years. When requesting the appointment of any particular
ad litem judge, the President of the International Tribunal shall bear in mind
the criteria set out in article 13 of the Statute regarding the composition of the
Chambers and sections of Trial Chambers, the considerations set out in
paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) above and the number of votes the ad litem judge
received in the General Assembly.”
Pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) of article 13 ter of the statute of the International
Tribunal, States Members of the United Nations and non-member States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters were invited, by
means of a letter dated 15 February 2001, to submit nominations for 27 ad litem
judges of the International Tribunal, and were informed that, within 60 days of the
date of that letter, they might nominate up to four candidates meeting the
qualifications set out in what is now article 13 of the Tribunal’s statute, following
the amendments that were introduced by the Security Council in its resolution
1329 (2000).
They were informed that, should they decide to nominate two or more
candidates, then they were at liberty, should they wish to do so, to nominate
candidates who were of the same nationality as each other. They were also informed
that they were at liberty, should they wish to do so, to nominate a candidate or
candidates who were of the same nationality as a permanent judge of the
International Tribunal.
They were further advised that, should they decide to nominate a candidate or
candidates, then, in accordance with paragraph 1 (b) of article 13 ter of the
Tribunal’s statute, they should take into account the importance of a fair
representation of female and male candidates.

2

S/2001/391

Pursuant to paragraph 1 (c) of article 13 ter of the statute of the International
Tribunal, as amended by the Security Council in its resolution 1329 (2000), I have
the honour herewith to forward to the Council the 60 nominations which I have
received from States Members of the United Nations and non-member States
maintaining permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters within the
60-day period specified in paragraph 1 (b) of article 13 ter of the statute as amended
(see annex). The list of candidates is set out in alphabetical order, together with the
curricula vitae which have been provided to me in connection with their
nominations.
I would like to take this opportunity to note that, pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) of
article 13 quater of the statute of the International Tribunal as amended, the ad litem
judges of the International Tribunal elected in accordance with article 13 ter are
required, during the period in which they are appointed to serve in the Tribunal, to
serve on a full-time basis and may not during that time, engage in any other
occupation of a professional nature or exercise any political or administrative
function.
I would also take this opportunity to note that, although the ad litem judges are
not expected at any point to take up residence at the seat of the International
Tribunal in The Hague, they are expected to hold themselves fully at the disposal of
the Tribunal during the period in which they are appointed to serve in the Tribunal.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3
