UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SECOND

th
1987

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

8 FEBRUARY

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

987)

. .. . . ., . . . . , ., .. . . .. . .. . . ,.. . .

, , . , . . . , . , ., . .. . .. . . .. . . . ... . . .. . ... . .

conrplaint

by Benin:
(al Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Benin to the United Nations addressed to the PI.esident
of the Security Council (S/ 12278)
(b) Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the Charge d’affair‘es a. i. of the
Permanent
Mission of Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 1228 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . 9 . .

1

s/PV. 1987

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Recordsof the SecurityCouncil.The dateof the document
indicatesthe supplement
in whichit appears
or in whichinformationabout it is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council, numberedin accordancewith a system
adoptedin 1964,are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Counci/.The new system,which hasbeenappliedretroactively to resolutions
adoptedbefore1 January1965,became
fully operativeon that date.

I
Be
of,
Pai
Ur
Or

1.
2.

I
ti
n
-I
C
ii
Y
n

NINETEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND

EIGHTY-SEVENTH

OII Tuesday,

frcsicler?t: Mr. Jamt?s MURRAY (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

8 February

MEETING
1977,

at 4 p.m.

Mr. I. k’aruhijc
(Rwarrda) arld Mr. A. A. Kodjoui (Tog(~)
tank the places resewed fiw them at the side oj’the Comcil
chamber.

Yrcsent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germally, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Reptlblic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panarna, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I should like to inforin
nxnlbers
of the Council that letters have been received
from the representatives of Cuba, Senegal and Somalia, in
which they request to be invited to participate, without the
right to vote, in the discussion of the question on the
Council’s
agenda. Since there are no objections, I propose,
thcreforc,
in accordance with the usual practice, to invite
these representatives
to participate
in the discussion,
without
the right to vote, under the provisions of Article 3 I
of the ‘Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
prcxedurc
of the Council and to take the places reserved fol
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be jnvjtcd ta take a place at the
Council table whenever they wish to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 9 87)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
(a) Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the ChargB
d’affaires u.i. of the Permanent Mission of Benin to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 2278)
(b) Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the ChargC
d’affaires rr.i. of the Permanent Mission of Guinea
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 228 I )

A t the iiwitatio,l of the Prcsidmrt, Mr. R. Alcrrcrju (Cuba),
Mr. M. Fall (Senegal) aud Mr. A. H. Hmw
(Somalia) took
the places reswwd
Jbr them at the side of’ the Coumil
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to document S/l 2182/
Rev. 1 , containing the revised text of the clraft resolution,
sponsored
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic Lund
Mauritius.

The tneetii1g was called to order at 4.05 ps111.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (irzterpretatiorz from Russiarz): Before stating the
position of the Soviet Union on the matter under consideration by the Security Council, I should like first to discharge
the pleasant duty of congratulating you, Mr. President, the
representative
of a country with which the Soviet Union is
successfully
developing relations of mutual co-operation, on
your assun~ption of this lofty and responsible post.

Complaint by Benin:
(a,/ Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Chsrg6
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Missibn of Benin to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 2278)
(b) Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the Chargk
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Guinea to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 2281)

5. 1 should also like heartily to thank the representatives
of the States lnelnbers of the Council, who spoke such kind
words about my country and me.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 1986th meeting, 1 invite the
representatives of Algeria, Guinea, Madagascar, Rwanda and
Togo to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the unclcrstanding that they will be
invited to take places at the Council table whenever they
wish to address the Council.

6. In the letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Permanent Mission of Benin to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Sccority Council, it is requested that
the Council discuss the matter of the treacherous and
barbaric
aggression of ilnperialism and its mercenaries
against the People’s Republic of Benin. We listened very
carefully
to the statement made by the head of the
delegation of Benin /198&h nzeetirtgj who gave a detailed
account of the position of his country on this matter. From

At the im$tation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algerial,
Mr. A. Doukottri! (Guirzea), Mr. B. Rabetafilca (Madagascar),
1

the facts made available to the members of the Council,
approximately the fo]]owing picture emerges: the choice of
a progressive course by one more State on the shores of the
Bay of Guinea is by no means to the liking of those
reactionary forces which are attempting to halt the irreversible process of the liberation of Africa. Understanding as
they do that the reforms carried out by the authority of the
people in Benin are well liked by the PoPulation of the
country, outside Ibrccs have attempted to do away with the
pcoplc’s r@gimc by force of arms. Thus, with the he]P of
mercenaries, they organized an act of aggressivegangsterism
which, thanks to the discipline and solidarity disp]ayed by
the people of Benin, was a failure.
7. The events in Benin are further evidence of the fact that
Peace and security on the African continent are under a
constant threat from those forces that, in their efforts to
prevent the full liberation of Africa, do not intend to
acquiesce in the l+acc of reality. Those events bear out the
accuracy of the warning of progressive forces in Africa of
the need to be vigilant with regard to imperialism and
neo-colonialism. At the same time, the treacherous attack
WI Benin has wee
again demonstrated the danger to the
sovereignty and independence of progressive African States
that is represented by international mercenary forces.
ti
8. The position taken by the People’s Republic of Benin
on this matter has won wide support among the non-aligned
countries and all of progressive Africa. As the representative
of Madagascar stated at yesterday’s meeting of the Council:
“This position is by no means something which derives
from a mere formality. It is justified by nn objective
analysis of what is happening and of the plotting that has
been going on for several years from the Congo to
Somalia, from Angola to Mozambique and Madagascar,
from Guinea and Benin to Uganda, to cite but a few
African countries.” /Ibid, psra.86./
9. The position of the Soviet Union with regardto the
processesnow going on on the African continent is we]]
known. We are firmly in favour of the complete and
immediateliberation of Africa by the liquidation of all
hotbeds of racism, colonialismand apartheid. In the
resolution recently adoptedby the CentralCommitteeof
the CommunistParty of the Soviet Union011 the sixtietll
anniversaryof the Great October SocialistRevolutionit is
stated:

Security
Counci] be sent to the spot in order that it may
elucidatethe facts connectedwith this criminal act and
Presenta report assoonaspossible.We believe that sucha
decisionwouldbe correct and fair to the pcoP]Cof Benin,
wou]d represellt
a further contribution in the strugglefor
the comp]cte and final imp]ementation of the historic
Declarationon the Granting of Independenceto Colonia]
Countriesandl’eoplesand contribute to the consolidation
of peace and security 011 the African continent and
throughoutthe world.

] I, The I’RESIDENT: I thank the represclltative of the
Soviet Union for his reference to the ClOScrelations
betweenhiscountry andmine.

the
F’

thl
th
an
tel

18
th
an
WI
th

12. Mr, KlKH]A (Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President,]
shouldIike first of a]] to offer YOUthe complinlentsof my
delegationon your assumptionof the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We are
confident that you will wisely and ably guide the progress
of this delicateandimportant debate.

15
se
ca
is1
fir
sh
te
ag

13, My delegation also wishes to express its sincere
appreciationfor the efficient mannerin which the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republicspresided
over the Councilduringthe month of January.

2(
th
PC
th

14. The questionwith which we are concernccltoday
involvesan act of aggression
againstan independentand
sovereignState member of the Organization of African
Unity and Memberof the United Nations. That act of
aggression
was perpetrated by a gang of international
criminalsat the expenseof a pcacefiil African people
committedto the raisingof their standardof living andthe
progress
of their country.
IS. The criminal act unsuccessfullyundertaken by the
mercenaries
againstthe People’sRepublic of Benin on 16
January1977 nevertheless
resulted in substantialmaterial
damageto buildingsand installations at Cotonou, the
economiccapita1of Benin. What is more important, there
wasa significantlossof humanlife amongboth the military
and civilians,who courageouslyoffered their lives in the
defenceof their country, its freedom and dignity against
the ravages
of thiscriminalgangof mercenaries.

16. This is not the first time that mercenarieshave
attackedpeacefulAfrican nationswhich refuseto submitto
slavery and colonial domination. When the continent of
“The Soviet Union and other SocialistStateswill give Africa awokein the secondhaIf of the twentieth century, it
every assistance
andsupport to the developingcountries found itself enchainedand deprived of freedom, with its
in their struggle for the fulfilment of their legitimate ~~m.mmbeingplunderedand its people being exploited.
aspirations to rid themselvescompletelyof imperialist WhenAfrica begana bitter struggleto restore its freedom,
exploitation and for their right to take chargeof their its resourcesand its dignity, it was to be cxpecled that
own affairs.”
thosecolonia]istinterestswould not accept the termination
of their domination.The imperialistforces have therefore
IO. Ill view of its consistentposition of princip]e on attempted to use every Possiblestratagem in order to
African questions,the Soviet Unionwill supportthe draft
maintaintheir dominationof the African colltinent andits
reSo]utioilsponsoredby Benin,the Libyan Arab Republic peoples.
and Mauritius /S/12282/Rev.I/.
We think that it is both
timely and appropriate to reaffirm that the territorial
17. Why is it that the people of Benin should be the
integrity and political independenceof Benin must be victimsof aggression
in this manner,aswere the peopleof
respected.We alsobelievethat the SecurityCouncilshould Guineasthe Peopleof Zaire, the people of Nigeria, the
support Benin’s request that a specialmissionof the PeoP]eof Ugandaandthe peopleof Ango]a? why is it that

01

M
at
de
ar
til
re
W

of Zimbabwe and Namibia are menacedwith
genocideat the handsof hired mercenaries?Why isit that
the PeopIe’s Republic of Mozambique is faced with
threats? In fact, why should the African peoplesin those
areasand others be confronted with aggression,
murder and
terrorism?
the people

of evil and aggression
that threatenAfrica andits devoted
leadership.We assureYOU that we all standasone in the
confrontation againstimperialismand the forces of evil
and in the causeof ensuringthe freedom and peaceof
Africa and of its revolutionary r&mes. Weexpressto you
the Completecommitmentof the Libyan Arab Republic
to stand by YOU with all its resourcesto defeat reactionary andcolonialistconspiracies.”

18. The answerto thesequestionscan be found in the fact
that those peoples have rejected the domination, control
and exploitation imposed upon them by the colonialists
who will not leave that continent and its peoplesto build
their own future by themselves.
19. The General Assembly at its thirty-first sessiondiscussed the question of terrorism and adopted a resolution
calling on the Ad J%C Committee on International Terrorism to continue its work of preparinga study with a view to
finding a solution to this problem [resolution 31/102/. 1
should like, therefore, to draw attention to this kind of
terrorism, perpetrated not only againstindividuals but also
againstentire nations.
20. What happenedin Benin at dawn on 16 January of
this year was an act of aggressionnot only against the
people of Benin but also againstthe whole of Africa and
the world community. One of the most basicobjectivesof
our Organization is to ensurethe safety and security of its
Members, especially the small States which have recently
attained independence. These States have difficulty in
defending their freedom and dignity againstthose whose
ambition it is to reimposetheir domination and exploitation. The Security Council has already condemnedthe
recruitment of mercenariesand called upon all nations to
withhold assistanceto suchmercenaries.

23. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, the French delegationis particularly pleased to seethe representativeof the United
Kingdom presiding over the Council. England-and
Scotland-are two great neighboursof France, both worthily representedby you. At the presenttime, the United
Kingdom is presiding over the work of the European
Community, and thus my country hasmany reasonsfor
placing its trust in your wisdom,in the devotion that you
have always shown to causeswhich are important to you
and in your well-known senseof humour. We are sufficiently familiar with your outstandingqualitiesand your
natural authority to be convinced that our work will be
conductedin a very skilful manner.We shouldalsolike to
convey to AmbassadorRichard a friendly tribute for the
tirelessefforts which he hasconstantly madein the course
of his particularly difficult mission.We hold him in very
high esteem.
24. I should like to take this opportunity to convey to
Mr, Troyanovsky the congratulationsand thanks of the
French delegation. The competent mannerin which he
dischargedhis taskasPresidentof the Councildirectly after
assuminghis post asPermanentRepresentativeearnedour
admiration.

21. We have heard the statementof the representativeof
25. Let me now turn to the agendaitem before us. The
French delegation listened with close attention to the
Benin [1986th meeting] in which he faithfully reported to
statementmadeby the PermanentRepresentative
of Benin
us the clear facts of the shamefulaggression
perpetratedby
a gangof mercenaries.He alsoinformed us of the lossesand f1986th meeting]. Our colleagueset forth with circumthe damagethat werethe result of that act of aggression.
At
stantial detail the eventswhich took placein his country on
16 January last. The statementswhich we heardyesterday
this stagewe hope that the Council will decideto senda
brought out the strong feelingsarousedby the eventslast
specialmissionto Benin in order to investigatethe eventsof
month at Cotonou. My delegationwould like to join with
16 January at Cotonou and report back to the Council.My
all those that have spokenin this debatein expressingour
delegation will express its views at a later stage after
receiving a detailed account of the facts and the conclusions abhorrence at the intervention of which the People’s
Republic of Benin wasthe victim. I shouldlike solemnlyto
of the proposed fact-finding mission.
stress here that France is particularly devoted to the
principle of respect for the independenceof States and
22. Finally, I should like to expressthe sympathy felt by
non-interferencein their internal affairs. In our view, there
my delegation and by my people and the Government of
the Libyan Arab-Republic for the representativeof Benin, must be no exceptionsto that principle. Its applicationis
his people and Government. Our support has already been particularly important in the caseof a continent madeUP
of States which have committedthemselves
with determiexpressed in a telegram sent by Colonel Mu’ammar AlQadafi, Chairman of the Revolutionary CommandCouncil nation to the task of development,a continent which is
devoting its best efforts to that taskandwhichhasat times
of the Libyan Arab Republic, to President Mathleu
deliberately forsworn the use of military meanswhich
Kerekou, President of the People’sRepublic of Benin.That
could haveprotected it from outsideintervention.
telegram expressedthe complete support of the Libyan
Arab Republic for the people and Government of Benin,
26. We statedthat positionin the month of May 1976,in
and read asfollows:
the presenceof the States,includingBenin, which partici“We have heard the news of the imperialist aggression pated in the France-Africanconferencein Paris.EVerYOne
perpetrated againstthe People’sRepublic of Benin. We at that time condemnedany attempts at foreign interfcrthank God for the safety of your country; Your adminis- ence j.n the affairsof Africa, in the interestsof safeguarding
tration and your power to confront the aggression.We peaceon the continent and so that Africa could devoteall
congratulate ourselveson your victory againstthe forces its resourcesto its developmentfor the benefit of man.
3

Benin [198&h meeting1 regarding the action directed
against his country on 16 January 1977. The facts that have
been presented to the Council eloquently testify to the
propriety
of this complaint by Benin with regard to the
mercenary forces that attacked the airport and city of
Cotonou.

27. The President of the French Republic has stated on a
number of occasions that: “Africa should be left to the
Africans, except as regards the assistance required for its
development tasks.”
28. me French delegation shares the strong feelings which
are aroused by the case before us today. MY country cnjoYs
relations with Benin based on mutual respect, friendship
and co-operation. The representative of Benin stated
yesterday that his country was devoted to the development
and strengthening of its relations with France. I should like
in turn to say that my country sincerely shares the same
desire. We have frequently stated as much ever since Benin
won its independence in an atmosphere of exemplary Calm
and friendliness.

36. The accountgiven by the representative of Benin as
well asthe statements
madeby previous speakersshowthat
the Councilhasbeforeit a caseof flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent
State, Member of the Organization, and of brutal interference in its internal affairs which may endangerpeaceand
security throughout the African continent and the entire
world.
37. The Romaniandelegationbelieves that the disquiet
and concern displayedby members of the Council are
particularly justified, since those attacks were directed
against Benin, a country that is peace-lovingand that has
undertaken a broadeffort to do away with the vestigesof
its colonial heritagein order to develop its economy and
strengthen its economicand political independence.

29. France will long recall with gratitude the sacrifices of
the soldiers of Benin who, in the course of the two world
wars, shed their blood in the cause of freedom.
30. We know that the People’s Republic of Benin is
devoted to economic development and social progress and
we welcome the efforts that are being made to that end. We
hope that the international community will firmly express
its opposition to any outside undertakings of whatever
kind.

38. In accordancewith the principlesof its foreign policy,
Romaniais firmly in favour of respectfor the independence
and sovereigntyof all States,and of guaranteeingthe right
of each peopleto determineits own future tid organizeits
life in accordancewith its own wisheswithout any foreign
interference. Thisbeingso, our delegationunderstandsand
supports the requestmadeby Benin, a country with which
Romania is developinglinks of closefriendship andfruitful
co-operation, relationsbasedon mutual respectand esteem,
which are in accordancewith the national interestsof the
Romanian and Beninese
peoplesand which serve the cause
of peaceandinternationalco-operation.

31. Reference was made to some munitions of French
origin. So that no link may be established, even by
implication, between that reference and responsibility for
the intervention in question, I should like to be perfectly
clear here and now: as I said at the beginning of this
statement, the principle of non-interference in internal
affairs is for us an absolute principle, regardless of the
ideological or political choices of States Members of the
Organization. For that reason, France will support the
dispatch by the Council of a fact-finding mission to
investigate the events which brought about this meeting.

39. The links of solidarity existing between the Romanian
people and the peopleof Benin were alsomentioned in the
joint communiquerecently signed at Bucharest by President NicolaeCeausescu
of Romaniaand PresidentMathieu
Kerekou of Benin,in which both countries

32. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
France for his kind words about my countries and myself. I
particularly appreciated his tact in referring to my native
Scotland, a country which for many years had what we
called “the auld alliance” against our common enemy,
England. I shall not fail to pass his message of good wishes
to my colleague, Mr, Ivor Richard,

“condemn outright any manifestations of neocolonialist policy andany pressureor interference in the
affairs of the African peoples,practicesthat are designed
to hinder independenteconomic and social development
in young African Stateswhich have set out on the road to
progressandprosperity”.

33. Mr. GHEORGHE (Romania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, I should first like to address to you,
on behalf of the Romanian delegation, our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. Your well-known diplomatic talents,
your experience and your profound knowledge of the
problems of the United Nations convince us that you will
be completely successful in your important and responsible
work.
34. At the same time, I should like to express our
gratitude to Your predecessor, Ambassador Troyanovsky of
the Soviet Union, for the skill and tact with which he
conducted the activities of the Security Council last month,

40. In view of what I have said, the Romaniandelegation
will support the draft resolutionthat is being sponsoredby
three African countries[S/l2282/Rev.l/ and in which the
Council states that the territorial integrity and political
independenceof Benin must be respected. Likewise, we
believe that it is the duty of the Council to respond
Positively to Benin’srequest,reflected in the draft resolution, for a specialmissionto be sent to Benin in order to
investigate and report to the Security Council SO as to
enable that body to carry out a thorough examination of
the matter andtake appropriateaction.

35. The Romanian delegation listened with close interest
to the important statement made by the representative of

41. The Romaniandelegationreservesits right to speak
again in the debatewheneverit seesfit.
4

42. Mr. AKHLJND (Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish to
avail myself of this opportunity to express to you the warm
felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. We are
confident that with your deep understanding of the issues
before the Council and your very evident skill in the correct
and expeditious handling of the Council’s proceedings, our
task will be accomplished with dispatch and to the
satisfaction of all. I am not sure what I can say on this
occasion about Pakistan and Scotland except that we have
taken to the bagpipes with great enthusiasm and, I believe,
also export them to your country.

main purposes of the United Nations is to maintain internal
peace and security, and to that end: to take effective
collective
measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and. for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace.
49. The attack on Cotonou which took place on 16
January seems to have been executed by soldiers of fortune
or mercenaries. It constitutes a breach of the peace and a
threat to the stability and well-being of a Member of the
United Nations, and a member of the Council.
SO. By virtue of Article 24 of the Charter, the Members of
the United Nations have conferred on the Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Security Council, in discharging that
responsibility,
acts on behalf of all the Members of our
Organization. It is the view of the delegation of Pakistan
that, in considering and dealing with the complaint of
Benin, the Council is discharging one of its very basic responsibilities.

43. Permit me also to convey the sincere admiration of my
delegation to our new Soviet colleague, Ambassador
Troyanovsky, for the manner in which he conducted ,the
proceedings of the Council during the month of January.
AS the representative of a great country which is a
neighbour of Pakistan, we were happy to see him in the
Chair discharging his responsibilities, in his very first month
amongst us, with such skill and success.
44. At our meeting yesterday [1986th meeting], the
representative of Benin, a country with which Pakistan
maintains close and friendly relations, informed us in detail
of the violence perpetrated on 16 January last at Cotonou,
the economic capital of his country, by unidentified
intruders from abroad. The armed attack was organized
with military skill and executed with ruthlessness, resulting
in considerable material damage and the loss of precious
human life in Benin.

51. The representative of Benin, in his statement, demanded that light be shed on the aggression of which his
country was the victim and asked the Security Council to
dispatch a special mission to Cotonou in order to ascertain
the facts in a clear and objective manner, to determine
responsibility and to assessthe damage caused. We consider
the request of Benin a reasonable one, and one which is
fully in accord with the provisions of the Charter and with
a number of past precedents, The delegation of Pakistan
will, accordingly, support the draft resolution submitted by
Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and Mauritius /S/12282/
Rev.21, by which the Council would affirm the territorial
integrity and political independence of the People’s
Republic of Benin and decide to send a special mission of
the Council to Benin in order to investigate and report back
later this month.

45. We join the previous speakers in paying a tribute to
the People’s Armed Forces of Benin for their valiant and
successful defence of their homeland, and for routing the
intruders.
46. The nature of the incident appears to be beyond any
doubt: it was a clear act of armed intervention in the
internal affairs of a sovereign, independent State. What
precise and ulterior purpose it was intended to serve
cannot, we feel, be a matter of indifference to the Council.

52. We hope that the special mission can proceed to Benin
as quickly as possible and bring back information on the
basis of which the Council may resume its consideration of
the item. The responsibility of the Council in this matter,
we feel, is twofold: first, to take such action as would
ensure against the recurrence of acts of violence and
intervention against Benin and other small countries, and,
secondly, to take measures to enable Benin to repair the
loss and damage it has suffered as a result of that attack.
Further action to be taken by the Council on receipt of the
report of the special mission will have to be determined,
bearing in mind this basic consideration.

47. The attack on Cotonou, indeed, raises basic questions.
The international community of States is composed of a
large number of countries of small and medium size. Those
situated in the third world are engaged in the all-important
task of economic development, relying mainly on their own
efforts, utilizing their own limited natural resources and
following the system which they consider best suited to
their conditions, They are peace-loving States and have no
political designs and neither the need nor the means to
maintain military forces of any size. Indeed, most of the
countries of the third world are not in a position to defend
each and every inch of their territories at all times against
any well-organized military attacks that might be mounted
from outside, but must rely for their security on the
maintenance of orderly relations among States and on
respect for international law.

j3. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Pakistan for his kind words about me and about the
cultural contribution which my country of Scotland has
been able to make to his.
54. 1 should like to inform members of the Council that a
letter has just been received from the representative of Mali
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. I propose, in
accordance with the usual practice and since there are no
objections, to invite the representative of Mali to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, under

48. They quite rightly look to the United Nations in
general, and to the Security Council in particular, for the
maintenance of international order, in accordance with
Article 1 of the Charter, which stipulates that one of the
5

gation, but in this case, because the Government of Benin
has specially asked the Council to send a fact-finding
mission, we are disposed to support Benin’s request.

the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 Of
the provisional rules of procedure. I therefore invite him to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn to
address the Council.

61. It is fortunate indeed that Benin was able to repel the
attackers who thereupon seem to have disappeared into
thin air. The question that troubles US is this: supposing the
mercenaries had succeeded in their objective, their identity
would have been known by now, but would their success
have made them acceptable? Questions of principle are
involved, as well as questions of responsibility. This is a
clear case of the use of force from outside against the
territorial integrity of the State of Benin. It is an
infringement of that country’s sovereignty and a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations. What is not clear,
however, is the identity of the persons who perpetrated
that act of aggression. Their mere description as imperialist
mercenaries is simply not good enough. We hope that
efforts to identify them will be successful.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. B. Kant4 WaW
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
55. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): The
incident that took place on 16 January 1977 at Cotonou
constituted an encroachment by imperialism and its
mercenaries on the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Benin. The Chinese
Government and people extend congratulations to the
Government and people of Benin, which, under the
leadership of His Excellency President Kerekou of Benin,
victoriously repulsed the invasion and defended their
national independence and sovereignty, and we express
profound sympathy at the losses suffered by the people of
Benin. The Chinese Government is convinced that the
Government and people of Benin will heighten their
vigilance, strengthen their unity and continue to safeguard
their national independence and State sovereignty. The
Chinese delegation supports the draft resolution sponsored
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and Mauritius
(S/I2282/Rev.I]
concerning the dispatch by the Security
Council of a special mission to Benin to investigate the facts
about the incident, and will vote in favour of the draft.

62. It is of course possible for those unknown persons to
operate without even the knowledge, much less the
assistance, of other Governments. Such clandestine operations are becoming a new and disturbirlg phenomenon of
international life and seem to be part of a general design to
topple r8gimes that are not acceptable in certain quarters.
Such under-cover activities constitute a dangerous aspect of
external interference in the internal affairs of States. The
Colombo Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries
condemned such acts as being incompatible with the
Charter.

56. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, may I first of all
congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council during this month, extend
to you our best wishes for your success and offer you our
co-operation. There is, of course, no doubt that YOU will
conduct the business of this Council briskly and efficiently,
as you have done so far. if I may say so, there is in your
personality the right proportion of conservatism and
progressivism, or progressiveness, which makes me feel that
the Councii is in very good hands.

63. We cannot fail to be impressed by the statements
made by representatives of several African States who
referred to the vulnerability of small States to externally
based attacks on their stability and security. We have heard
that mercenaries are being recruited and trained abroad for
such purposes. Clearly, foreign agencies are involved, even
though the Governments may be unaware of the activities
of these mercenaries. Nevertheless, this does raise important
questions of international responsibility for such situations,
Where do these mercenaries come from, and where do
they go? What are their motivations? Is it simply the
profit motive, or is it the political motive that underlies
their operations?

57. May I associate my delegation with the well-deserved
tribute paid by you to your distinguished predecessor, the
representative of the Soviet Union, who carried out his
burdensome responsibilities last month with great charm
and considerable competence.

64. The Security Council clearly has the responsibility to
see that the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter are observed. What can the Council do to deter and
prevent such attacks in the future? Specifically, what
should Member States of the United Nations do in order to
ensure that the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 4, will be
scrupulously observed? Answers to these questions have to
be found, because the United Nations is today largely an
organization of small States which became Members mainly
for the protection of their sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

58. As to the complaint before the Council, we listened
with anxious attention to the statement made yesterday by
the representative of Benin, and we also listened carefully
to the statements made by the representatives of Algeria,
Rwanda, Guinea and Madagascar [1986th meeting].
59. The facts presented by the representative of Benin
have not been controverted. They have, in fact, been
confirmed by press reports. According to these, there was a
bIatant attempt by unidentified persons from outside Benin
to overthrow the Government of Benin by the use of armed
force. We accept the facts presented by the representative
of Benin. They do not need verification.

65. We hope that the debate on the complaint of Benin
will initiate steps which will lead to the evolution of
international law providing for adequate measures to check
and remove the threat posed by mercenaries who engage in
ConsPiraCiesto overthrow established rhgimes.

60. Ordinarily we would not consider it necessary for the
Security Council itself to carry out an on-the-spot invest&
6

66. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of India
for his kind words about me. I assure him that I shall do my
best to mix conservatism and progressiveness in the correct
proportions.

liberation and its progress. It is for us an honour that in the
world we form part of an ever-tightening network of
friendships, and we are ready for co-operation, providing
that it is based on a spirit of justice, mutual respect, dignity
and solidarity. But by reason of those very friendships and
the fact that we are so ready to co-operate, we cannot
acquiesce in the use by hidden forces of means condemned
by international morality and by the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in order to mould the third
world according to the criteria of their own selfish and
material interests. For this reason, we condemn all acts of
provocation, aggression and humiliation perpetrated against
the independent and sovereign States of Africa and elsewhere.

67. The next speaker is the representative of Togo, whom
1 illvite
to take a seat at the Council table and to make a
statement.
6% Mr. KODJOVI (Togo) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, I should first like to thank you for allowing
me to speak cm behalf of my country in the present
discussions. I should like to associate myself with those
who have congratulated you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. 1 am
certain that, prompted by the traditions of freedom and
democracy of your own country, as well as by your
devotion to those traditions and your competence, you
have assumed your position with that desire for justice and
objectivity which alone can ensure that the Council will
effectively play the essential role incumbent on it in
promoting progress for all the peoples of our planet, in
freedom, dignity and tranquillity.

72. The African peoples have struggled, are still struggling,
and will continue to struggle, as long as they have to,
whatever the price to be paid and the sacrifices to be made,
in order to free themselves and become masters of their
own destiny, to ensure their progress and their development, not only in their own interests, but also in order to
contribute to the collective realization of the full potential
of mankind as a whole.

69. May I, from the very outset, state that in this matter
which
we are now discussing, the position of my country is
clear. The Central Committee of the People’s Assembly of
Togo met on 21 January of this year

73. Those cynical enterprises and undertakings which tend
to compromise the achievements of this noble design are
therefore viewed by us as committing an odious crime
against humanity, and the entire international community
should rise up, as a man, against those who are endeavouring to turn the African continent into one enormous
swamp, where those adventurers who have not been able to
gain acceptance within their own societies may wallow at
ease and against those who think they they can perform
deeds of heroism by stabbing us in the back, sowing terror
in our countries and massacring our peaceful populations in
order to earn money.

“ * a . vigorously to condemn and denounce the use of
mercenaries in Africa, and particularly in the People’s
Republic of Benin, since they flout the most elementary
principles of the sovereignty of the people of Benin. The
Central Committee of the Togolese People’s Assembly
fully supports the fraternal people of Benin in its just
struggle to preserve its independence, its unity and its
national sovereignty.”

74. Unfortunately, mercenaries have operated in most
parts of Africa: in Zaire, in Guinea, in Nigeria and
elsewhere. Today it is the People’s Republic of Benin which
has been the victim of their attacks. Which people and
which country will be their next target? Who is arming
them? And on whose behalf are they carrying out their
frightful missions? Those are the questions which we
agonize over in connexion with the use of mercenaries, a
practice which is developing and which has become a
universal calamity, a terrifying sword of Damocles permanently suspended over the heads of all peoples.

In other words, the reality of the cowardly aggression
perpetrated against the fraternal people of Benin is for us
not a matter for doubt, and we are relying on the
impartiality of the fact-finding mission, which it has been
requested should be sent to Benin, to determine, in all
objectivity and with complete accuracy, what occurred, and
at the same time to ascertain who was responsible.
70. This position is based on the constant desire of the
leader of our authentic, peaceful and humanistic revolution,
and of the nation-wide movement of popular consensus
which he directs and leads, to struggle, with determination
and perseverance, against all those evils which stand in the
way of the full development of each and every human
being. Those evils are: foreign domination of the colonial
type, neo-colonial and racist domination, imperialism from
whatever source, violence in all its forms, and the odious
crimes perpetrated by the moneyed Powers, or any act of
oppression against peoples throughout the world and
against
the honest leaders who refuse to betray their
peoples for their own ends. Togo has not forgotten
Sarakawa; it is very difficult to forget it.

75. ‘,t is high time that our international CommunitY
heeded the repeated appeals of the heads of African States.
It is high time that they realized the universal dimension of
this problem and took account of the pertinent reSOhtions
in which, for many years now, the Organization of African
Unity has been calling upon all States to cease tolerating
the recruitment, training and equipment of mercenaries in
their territories, and to forbid their nationals from serving
in their ranks.
76. This matter must be considered with due care. Merely
to condemn the use of mercenaries is not enough. The
machinery of that practice has to be dismantled, and it is
important that specific steps be taken in order to eradicate
it utterly, together with all the forms and sources of

71. My country scrupulously respects the choice by every
State of its own socio-economic system. Every people has
freedom of choice in the achievement of its objectives, its
7

Africa, with the aid of modern technology, are emulating
the feats of the pirates of the past. Once again an African
country has had to deal with the dastardly and barbaric
activities of imperialism; once again it has had to confront a
gang of mercenaries and repulse an attack by a group of
hired killers, criminals without a country, who are moved
only by a desire for profit, inspired by the spoils of war and
organized by racism.

violence, if we want peoples to live in peace and tranquillity
and achieve complete fulfihnent in a world of brotherly
solidarity. In this connexion, the active co-operation of my
delegation and of my country is something of which our
Organization can be assured,
77. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba, whom I now invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

82. Just as in Guinea in 1970 and in Angola more
recently, imperialism and its mercenaries found in Benin a
courageous people guided by an experienced vanguard
which was able to repulse the aggressors only three hours
after the attack was begun. The people of Benin and the
People’s Armed Forces of Benin won a significant victory,
which we joyfully proclaim. Those responsible for the
aggression of 16 January wished to put an end to the
revolution in Benin; they wished to reinstall colonialism
and racism and they attempted to eliminate the revolutionary example so worthily set by Benin today. But the
enemies of Africa once again met with failure. This victory
will consolidate the revolution and strengthen the will of
the entire people which is backing the People’s Revolutionary Party and President Mathieu Kerekou.

78. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (irzterpretution from Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank you and the
other members of the Security Council for allowing my
delegation to participate in this debate. I should also like to
join those representatives who have congratulated you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council, and I am
sure that, thanks to your recognized experience, your
ability and your tact, you will fully discharge the important
responsibilities you have assumed for this month.
79. The Revolutionary Government and the people of
Cuba learned with great indignation of the criminal
aggression against Benin on 16 January last. The events
which occurred at Cotonou that day and were described
yesterday by Ambassador Boya (1986th meeting] cannot
fail to cause alarm and result in protestation throughout the
entire world. The clarification of those events and the
condemnation of those responsible, as well as the adoption
of effective action to prevent a recurrence of such events,
are duties which the Council cannot shirk.

83. However, the fact that the aggressors were defeated
does not relieve the international community or, specifically, the Security Council of the duty of clarifying the
facts and adopting whatever action is needed to put an end
to the use of mercenaries; it is time to call on certain
Western Powers to put an end to their support or tolerance
of the activities of killers who know no national boundaries. The recent Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity spoke to
the world of the importance of creating the necessary
machinery to prosecute and punish the crime of employing
mercenaries. The fifth summit Conference of the nonaligned countries and the General Assembly at its latest
session have echoed that concern.

80. It is clear that, on 16 January, a cowardly and ignoble
attack took place against Benin, It was treacherously
planned, perpetrated in the shadows and carried out by
pirates and international mercenaries. Its organizers and
perpetrators in one fell swoop violated the principles of
international law. It was a serious act of aggression, using
armed force against the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the People’s Repubhc of Benin. An
attempt was made to set at naught the inalienable right of
the people of that country to choose the political,
economic and social r6gime most suitable for it. The
aggressors used sophisticated military rnatt%el, which could
only have come from some subversive agency of irnperialism. In the commission of that act of aggression the most
elementary principles governing international conduct were
ignored, including those relating to war. An apparently
non-military aircraft was used, the air space of Benin was
violated, and, in an act of treachery, the aircraft landed at a
civilian airport, where a surprise attack was indiscriminately
carried out. The aircraft of the aggressor did not have any
identification and the attackers did not carry any flag or
wear the uniform of the Power which had sent them into
combat. In sum, the criminals were mercenary troops made
up of foreign whites and Africans and perhaps also certain
traitorous citizens of Benin, all well armed and trained. The
victim was a country which was not in conflict with any
other, which had not committed any aggression against
anyone and against which war had not been declared.

84. We often hear concern expressed by the spokesmen of
certain Western Powers when the security or tranquillity of
certain individuals happen to be affected by manifestations
of violence which at times arise as a result of oppression
and injustice for which those same Powers are responsible.
If they do not want their words to be termed hypocritical,
they must here and now demonstrate the same firmness and
concern when the victims are Africans, when criminal terror
is indiscriminately used against the people of the third
world, and when the pain and suffering are inflicted on
humble workers who do not travel in luxurious aircraft or
read the major newspapers of the West and who could not
use the powerful means of imperialist propaganda in their
defence.
85. Benin has won a place in history by reason of a culture
and an artistic development which surprised Europeans. It
was the expression of the vitality of a free people, which
colonialism could not find bonds strong enough to enslave.
The heroic resistance which Behanzin, Bio Guera, Kaba and
other leaders waged against the colonialists is proof of that.
Today Benin, inspired by the immortal ideals of socialism
and defended enthusiastically by its workers, peasants and
students, will not return to a state of colonial serfdom.

81. At Cotonou, near the coasts which in colonial times
were notorious for the slave trade that flourished there, the
imperialists of today, who are attempting to recolonize
8

86. Those responsible for the brutal act of aggression of
16 January represent a past marked by oppression and
POvertY which wilt Ilever return. To ensure that, there is the
heightened awareness and firm revolutiol~ary
will of an
Africa dete~~iml to be the sole master of its own destiny,
HI awareness and a will that were clearly expressed in a
message Sent to all Africans by the President of Guinea,
Ahmed Shou Tour& in connexion with these events,

activities againstthe sovereigntyand territorial illtegrity
of
Peace-lovingStates. Suchevil methodsrevivein our minds
shamefulmemoriesof how foreign dominationpenetrated
Africa during the secondhalf of the nineteenthcentury, an
activity better known asthe “scramblefor Africa”.
94. AS we have heard from the representativeof the
People’sRepublic of Benin f1986th meeting], the attack
on the city of Cotonou had asits chief aimthe occupation
of the Presidential Palace,with the objective of bringing
down the legitimate Governmentof that country, Sincethe
aggression
waslaunchedfrom an aircraft which camefrom
outsidethe country, flying at a low altitude from the coast
in order to evadethe radarscreen,it isclearthat this wasan
external attack on the State of Benin. Fortunately, the
military forces of Benin were able to foil this attempt at
armed aggressionagainsttheir country. However, it is a
grim commentary that this kind of aggression
has always
resultedin great suffering both in the lossof humanlives
andin the destruction of property.

87. In their struggle 10put an end to colonial oppression
a.nd racism, the African peopleshave and will have in the
People’s Republic of Benin an impregnable bastion. We
reiterate today thC completesolidarity of the people and
the Revolutionary Government of Cuba with Benin, with
its

COWageWs

and

Vahllt

people

and

with

its Party

ald

its

Government.
88. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative
Of SonXlh.
1 invite
him
to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement,
89. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Mr, President,my delegation
extends to YOU its felicitations on your accessionto the
office of Presidentof the Security Council for the month of
February. We are sure that under your guidance the
Council’s consideration of the matters before it will be
wisely directed.

9.5, In the caseat hand, we haveregretfully learnedthat,
apart from considerablematerial damage,at least five
military men and two civilians were murdered by the
mercenaries.To demonstratethe indignationof the Govemment and people of the SomaliDemocraticRepublicat this
disdainful attack, I should like with your permission,
Mr. President, to quote from a message
of support and
solidarity to the Government and people of the People’s
Republic of Benin which my President,Major General
MohamedSiad Barre, sentto the Presidentof the People’s
Republic of Benin on 16 January. In his message
my
Presidentstated, inter nlia:

90. We also wish to express our appreciation of the
excellent manner in which your predecessor,the Permanent
Representative of the Soviet Union, conducted the affairs
of the Council in the month of January, when the Council
was seized-as it is againat the present time-of a question
of unprovoked aggression,at that time againstBotswana,
another African State.

“I am deeply shocked to learn of the cowardly
mercenary invasion of your country. At the sametime I
am heartenedto hear that the heroic defenceforces,the
valiant patriots and militia of revolutionary Benin,under
your wise and courageousguidanceand leadership,have
succeededin routing the aggressors
andsendingthem into
flight . . . The Government of the Somali Democratic
Republic expressesits condemnation,in the strongest
terms, against this inhuman and barbaric naked imperialist aggressionagainstthe brotherly peopleof Benin
launched through the intermediaryof mercenaries.The
party, Government and entire peopleof Somaliasalute
their heroic bretheren of Benin and their democratic
revolution for dealinga resoundingblow to the aggressor
forces and restoringa greatvictory not only for their 0~11
country and people, but alsofor the entire peace-loving
peoplesof the world . . . Allow me oncemore to assure
you of our total and unreservedsupport,both moraland
material, in the face of this threat, as we standsideby
side with you in militant solidarity. I have every
confidencethat imperialistaggressions
of this type, which
are only indicative of the perpetrators’ total lack of
morality and utter disregardfor the basicprinciplesof
human conduct, will always,ason pastOCCaSSiOns,
result
h total failure, and will only help to reinforce our
collective resolve to safeguardour hard-won independenceand strugglemore vigorouslyfor consolidatingour
gains
and forging aheadwith added determination to
achievea better life for our peoplesin freedom,dignity
and honour.”

91. May 1 also take this opportunity to express my
delegation’sgratitude to you, Mr. President,and the other
membersof the Council for allowingus to participate in the
debate on this seriousmatter which compelledthe Government of Benin to requestthe intervention of the Council.
92. My delegation considersit an important duty to
participate in this debatebecausewe believe that the issue
is one
of aggession
2gilillSt
a peace-loving,sovereignState.
The gravity of the issueis compoundedby the fact that the
aggressionagainst the People’s Republic of Benin was
carried out by mercenaries.The useof thosepredators by
some countries or groups to attack other States is a
dangerousdiseasethat hasbecomeendemic in the African
continent. My delegation believesthat this matter cannot
be ignored or taken lightly by the Security Council, wlich
is responsible for preserving international peace and
security.
93. My delegation also maintains that the activities of
mercenariesare 110 lessviolent and destructive than is
terrorisln alid the taking of hostages,matters which have
gained the attention and the condemnationof the international community. My delegation,therefore, believesthat,
independently of the question at hand, the mercenary
probleln is serious enough to make it necessaryfor an
international convention to beestablishedagainstthe hiring
of sucll crill~ilzals, wllose aim is to engagein subversive
9

heavy toll: seven patriots Were killed and a number of
public buildings were damaged. MY delegation wishes to
pay here a heartfelt tribute to the ardent militants of Benin,
soldiers of peace and freedom, Who gave their Iives in the
line of duty, We bow respectfully to their memory and we
say that their sacrifice will not have been in Vain. They have
joined
in history our immortals: Kings Behanzin, Samory
Tour& El Hadji Oumar and other distinguished sons of our
continent who symbolize for ever Africa’s resistance to
foreign occupation. AI1 honour and glory go to the militant
people of the People’s Republic of Benin who rallied
spont~eously behind their party in the vanguard, the
People’s Revolutionary Party of Benin, and their distinguished
leader, President Mathieu Kerekou, and put down
that armed conspiracy by mercenaries against the independence and sovereignty of their COuIltry.

96. This is not the first case of its kind to come before the
Security Council It will be recalled that in the past the
Council has been called on to take action because of armed
attack by mercenaries or because of other kinds of armed
Intervention in the internal affairs of other African States.
It will constitute a grave threat to peace and stability on the
African continent if outside forces can threaten with
impunity the hard-won independence of African States. It
is not a question only of peace and stability. What is at
stake is also the very honour and dignity of Africa.
97. At this stage, the least that the Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin can ask for, and the Council
support, is the dispatch of a fact-finding mission to
ascertain the origin of that brutal aggression. Such a mission
would bear in mind the importance of exposing the evil of
mercenary activities and the necessity of eliminating that
scourge from the face of the earth if we are to ensure that
the aims and objectives enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations are to be preserved.

104. The aggression carried out against the African
country of Benin is certainly not an isolated act. It is most
assuredly part of a vast undertaking of colonial reconquest
organized by those who yearn for a return to the past. We
recall that the use of European mercenaries first occurred
on the African continent in the early 1960s and that
mercenaries have been involved in all the upheavals that
have shaken Africa since that time. From Katanga to Benin,
via Bukavu in Zaire, in November 1967, Biafra in 1968, the
Republic of Guinea on 22 November 1970, Angola in 1975
and Southern Rhodesia and many other places, the Bob
Dlnards, the Steiners, the Schramms and their soldiers of
fortune achieved notoriety through their odious crimes
committed in cold blood against peace-loving African
peoples.

98. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mali. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
99. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, with your permission, I wish to discharge a
pleasant duty and congratulate you most amicably on
behalf of my delegation, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Who better than you,
Sir, old African hand that you are, can comprehend the
problems of our continent? You lived there in a stormy
region when you were representing your country, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in
Rwanda. You referred to this with some degree of emotion
at yesterday afternoon’s meeting. We believe, Mr. President,
that you are fully qualified to conduct our debates
successfully.

105. But the case of the People’s Republic of Benin is
particularly surprising in that that country is not at war
with any other country nor is there any internal strife
within that country. Mobilized behind its vanguard party,
the People’s Revolutionary Party of Benin, and its distin.
guished leader, President Mathieu Kerekou, the militant
people of Benin have been working since 30 November
1972 to build a democratic society that cherishes peace and
justice and one that maintains friendly relations with all
countries that respect its sovereignty and independence.

100. Secondly, Mr. President, I wish to express to you
and, through you, to the other members of the Security
Council my delegation’s appreciation for permission to
participate in the Council’s debate on the complaint of the
People’s Republic of Benin.

106. Where, today, are those who pleaded in this Council
in November 1967 to reduce the charges against the
mercenaries who were surrounded at Bukavu in Zaire?
Where, today, are those who so conveniently referred to a
humanitarian spirit in their appeal for clemency from
Africa and, in particular, from the Presidents of Zaire and
of Rwanda, which were the countries primarily Involved?

101, I wish also to take this opportunity to bid welcome
to the distinguished citizens of Benin who have been sent
by the Central Committee of the People’s Revolutionary
Party of Benin to attend the debate of the Council on this
disturbing affair.
102. Africa and the peoples of the world which cherish
peace and justice have followed with dismay and indignation the clear-cut act of aggression perpetrated against the
People’s Republic of Benin on 16 January last, at daybreak,
by a gang of hired killers directed by unknown evil forces.
The representative of Benin, our brother Mr, Boya, gave us
a detailed account [1986th meeting/ in his important and
moving statement yesterday afternoon of the tragic events
that took place at Cotonou. The treachery of that mad
undertaking was matched only by its cynicism.

107. Everyone is quite familiar with the subsequent course
of events. The mercenaries were freed and repatriated by
the International Red Cross to Europe from which they
immediately departed before the very eyes of the authorities of their countries of origin and went to Nigeria, to
suPPort efforts at secession by the rebel province of Biafra.
Nothing was done to stop them. Just as in the case of the
act of aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin, no
voice was raised to condemn them, or even to sympathize
with the African peoples that were victims of their crimes,
whereas, in the case of individual acts SUCK as the taking of
hostages or the hijacking of aircraft, which we of course

103. Although the People’s Armed Forces and the militant
people of Benin were swift in their response, there was a
10

co
:;

1C
sa:
nc
of
th
ler
th
Gf
fo
cc
El
th
in
ne
in

1c
wl
mi
Be
rai
of

11
in
fo
Rt
its

11
Pe
ml
BE
th
an
gu

11
c”i

ii
de
ml
Pll

;;
co
it)
an

11
SP
Se
Wi
co
kn
co
an
ad

condemn, whole foreign ministries swing into action, public
opinion is alerted and even wooed at considerable expense
by the self-same Governmegts.
108. Africans, however, are no fools. We do not wish to
say that there is a certain brand of racism behind all this,
nor do we wish to interpret this lack of response as a kind
of conspiracy of silence. But we wish to proclaim clearly
that acts of aggression against. independent peoples, regardless of the colour of their skin, must move us all much more
than individual common-law crimes. As was declared in the
General Assembly on a number of occasions by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of my country,
Colonel Charles Samba Cissokho, the detente advocated for
Europe will not be true dCtente unless its supporters feel
that it must spread to all continents. Because of the law of
interdependence which governs our world, peace can be
neither local nor regional: it must be widespreadinternational-or it does not exist.

shown by the punctual convening of the meeting of the
Security Council under your presidency. My country has
the best of relations with the United Kingdom, and we wish
on this occasion not only to recall the bonds of friendship
between our two peoples, but to welcome them and to
pledge the full co-operation of Panama in making your
tenure of office as successful as possible.
114. We also wish to join the tribute which you, Mr. President, and other representatives have paid to Ambassador
Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union on the splendid job he
did as President of the Council for the month of January.
We repeat once again our conviction that his presence in
the United Nations will be a great contribution to peace
and international dktente.

109. Europe, Asia, Africa, the Americas, Oceania-the
whole world-must
condemn the act of aggression committed on 16 January last against the courageous people of
Benin, just as they should have condemned the criminal
raid in July 1976 against the independence and sovereignty
of Uganda.

115. Referring specifically to the agenda item, the delegation of Panama wishes to say that it considers the
complaint of the People’s Republic of Benin a very serious
matter indeed. We listened to the statement of Ambassador
Boya [1986th meeting/ in which he gave a very vivid
account of how his country fell victim to a carefully
prepared and perpetrated act of aggression on 16 January
1977 against the city of Cotonou. The individuals involved
were carefully trained and had ultra-modern military
matkriel at their disposal.

110. Those tragic events provoked, in fact, untimely mirth
in neo-colonialist circles. We regret in that regard the
foot-dragging and the attempts that were made to deter the
Revolutionary Military Government of Benin from making
its complaint.

116. Certain features of the act have not been clearly
defined, but it is a matter of the utmost gravity, because
this represents one new way to undermine the peace and
security of States, such as Benin, which are involved in
building their own future in harmony with their neighbours
and with all other countries of the world.

111. The armed aggression perpetrated against the
People’s Republic of Benin by a gang of mercenaries is not
merely the concern of Africa, even less merely that of
Benin. It concerns the entire international community, for
this is a case of a serious violation of international peace
and security, of which the members of the Council are
guarantors. And as has so often been said, only facts count.
112. That is why my delegation urges the Council to
respond to the request of the Revolutionary Military
Government of Benin and send a special mission to
Cotonou to establish the facts on the spot and inquire into
all aspects of the aggression, in order to guide the important
decisions which the Council will be taking at a subsequent
meeting on the substance of the question-namely, on the
phenomenon of those gangsters employed against the third
world. I am referring, of course, to the use of mercenaries.
There is nothing new in the dispatch of such a mission; it is
common practice in the Council. It guarantees its impartiality and objectivity in studying the serious questions which
are of concern to us today.
113. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Sir, your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February is sincerely
welcomed by the delegation of Panama. Your splendid
contribution to the work of the United Nations is well
known and justly valued. In addition to your gentlemanly
courtesy and your style, we admire your political rectitude,
and after what happened yesterday we could add an
additional virtue: your just sense of time and place, as

117. The overriding importance of the event was brought
out in the debate by Ambassador Ramphul [ibid.],
speaking both in his capacity as representative of Mauritius
and in that of spokesman of the Organization of African
Unity. He stated yesterday that the attack against the
integrity of Benin was an attack on Africa as a whole. There
is no doubt about that, and I should like to say that not
only was it an attack on Africa as a whale, but it could be
viewed as directed against all the countries of the third
world-against
not only the States of Africa, but also of
Asia and Latin America. That act was entirely unlawful,
immoral and completely unjustified, which is why this
matter falls within the competence of the Security Council.
118. In addition to the letters which were received by the
Council on 26 January from the delegation of Benin
(S/12278/
and on 4 February from the delegation of
Guinea [S/12281/, I wish to refer in particular to document S/12283, which contains a letter dated 7 February
addressed to the President of the Security Council by
Ambassador Hamilton Shirley Amerashinghe, the Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka, President of the
General Assembly and Chairman of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries.
119. Mr. Amerasinghe, on behalf of the Coordinating
Bureau, referred to the complaint made to the Security
Council by the People’s Republic of Benin regarding the act
of aggression committed by a commando unit of mercenaries which landed at Cotonou airport on 16 January.
That communication is unquestionably of great impor-

tance. It contains a communique from the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries in which, after
referring to those reprehensible acts, the Co-ordinating
Bureau expresses its pleasure at the success of the People’s
Armed Forces of Benin and the Government of Benin in
repulsing the attack and expresses sympathy to the Government of Benin on the loss of life and the damage caused by
the commando attack. Those sentiments are shared by my
delegation, which wishes to express to the delegation of
Benin our heartfelt condolences at the losses suffered. The
Coordinating
Bureau also expresses to the Council its
serious concern over the events which took place on
Sunday, 16 January. It seems they were part of a plan
aimed at undermining the stability of regimes whose
policies are viewed with displeasure in certain circles. I
believe that is truly the heart of the matter.
120. The Security Council has before it a revised draft
resolution [S/l2282/Rev.Ij.
That draft affirms that the
territorial integrity and political independence of the
People’s Republic of Benin must be respected. By its
adoption, the Security Council would decide that a special
mission should be sent to Benin to investigate the events of
16 January at Cotonou, and that it should report not later
than the end of February. The delegation of Panama will
vote in favour of the draft, which is entirely justified. We
shall do so on the understanding that the draft is based on
the complaint by the People’s Republic of Benin, that the
international community believes that actions by mercenaries are unlawful, contrary to international law and
immoral and that they represent methods which should not
be used, and that world public opinion should be aware
that the Security Council will take vigorous action to see to
it that those acts, which are a threat to all developing
countries, particularly those of the third world, are eradicated.
121. All members of the Council are aware that an
operation of the magnitude of that which took place in
Benin requires either the active or passive complicity of the
intelligence, police, customs or immigration services, or the
armies of constituted States. This matter should be investigated thoroughly so that those who continue to believe that
through the use of mercenaries they can do away with
self-determination of peoples, will understand that they
have no future.
122. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Panama for his reference to the cordial relations between
his country and my own. I thank him also for the very kind
words he addressed to me.
123. There are no further names on the list of speakers. As
no other representative wishes to speak at this stage, the
Council will now proceed to consideration of the draft
resolution submitted by Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic
and Mauritius /S/12282/Rev, I]. As a result of informal
consultations, it is my understanding that members of the
Council are agreed that the draft resolution may be adopted
by consensus, without being put to the vote. Accordingly,
if I hear no objeclion, I shall declare the draft resolution
adopted.
The draft resolution was adopted.1
1 Seeresolution 404 (1977).

124. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): On behalf of my African
brothers members of the Security Council and sponsors of
the draft resolution, I had the honour of introducing
yesterday, I wish to thank all members of our Council for
their co-operation and understanding in adopting by consensus the draft as revised by the sponsors. In doing so, the
Security Council has, first, served the cause of international
peace and security and, secondly, taken a decisive step
towards the unmasking and condemnation of international
mercenaries, Not only was Benin fully justified in alerting
the Council and in securing a preliminary decision-namely,
the dispatch of a special mission to Cotonou-but it aho
deserves our appreciation for highlighting the new curse of
international mercenaries.
125. As President of the Security Council, Sir, you have
played a very important role, with your recognized skill,
diplomatic talents and experience. You have shown great
patience, commendable courtesy and integrity, and we
thank you very much indeed.
126. During the debate several speakers referred to what
appeared to them to be an unwillingness on the part of
some unidentified members of the Security Council to meet
Benin’s request, members who seemingly held the view that
the matter would better be dealt with by the Organization
of African Unity. In this connexion, 1 wish at this stage to
inform the Council that I communicated with the current
President of the Organization of African Unity, the
Rt. Hon. Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, who informed me
that ‘no harm could ensue if debate were initiated in the
Security Council”. We have now dealt with the first phase
of the matter. We anxiously await the report of the Special
Mission.
127. Mr, President, at the beginning of this debate I
intentionally refrained from expressing the traditional
compliments to the presidency. That was not out of a lack
of courtesy or of respect, but rather out of a fear that any
compliments from one member of the Commonwealth to
another, especially to the United Kingdom, might give rise
to some suspicion of collusion should things not go well for
the regional group to which 1 belong. Nor did I want any
compliments from me to you, Sir, to be interpreted by YOU
as a form of bribery or corruption to serve the cause of
Africa, though of course I am not suggesting that you are
open to bribery and corruption, However, now that you
have discharged with flying colours your difficult and
delicate duties so far as the first phase of action following
Benin’s complaint is concerned, I wish to state that it has
given me great pleasure to work under your presidency.
128. I say, this, Sir, because since 1810, with the
exception of a few years, and until its independence in
1968, the British Crown Colony of Mauritius was governed
by British Governors of Scottish birth, a fact which led me
to believe that the best exports of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland were definitely the
scotch and the Scot. The Scats are certainly great soldiers,
administrators and diplomats. I am happy, however, that
they have ceased to govern me and that I participated in the
work of this Council as the representative of an independent and sovereign country ruled by a democratically
elected Government with a socialist vocation. Who knows,

-

perhaps the brave Scats, too, will one day free themselves.
If such is your wish, Sir, I wish you the best of British luck.

131. I have noted that, in accordance with paragraph 3 of
the resolution we have just adopted, the Security Council

129. Mr. President, I join YOU and your delegation in
rejoicing in the celebration of the jubilee of the reign of our
most gracious Queen, Elizabeth II, cwx if Mauritius seems
to be on the eve of becoming a republic.

“‘Decides that the members of the Special Mission will
be appointed after consultations between the President
and the members of the Security Council”.
I shall begin consultations with the members of the Council
on this forthwith
and shalt keep members informed of
progress.

130. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his good wishes to my country on the
occasion of the Queen’s anniversary, and I note with
satisfaction that he has gone on record as saying that I am
not open to bribery.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

13

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PURLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
ICAE

I-IOJIYUHTh

NB&AHIiR

OPI’AHU

BAU(EIU

OJiZEJ(UHEHHhIX

lKAqMA

Pis~awarr
Oprannsannw
Odzen~~e~nbrx
HauaR
MOXCKHO kynerr.
s HHHXHI,~X Sarax-inax
n arenrcraax
so scex paRonax
‘unpa. HaeonwTe
cnpaenw
06 W~~*HHRX s
earner.3 KnnxcnoM
Marasune
nnw nnurnre
no anpecy:
Opranuaanns
06~enu~ennbrx
HauuR, Ce~qm
no noonawe
usAawuR, Hbm-Hopa
nsn Xenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

IAS publiceciones
de las Naciones Unidas
es&in en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

7000 1 -May

1977-Z

,200
