lleloludom adopted on the reporta of the TbJrd Committee

( h) Reviewing internal laws and regula~ons wi~ a
view to identifying and rescinding those which provide
for, give rise to, or inspire racial discrimination or
apartheid;
(i) Ensuring the cessation of all discriminatory
measures against migrant workers and extending to
them treatment equal to that provided for nationals of
the host country with regard to human rights and to the
provisions of their labour legislation;
(j) Complying, when due, with the provisions of
paragraph 18 ( e) of the Programme for the Decade,
which call for Governments to forward a report every
two years on the action taken under the Programme
for the Decade, on the basis of a questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General;
(k) Educating, in particular, youth in the spirit of
equality and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Urges Member States which are parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to continue to comply
fully with their obligations under the Convention and,
in particular, to submit their reports within the timetable laid down under article 9;
5. Also urges United Nations organs, the specialized
agencies and intergovernmental and· non-governmental
organizations to ensure the continuation of their activities related to the Decade with emphasis on, inter alia:
(a) Providing moral and material support to the
national liberation movements and victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
( b) Assisting and conducting vigorous educational
and information campaigns to dispel racial prejudice
and to involve public opinion in the struggle against
racism and racial discrimination, in particular to organize an international competition for selecting an appropriate emblem for the Decade and to print posters
containing the emblem for wide distribution;
(c) Examining the socio-economic and colonial roots
of racism, apartheid and racial discrimination with a
view to eliminating them;
6. Requests national sports federations of Member
States to refuse systematically to participate in all sports
or other activities together with the representatives of
the racist regime of South Africa;
7. Welcomes any contributions and suggestions related to the Programme for the Decade by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to draw on the
expertise of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities while
undertaking the relevant activities of the Decade;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session a report
containing proposals to implement efficiently paragraph 17 of the Programme for the Decade, which calls
for the establishment of an international fund on a
voluntary basis;

83

10. Reiterates the call in its resolution 3057
(XXVIII) to make adequate resources available to the
Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme for the
Decade;
11. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights,
in collaboration with the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to
study ways and means of ensuring the implementation
of United Nations resolutions bearing on apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination with a view to facilitating the examination of this question by the General
Assembly in accordance with paragraph 18 (i) of the
Programme for the Decade;
12. Appeals to Governments and private organizations in a position to do so to make voluntary contributions of funds which would make it possible to carry
out all of the activities provided for in the Programme
for the Decade, especially in paragraphs 15 and 16
thereof, with regard to research, studies, education,
training and information directed towards the achievement of the goals of the Decade and designed to assist
the victims of racial discrimination and racism;
13. Decides to consider at its thirty-first session, as
a matter of high priority, the question entitled "Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
2400th plenary meeting
10 November 1975
3378 (XXX). World conference to combat
racism and racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1938 B (LVIII) of 6 May 1975,
1. Notes with appreciation the offer of the Government of Ghana to act as host to the world conference
envisaged as a major feature of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
·
2. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into consultations with the Government of Ghana concerning
arrangements for holding the conference as well as the
nature of the financial contribution that the Government of Ghana will be able to make with regard to its
offer;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on his consultations in this regard to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixtieth session to
enable the Council to advise the General Assembly on
this matter.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
33 79 (XXX). Elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1904 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963, proclaiming the United Nations Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and in particular its affirmation that "any doctrine
of racial differentiation or superiority is scientifically
false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous" and its expression of alarm at "the manifesta-

84

General Assembly--Thirtieth Seeeion

tions of racial discrimination still in evidence in some
areas in the world, some of which are imposed by certain Governments by means of legislative, administrative or other measures",
Recalling also that, in its resolution 31151 G
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, the General Assembly condemned, inter alia, the unholy alliance between
South African racism and zionism,
Taking note of the Declaration of Mexico on the
Equality of Women and Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,4 proclaimed by the World Conference of the International Women's Year, held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975, which
promulgated the principle that "international co-operation and peace require the achievement of national
liberation and independence, the elimination of colonialism and neo-colonialism, fore~gn occupation, zionism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in all its forms, as
well as the recognition of the dignity of peoples and
their right to self-determination",
Taking note also of resolution 77 (XII) adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity at its twelfth
ordinary session,11 held at Kampala from 28 July to
1 August 1975, which considered "that the racist regime in occupied Palestine and the racist regimes in
Zimbabwe and South Africa have a common imperialist
origin, forming a whole and having the same racist
structure and being organically linked in their policy
aimed at repression of the dignity and integrity of the
human being",
Taking note also of the Political Declaration and
Strategy to Strengthen International Peace and Security
and to Intensify Solidarity and Mutual Assistance
among Non-Aligned Countries, 6 adopted at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, which most severely condemned zionism as a
threat to world peace and security and called upon all
countries to oppose this racist and imperialist ideology,
Determines that zionism is a form of racism and
racial discrimination.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3380 (XXX). Status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and ratification the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Convinced that ratification of or acces~vn to the
International Convention on the Suppre:-:sion and Pun" Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. I.
II See A/ 10297, annex II.
e A/10217 and Corr.I, anne:r, p. 3.

ishment of ,the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis
and implementation of its provisions are necessary for
the achievement of the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
1. Appeals to the Governments of all States to sign,
ratify and implement without delay the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly annual reports on the status of the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
3. Decides to consider this question at its thirty-first
session under the item entitled "Elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination".
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3381 (XXX). Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3-057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3134 (XXVIII) and 3135 (XXVIII) of
14 December 1973 and 3225 (XXIX) of 6 November
1974,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General7
on the status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;8
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that ratification of or
accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on a
universal basis and implementation of its provisions
are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Appeals to States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of malcing the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
subn_iit to the General _Assembly annual reports concemmg the state of ratifications of the Convention in
accordance with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of
21 December 1965.
2400th plenary meeting
10 November 1975
3382 (XXX). Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries ::ind peoples
for the effective guarantee and observance
of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973
and 3246 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
7 A/10197.

8 Resolution 2106 A

(XX), annex.
