A/63/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

50

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 November 2008, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mbuende
(Namibia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 6.05 p.m.
Agenda item 45 (continued)
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/262)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/127)
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.23 and
A/63/L.24/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): It is
a great honour to address the Assembly on behalf of
the people and the Government of Ecuador, a country
that is convinced that dialogue, equality under the law
for all peoples, mutual respect, self-determination,
cooperation and peaceful coexistence are the
fundamental principles which should guide relations
among States. Ecuador supports the pacific settlement
of international disputes and conflicts and emphatically
rejects the threat or use of force as a mechanism to
resolve them. We therefore condemn interference in the
internal affairs of States, as well as any form of
intervention. Loyal to those principles, my country
promotes peace and universal disarmament and
condemns the development and use of weapons of
mass destruction.

As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Ecuador has enshrined in its legal structure the
standards set out in the Charter, as well as the
principles derived from the Constitution of UNESCO
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. But
we have gone further. In our new political constitution,
recently approved by a vast majority in a public
referendum, Ecuador proclaims itself a State of law, in
which all individuals, groups, associations, educational
communities, enterprises and institutions enjoy in their
daily activity a firm commitment based on respect for
life,
rejection
of
violence,
understanding,
environmental preservation and solidarity as essential
elements for attaining social inclusion and equality.
Furthermore, the new constitution of Ecuador
condemns the imposition of bases or installations with
military purposes by one State on the territory of
another, since we have declared our country to be a
territory of peace.
Additionally, my country has established
tolerance and multiculturalism as basic principles,
respecting all types of religion and worship, including
the enormous spiritual richness of our indigenous and
Afro-Ecuadorian peoples. As President Rafael Correa
Delgado, an economist by training, stated during the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the signing
of Peace Accord with our brotherly country Peru, “we
have to build a profound sustainable peace on the basis
of development and justice”. That is precisely what we
are doing in Ecuador; we are building peace each and
every day with commitment and effort and based on
social justice, equality, dignity and respect. We are

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-60280 (E)

*0860280*

A/63/PV.50

committed to building a supportive human society that
fosters regional integration.
To that end and convinced that peace brings
progress, our current Administration, since taking
office, has actively participated with its Peruvian
counterpart in implementing innumerable projects in
the area of the southern Ecuadorian border, dealing
with many different issues, including transportation,
trade, mutual trust measures, irrigation channels,
tourist plans, highways and country roads, migration
mechanisms, educational and cultural exchange
programmes, hydroelectric stations, environmental
measures, a bi-national park for peace, among other
things, involving a joint investment of $2 billion for
executing projects. Those projects, as our President has
said, evince our political will to change the
development pattern. Today we are trying to strengthen
the border and move towards a human security
concept.
We in Ecuador firmly believe that the human
being must be considered the central concern of the
international order and that strict respect for human,
civil, political, economic, social, cultural and collective
rights must form the core of foreign policy, based on
the premise that human rights are universal,
interdependent and indivisible. The application of
those principles must be guided by the principles of
universality, impartiality, objectivity and nonselectivity, with the recognition that constructive
dialogue and cooperation is necessary in order to foster
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development.
The same view applies with regard to the
implementation of Plan Ecuador in area of the border
zone with Colombia. Its purpose is to conceive human
security as a result of peace and development. That
plan is based on three fundamental axes: first,
strengthening security and the culture of peace, centred
on the human being and based upon the satisfaction of
their needs and the achievement of their full potential
in terms of capabilities and freedoms. Secondly, it
fosters the maintenance of equitable international
relations in solidarity with others; and thirdly, it
affirms a defense policy based on the protection of
populations and natural resources, national heritage
and effective control of one’s territory.

2

Owing to the impact of the internal Colombian
conflict on Ecuadorian society, Plan Ecuador is focused
on multidimensional and multi-sector prevention
efforts aimed at solving the grave problems resulting
from
poverty,
exclusion
and
violence.
Its
implementation is based on achieving national social
and
economic
development
objectives,
strict
compliance with international agreements in the field
of human rights, conservation and the sustainable
exploitation of natural resources and the fight against
all kinds of illegal activities affecting human security.
We propose to that effect the strengthening of the
economy of the border provinces, improvement in the
quality of life of the people, increasing the presence
and the coordination of our State institutions and
strengthening the management capacity of Government
and local social organizations. That is the only way to
respond efficiently and in a timely manner to the
increased number of social problems and those
resulting from the displacement of groups of people by
the internal conflict in Colombia to strengthen
humanitarian aid, minimize the environmental impact
of production activities and to keep the population
from getting involved in illegal activities.
Plan Ecuador is a starting point that sets the
political agenda of the Government regarding the
northern border. That instrument has been enriched
with the help and participation of the main local actors.
The refugee issue in the northern border area is a
national priority for my country as we seek to build our
culture of peace. In order to foster comprehensive
economic and social development and build a zone of
peace, as conceived by Plan Ecuador, State policies
regarding refugees must guarantee their protection and
at the same time provide a lasting solution for those
hundreds of thousands of Colombians who need
international protection.
Ecuador has implemented key strategies to fulfil
such high humanitarian objectives and they deserve
special mention. Those strategies allow the active
inclusion of people in need of international protection
into Ecuadorian society, making Ecuador the country
with the largest number of refugees in the western
hemisphere.
Finally, and despite the enormous investment in
human and economic resources for refugees, which has
gone beyond the country’s possibilities, Ecuador has
renewed its commitment to the issue of refugees, the

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

same commitment that has been strengthened by the
implementation of our renewed policy on refugees.
Everything I have said in this statement provides
examples of what my country and Government have
implemented for the effective promotion and
implementation of a culture of peace. Ecuador is truly
convinced that only by building a new multipolar order
that actively incorporates the economic and political
regional blocks and by strengthening horizontal
relations, can a better, more just, democratic and
diverse world be built.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Chairman of the delegation of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus welcomes the results of the World Conference
on Dialogue, which took place in Madrid in July 2008.
We agree with the principles of dialogue, tolerance and
mutual understanding set forth in the final Declaration.
Belarus particularly appreciates the idea in the Madrid
Declaration on the value of diversity in the culture of
peoples and civilizations.
At the 2005 World Summit, the President of
Belarus proposed to recognize the diversity of ways to
achieve progressive development as a value of
civilization. The purpose of the initiative was to
support diversity of political, social and economic
systems in today’s world. Such diversity involves
various ways of life for peoples, including religious
and cultural aspects and historic legacies.
Diversity is certainly a value for world
civilization. It is the diversity of the political,
economic and social lives of peoples that is the
prerequisite for effective dialogue, including a dialogue
of cultures and religions. Supporting diverse ways of
progressive development is also one of the most
important factors in maintaining international peace
and security. We agree with the appeal in the Madrid
Declaration to encourage a dialogue of religions. For
Belarus, the principles of interreligious and inter-ethnic
tolerance, dialogue and cooperation have been an
integral element of social life.
The historical religious and ethnic diversity in
Belarus has led to an absence of conflicts on the basis
of religious or ethnic intolerance. The favourable
interreligious and interracial relations in Belarus are
fostered by active State policy. We believe that the
United Nations should broadly and decisively promote

08-60280

the development of inter-ethnic and interreligious
dialogue. We welcome the holding in the United
Nations of yearly forums on encouraging dialogue
among cultures and religions as an effective
mechanism for exchanging experiences.
However, specific proposals that have been made
in recent discussions in recent years have not yet been
sufficiently reflected in decisions of the General
Assembly, other bodies and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system. We believe it is important to
call upon the international community to assist in
expanding education as an effective means to combat
religious and racial intolerance; to enhance the
innovative use of the latest information technologies
for interreligious and inter-ethnic dialogue, especially
among young people; to ensure political correctness in
the media and their moral and ethical responsibility in
the context of freedom of speech and also to expand
academic exchange among countries. Belarus proposes
that we consistently include these ideas in decisions of
the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica wishes to express its thanks to King
Abdullah Bin Abdelaziz Al Saud of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia for his endeavours to bring about this
meeting in the context of the dialogue among
civilizations promoted by Spain and Turkey.
A country such as ours, which on 1 December
will celebrate 60 years since we constitutionally and
institutionally abolished our army, must welcome all
efforts intended to achieve and promote peace. Here, it
is worth recalling what Pope John Paul II stated with
intellectual and spiritual clarity at the thirty-first
session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO): in today’s
world, development is the new name for peace.
For its part, the United Nations, as the broadest
most democratic and most inclusive organization of
peoples and States, and faithful to its founding values,
has stated, by remit of heads of State or Government in
the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), that the
three pillars of its mission are peace, development and
respect for human rights.
The Millennium Declaration tells us that those
pillars are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. It is of

3

A/63/PV.50

great symbolic significance that, in December, 60 years
will have passed since both the abolition of the army in
our country and the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. If only human rights
were to prevail effectively and universally, how far we
would have progressed towards a culture of peace.
Accordingly, there are two fundamental elements
if we are to conceive, develop and disseminate a
culture of peace. On the one hand, we must live in
peace — in peace with our neighbour and with
ourselves, deeply respecting the essential in all human
beings, each of whom possesses inherent dignity. On
the other hand, we must ensure that access to education
is a true, effective and universal right.
Education, both in the home and at school, must
convey respect for others: for their religions, cultures,
physical and mental states and any other human or
social attribute. The values about which we are talking
today and which we are promoting must be the
cornerstone of the educational materials used by our
children and young people. Our Governments must
ensure that no book, tape or education material of any
sort
contains
concepts
or
ideas
fostering
discrimination, indifference, hate or violence against
any human group.
It is undeniable that we are living in difficult
times. While men and women of goodwill throughout
the world praise peace and live in peace, weapons and
petty or lofty ambitions fill our fields with blood when
they should be planted with seeds and irrigated with
water so that the natural world that God gave us may
offer the rich fruit of the Earth that feeds all of us.
While men and women of goodwill yearn for a
solidarity that would organize and protect humanity,
greed and selfishness are rampant. While people of
goodwill work to bring close those who have been cast
aside or considered to be without importance,
ignorance or poorly understood tradition nevertheless
keeps them afar and under domination.
However, against this backdrop, allow me here to
recall the old adage that it is always darkest before the
dawn. How much truth there is in that phrase. At a time
when we are in the midst of wars, natural disasters and
economic events that worry all of us, the prophetic
vision and the dream of Martin Luther King, Jr., are
ever more real. The power of his idealism and the
power of change must overturn prejudice and mental
barriers that, a short time ago, appeared invincible.

4

Martin Luther King and his ideals have reached the
promised land. The culture of respect for diversity as
the foundation of peace has taken a great leap forward.
From my country, Costa Rica, where, whenever
we sing our national anthem, we say “Long live work
and peace”, we raise our voice in this Hall to proclaim
together with the prophet Isaiah that swords shall be
beaten into ploughshares and that men shall learn war
no more.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Chairman of the delegation of Croatia.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Let me start by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly for organizing this high-level meeting and to
His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia for having
undertaken this initiative. We have had the chance
during the past two days to listen to heads of State or
Government from the many diverse regions of the
world, and we have heard them place a great deal of
importance on the value of mutual dialogue and
understanding. Their strong commitment to the
promotion of these values can give rise to a future
filled with promise and hope.
Today we live in a world that is closely linked
through telecommunications and the global economy.
We do not need to live close to one another to know
that somewhere else in the world a different culture or
religion or system of beliefs exists. As our citizens
interact, our economies and our cultures also interact.
In this interaction, mutual understanding of one
another’s faith and culture is the basis for our wellbeing, our stability and our prosperity.
On the other hand, it would be wrong for any
religion to claim superiority over others in terms of
holding the highest truth. If we fail to understand and
appreciate one another’s differences, religion and
culture will eventually be used to promote and deepen
conflicts, instead of bringing us closer together. The
freedom to hold a belief of one’s choosing, or to
change it, is an essential attribute of the human
conscience and a prerequisite for peaceful coexistence
and unity as one single but diverse human family.
As we celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is crucial to
ensure that every single person has freedom of speech
and expression and freedom of faith and belief, which

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

includes freedom of religion. That, in its ultimate form,
is the basis for intercultural dialogue.
With its geographical position, Croatia has been
at the crossroads of various religions and cultures for
centuries. It is a place where Central and Eastern
Europe meet the Mediterranean and where Christianity
meets Islam and Judaism, the cradle of our belief in
one God and creator. Croatia is a strong supporter of
the Alliance of Civilizations initiative, which is aimed
at combating extremism and overcoming cultural
misunderstandings among civilizations. Croatia has
actively engaged in that process and is about to begin
preparing for its national plan on the issue.
Croatia welcomes the idea behind the World
Conference on Dialogue, held this year in Madrid,
Spain, which brought together representatives of
various religions in the hope that it would promote
mutual understanding and tolerance. We would also
like to draw attention to the recent meeting in Rome
between Catholics and Muslims, at which a number of
timely and pertinent issues were discussed. Such
meetings are good examples of bridging the differences
among cultures and religions where a common
denominator can be found.
Religious communities and their leaders hold a
great deal of power and responsibility in their hands.
Believers listen to the words of such leaders and seek
their guidance, especially at this time of change and
challenges. The important responsibility of promoting
mutual understanding and tolerance that rests with
religious leaders provides them with a unique moral
authority to guide people in the direction of accepting
their neighbours and rejecting distorted uses of religion
that exacerbate conflicts and tensions.
In many regions of the world, we see that
interreligious and intercultural cooperation is a
prerequisite for international peace and security. As a
country rich in cultural diversity, we understand that a
common and peaceful future for the benefit of all can
be built only on the foundations of tolerance,
understanding and reconciliation. We should all strive
to accept our differences and use them as a bridge by
which to bring nations and peoples together and build
the conditions for a peaceful solution to long-lasting
conflicts, rather than exacerbating dissimilarities
created by historical or cultural differences or
misgivings.

08-60280

Although no one can change the past, we can all
commit to strengthening our future prospects by
investing in new generations. Our children were not
born with prejudice in their hearts; they were taught it.
If we offer them interfaith education based on the
principle of mutual understanding and acceptance, they
will grow up with a better chance to shape a world free
of discrimination and intolerance.
The Acting President: I now call on the
Chairman of the delegation of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): The delegation of
Sri Lanka commends the President of the General
Assembly and His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia for the initiative to
convene this high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the subject “Culture of peace”. The world
community is confronted with multiple crises that
touch upon human and inter-State behaviour in all its
aspects, heightening tensions, uncertainty and even
fear and anxiety. It is indeed timely to reflect on the
need to understand and deal with the scourges of
extremism, terrorism, hatred and xenophobic
tendencies that lie at the root of those problems.
Initiatives on the dialogue among civilizations,
the dialogue among faiths and the dialogue among
peoples and communities are not new; they have been
and remain an integral part of the human endeavour
aimed at overcoming conflict and intolerance. About a
decade ago, when theories regarding an imminent clash
of civilizations were being propounded by some, there
were wise initiatives in Asia to promote a dialogue
among civilizations. That process has come a long way.
It has been heartening to see its further evolution
through high-level meetings that have been held at
important venues in places ranging from Madrid to
Phnom Penh and from Tehran to Astana, covering
almost all corners of the world and now coming to
fruition here at the United Nations in New York.
All those initiatives have been timely in a world
beset by words and deeds of bigotry. The present
dialogue can deepen mutual understanding and enable
us to develop shared perspectives on common
challenges affecting humanity and a vision for a
collective response to such challenges, rooted in values
and ethics.
A culture of peace should not be a rhetorical
exercise or a matter of precept alone, nor is it a debate
on values versus human rights or vice versa. It is self-

5

A/63/PV.50

evident that a culture of peace is the core value
underpinning all major religions of the world.
Moreover, the crises of the past and present
notwithstanding, we live in an era in which examples
of great men and women who have nurtured, practiced
and given meaning to the concept of non-violence,
tolerance and passive resistance, without resort to
terror and without harm to fellow human beings, have
become more relevant than ever before. Mahatma
Gandhi, Martin Luther King and the living legend
Nelson Mandela are but a few of those who continue to
be icons of peace and reconciliation. Their missions
and lives have drawn more on the inner strength of
being human, proving beyond a shadow of a doubt that
intolerance and terrorism have no place in any human
endeavour to overcome oppression, denial or
deprivation. Even today, there are a countless number
of persons still out there who are practicing those
ethics, providing best-practices approaches to
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. As we invest
time, resources and energy in forums such as this, it is
also timely that we take a leaf from their lives as we
reflect on the important aspect of advancing a culture
of peace at all levels.
We live in an increasingly fragile and polarized
world. Underdevelopment, poverty and a multiplicity
of social and economic ills, compounded by hatred,
terrorism and the defamation of religions and cultures,
as well as unsustainable consumption and exploitation,
continue
to
beset
humanity.
Environmental
degradation, the erosion of ethical values, the
continued weaponization of human security —
including, of course, the menace of weapons of mass
destruction — and organized crime continue to push
the world towards further instability and crisis. While
human
ingenuity
has
heralded
breathtaking
developments in science and technology, the benefits
of such creativity are increasingly being outweighed by
the potential for misdirection and exploitation that they
have entailed.
By definition, a culture of peace includes much
more than just peace and security, which we often talk
about. It encompasses the gamut of positive attributes
needed to replace the culture of weapons and violence,
misery and repression that has dominated the human
history. These include respecting life, rejecting
terrorism and violence, sharing with others, listening in
order to understand, preserving the planet,
rediscovering
solidarity
and
participating
in

6

democracy. There are yet more, which relate both to
our way of life and to our relationships with fellow
human beings. Compassion, not hatred, and informed
inquiry, not blind adherence — as advocated in
Buddhism — are key strands that run through the
concept of a culture of peace.
A culture of peace presupposes realizing equity
and equality for all, with justice and dignity. An
absence of these would naturally negate any effort at
achieving a global order conducive to stability and
prosperity. A comprehensive approach to enhancing a
culture of peace, therefore, remains predicated on a
lasting commitment and the will to take meaningful
measures on multiple fronts, essential to securing
humanity.
First, we should place emphasis on the imperative
of peaceful coexistence. At the same time, positive
recognition of differences in the ways of life and the
expressions of ideas, as well as the pursuit of beliefs, is
of equal importance. We should both strengthen and
expand the platform for dialogue. It is unfortunate that
dialogue is often confused with argument, and
consequently, an overemphasis on argument culture has
overshadowed the importance of a culture of dialogue.
This is true of many peacemaking efforts, whether
inter-State or intra-State. We need to reverse that trend.
A positive affirmation that no religion,
community, or ethnicity can be equated or associated
with violence or terrorism is crucial to sustainable
peace. Equally, no entity postulating or practicing
terrorism can or should be allowed to claim to
represent any community, ethnic or religious interests.
It is important to address vulnerabilities,
compounded by backwardness, social and economic
exclusions, if necessary even by upholding the value of
affirmative action. It is also imperative that we take
conscious and determined action to humanize our
thoughts and conduct more. We witness, on a daily
basis, the media and others describing ordinary events
in militaristic terms. It is unfortunate that we continue
to apply the dichotomy of combatants versus noncombatants to civilians, whereas the distinction should
in fact be civilians versus non-civilians. The
introduction of the term “collateral” into the lexicon of
human relations is one of the most negative
developments in recent years. It is time that we, and
younger generations, were weaned away from such

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

thinking. Only terrorist groups would benefit from
such weaponized thought processes.
Last but not least, we should build on the positive
aspects of our different value systems and belief
systems in order to harness a greater understanding and
rapprochement. The media, like other actors and
players, need to play a catalytic role in this context. It
is time to desist from the promotion of conflict and the
glorification of terrorism and rededicate ourselves to
actively
strengthening
the
foundation
for
multiculturalism and coexistence.
As a country where the four major religions of
Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity and Islam have
coexisted for centuries in peace and harmony, Sri
Lanka shares an intrinsic belief in the value and
importance of a sustained dialogue among civilizations
and cultures, as well as interreligious and intercultural
cooperation for peace. That spirit and ethic of
coexistence and mutual respect have been the bedrock
of our 2,500 year-old civilization, founded on the core
Buddhist values of compassion, understanding, modest
living and friendliness towards nature. Buddhism and
other religions have immense potential and scope to
play crucial roles as religions of peace in culture of
peace initiatives.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Chairman of the delegation of Bolivia.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We are gathered here today to consider agenda item 45,
entitled “Culture of peace”, to think together of ways
to strengthen dialogue among our various religions and
of ways of achieving an alliance among our
civilizations.
We are living through times of crisis and change.
This consideration and search for unity among peoples
has become of paramount importance in these turbulent
times, these times of crisis and major challenges, times
in which we are becoming aware that our world is on
the brink of inevitable disaster, of global crisis, a world
emergency that could be described in the following
ways. First, climate change is causing ever stronger
and more frequent disturbances and natural disasters. If
certain critical thresholds are passed, there could
suddenly be disastrous consequences, especially for the
poorest nations and peoples.
Second, the depletion of the planet’s natural
resources, which are being drastically sapped owing to

08-60280

over-exploitation by industrialized nations, which
every year consume 30 per cent more of the world’s
natural resources than can be renewed.
Third, we have a water crisis. With urbanization,
industrialization and increased use of energy, there has
been a greater consumption of water, and water tables
have been drawn upon to a greater degree, thus
reducing the sources of this vital liquid in many areas
of the world.
Fourth, the current crises in food production have
resulted from climate change, speculation and the
increasing conversion of agricultural produce into raw
materials for agro-fuels. This is causing a drastic price
hike and is gradually reducing world reserves.
Fifth, an energy crisis has arisen with the end of
the era of cheap energy, above all, oil and gas — and
yet, no alternative forms of energy have been found to
replace them at the current levels of consumption.
Neither are there energy models that could contribute
to reducing consumption. We continue to see natural
resources being pillaged.
Sixth, the current financial crisis has been
spreading throughout the world in 2008 and has
deepened the asymmetries between countries,
burdening peoples with the responsibility of saving the
system at the cost of seeing their rights eroded and
unemployment increasing.
Seventh, there is the crisis of time, in which the
time scale of industrial production clashes harshly with
the rhythm of life, leading to a tremendous collision
between the rhythm of natural time cycles and the
linear time of history as measured by the clock.
This multifaceted crisis is an expression of the
crisis of the capitalist system. As it worsens, it is
becoming a factor that is de-stabilizing international
relations.
If the countries of the world do not reach
agreement on the necessary joint measures to resolve
the crisis, the culmination of the effects of climate
change in the world and depleted natural resources will
mean that it will be more likely that many politicians
will favour the military option. They would do so in an
attempt to hold on to their privileged living standards
for longer and maintain their control over access to oil
deposits and strategic routes for the transport of
hydrocarbons, but also over access to drinking water,

7

A/63/PV.50

important mineral deposits, forests and land for food
and biofuels, among other natural resources.
This global systemic crisis derives from a
resurgence of racism as a tool of powerful groups and
elites to entrench their privileges and to see in the
others — those different from them, the ones they have
colonized — a threat to their ability to continue to
enjoy their accustomed lifestyle. In several countries
and regions, racism has gone from speech to action and
is expressed in violent acts against indigenous cultures,
migrants and peoples of the South. Sometimes, this is
subtly expressed through policies and control
mechanisms in certain States.
Faced with this worrying perspective of the
growing global crisis, the culture of life and peace has
blossomed, a culture that is embodied by indigenous
peoples, as has been demonstrated throughout history,
and that is now gaining strength as an alternative to the
unquestioned prevailing system. Our communities are
fostering another, more balanced form of life and the
construction of another Abya Yala — which is now
called America — of another world.
We indigenous peoples wish to live not just
together with other human beings but in harmony with
Mother Earth. Indigenous nations throughout the world
are the reservoir of ancestral wisdom and scientific
knowledge for protecting life. They are the moral
reserve and a decisive factor for saving the world. We
as human beings have to recognize that we are part of
Mother Nature and that we need to re-establish
complementary relationships among ourselves and with
nature.
In that framework, everybody and everything are
of importance in our culture. We all have a space. We
are all worth something. We all maintain a balance
among ourselves. That is to say, we all need one
another and we all belong to the culture of life. We are
all a part of a community based on giving and
receiving, on living in complementarity with each
other, on the common good, on organized mutual
support and on life together, in which capacities are
developed without destroying human beings and
nature. We are part of the Tama — the great family —
which has always been present in the unity,
complementarity, hearts and actions of indigenous
peoples.
To contribute to this international debate, our
President, Evo Morales, has put forward ten proposals,

8

ten commandments to save the planet, humankind and
life. Among the most important proposals is the
obligation to put an end to the capitalist system. If we
wish to save Earth in order to save life and humankind,
we must put an end to the very essence of capitalism,
which is the seeking of profit at the cost of life. The
serious effects of climate change and of the energy,
food and financial crises are not a result of the actions
of human beings in general, as is often explained.
Rather, they are products of the prevailing capitalist
system, its production and consumption networks and
its destructive and predatory logic, which has made
civilization inhuman, with unbridled industrial
development eternally clashing with life.
Renouncing war is another inescapable task,
because peoples do not win wars, only empires win
wars. Nations do not win wars, only transnational
corporations win wars. Wars benefit small groups of
the powerful and not peoples. They destroy life and
pillage natural resources. Nothing and nobody can be
saved from war. Those who fight suffer and those who
go hungry to feed war suffer. Mother Earth and the
natural balance of life suffer. Above all, it is the human
condition and those rights that we have built up little
by little, as nations, that suffer.
It is essential to build a world free of imperialism
and colonialism, where relations must be aimed at
complementarity, the respect for diverse sovereign
entities and identities and where the deep asymmetries
that exist between one family and another, one country
and another and one continent and another are taken
into account.
Throughout the world, blocs for regional
integration are being built. Those processes clearly
show that we wish to bring about coexistence among
our various peoples, economies and civilizations, to put
an end to the unipolar world and bring about a
balanced, multipolar one.
Another issue is how to put an end to wasting
energy. In 100 years, we have used up fossil fuels that
were created over millions of years. Some
Governments set aside land to produce energy for
machines and cars and not for human beings. We must
implement policies to curb the overproduction of
biofuels and, in this way, avoid hunger and poverty for
our peoples.
We must become fully aware with regard to
respect for Mother Earth. The capitalist system treats

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

her as a raw material, as a resource according to the
system’s predatory logic. But Earth is our home and
cannot be turned into merchandise.

nature and being aware of the interdependence among
nations and regions and the interdependence of human
beings with nature.

In this time of climate chaos and resource
scarcity on our finite planet, we must put an end to
consumerism, waste and luxury and consume only
what is necessary. We must prioritize what we produce
and consume locally, as well as exchanges among
regions, thus stimulating self-sufficiency and the
sovereignty of communities within the limits allowed
by the health and resources of the planet. We must not
go beyond what the Earth can provide to shelter us.

By awakening the ethical and moral values of our
peoples and cultures, we should build brotherhood
among nations, to make this new millennium a
millennium of life, and not of death or war, a
millennium of balance and complementarity. We, the
nations of the world, must together decide on and
direct our destinies. We must all, men and women,
construct a culture of patience, of dialogue and,
fundamentally, of life and peace. Together, we must
bring about respect and harmonious and peaceful
complementarity among our nations and communities.

Industrialized nations must radically reorient
their economies and readapt their production,
consumption and energy use levels. They must
abandon the vision of unbridled economic growth,
which is utopian and suicidal. They must reduce
industrialization and long-distance trade and promote
local production and local agriculture, thereby
overcoming the imbalances among nations.
The major problems facing humankind and the
planet today are connected with the imbalances that
have been created among nations and regions. We
cannot tackle the various crises we have mentioned if
these imbalances among countries persist. It is not a
question of helping developing countries to achieve the
same level of development as developed countries. The
living arrangements in the North cannot be extended to
the entire planet, because there are not enough
resources on Mother Earth to withstand such pillaging
of natural resources. If we were all to live at the same
level as developed countries, we would need three or
four more planets. This is unsustainable development.
Therefore, Bolivia talks of living well rather than
of living better at the cost of others and nature. Living
well is based on the life of our peoples, the riches of
our communities: fertile land, clean air and water and a
simple life, which can reduce our addiction to
consumption and ensure balanced production.
Living better is a concept that implies that certain
peoples can live better than others. However, if we live
better and see others who are worse off, that is not
living well. Exploiting and subjugating our neighbours
or attacking nature might enable us to live better, but it
is not living well. For us, living well means living in
community, being complementary one to another rather
than competitive, sharing and not taking advantage of
our neighbours, living in harmony with others and with

08-60280

Finally, we firmly believe that we can neither
resolve nor satisfactorily address all the crises
besetting us today unless we undertake discussions and
profound reflection, here in the United Nations, on the
new paradigms that must guide us in the twenty-first
century.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
The delegation of Tanzania is pleased to participate in
this important debate on the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace, under the agenda item on the
culture of peace. This high-level meeting has come at
an opportune time, when the rejection of intolerance
and a profound aspiration to live in peace and security
are becoming an increasingly salient feature of society
today.
We congratulate the President of the General
Assembly and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
successfully organizing this high-level meeting. We
believe that its outcome will contribute to a better
understanding and a deepening dialogue among
cultures, religions and faiths. All of us therefore have
an obligation to maintain the momentum that will be
generated through this meeting.
We also wish at this juncture to commend the
work undertaken by UNESCO and other United
Nations agencies, the Alliance of Civilizations and the
Tripartite Forum on Interfaith Cooperation for Peace in
promoting the culture of peace.
The importance of intercultural and interreligious
harmony cannot be underscored sufficiently in the

9

A/63/PV.50

United Republic of Tanzania, a country with a diverse
population. We have over 100 ethnic tribes and several
religions, which coexist in harmony and with full
freedom to express their cultural and religious
diversities. In Tanzania we have succeeded in having
four peaceful transitions of the presidency. The union
of the Tanzania mainland and the island of Zanzibar
44 years ago, has stood the test of time and is an
exemplary case of unity of sovereign countries.
The Government of Tanzania firmly believes in
fostering a culture of peace for sustainable
development and the prosperity of all people. The
culture of peace and the unity that we enjoy in
Tanzania has not come about by itself; it has been
developed and nurtured. We have consistently instilled
in our children and our people the values of tolerance
and dialogue. We have further continued to impress
upon them the need to refrain from the use of force and
violence and instead to reason with and respect each
other, for we know that the costs of conflicts are
devastating.
The freedom of religious belief, worship and
practice is enshrined in our Constitution. However, we
go beyond the expression and protection of the right to
faith and worship and encourage dialogue between
various faiths and religions to help to develop the
understanding of the faiths and religious beliefs of
others and to reduce ignorance. Mutual understanding
breeds respect for each other, while ignorance is the
seed of religious bigotry and intolerance and can be
used by a few disillusioned people to sow seeds of
misunderstanding and discord in society.
The responsibility for instilling the culture of
peace is not the responsibility of the Government
alone. Concerted efforts are needed from all
stakeholders, such as parliaments and civil society,
including religious and faith-based organizations.
The Helsinki Process on Globalization and
Democracy, which Finland and Tanzania co-chaired,
and its final report, which was presented to the
Secretary-General in September 2008 by the Presidents
of Tanzania and Finland, underscored that globalization
had brought changes with it, not only in world politics,
but also diversity in the people and cultures in many of
our countries. In this regard, the involvement of
different stakeholders and international collaboration
and cooperation are equally essential in meeting the
objectives of the Decade for the Culture of Peace.

10

We are encouraged that one of the main goals of
the culture of peace is to ensure that the Charter of the
United Nations is adhered to and enhances the creation
of a culture where peace will prevail. Tanzania, as one
of the champions of peace in the African continent and
beyond, will continue to support the Decade for the
Culture of Peace, the Alliance of Civilizations and the
Tripartite Forum on Interfaith Cooperation. We should
endeavour to ensure that the United Nations continues
to play a leading role in these initiatives.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
chairman of the delegation of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to express our
sincere appreciation for the convening of this timely
high-level meeting on the culture of peace. We
commend the initiative of His Majesty King Abdullah
of Saudi Arabia for convening this meeting. The
presence of so many world leaders here is a testimony
of the collective commitment to the cause of an
enduring culture of peace in the world, for bringing
about harmony and understanding among different
religions, cultures and civilizations.
Peace is the highest calling and highest ideal of
the United Nations. It is among the most important
objectives of our Organization. The United Nations
embraces the universally shared values and goals for
the culture of peace. In this context it is very important
that we take up the agenda of the culture of peace,
dialogue and alliance among civilizations and religions
to promote harmony, tolerance and fraternity among
the world’s various cultures, religions and civilizations.
Nepal appreciates various initiatives on the issue
of the culture of peace, alliance and dialogue among
civilizations and harmony among the world’s religions
and cultures, including the decision to include the
culture of peace on the agenda of the General
Assembly. The United Nations system can do a lot to
promote interfaith dialogue and interface among
civilizations, bringing together Governments, religious
institutions, civil society leaders and the media to act
together in the interest of the culture of peace.
The messages of peace and harmony resonate in
every culture, civilization and faith. Nepal is a cradle, a
confluence of various religions, cultures and
civilizations, with Hinduism, Buddhism and various
native religions observed by diverse ethnic groups and
indigenous peoples. Nepal is a perfect example of
tolerance and harmony among peoples who observe

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

various religions and cultures. Although we have had
our share of conflict and violence, which we are
putting behind us through a nationally driven peace
process, it is a fact that religious and cultural
differences are not a source of conflict in the country.
Today, Nepal has made remarkable progress
towards peace, democracy and development through
our own creative peace process. The peaceful
resolution of Nepal’s decade-long conflict reflects the
importance of the culture of peace. The people of
Nepal have arrived at the conclusion that all
disagreements will henceforth be resolved through
dialogue, accommodation and the verdict of the people
through democratic means.
Nepal is the country of birth of Lord Buddha, the
Apostle of Peace and the Light of Asia. The teachings
of Buddha include the ideals of peace, compassion,
non-violence and tolerance, which are among the
guiding principles of the United Nations. In that
context, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his homage to Lumbini, the
sacred birthplace of Buddha, during his recent visit to
Nepal. I would like to take this opportunity to state that
we are committed to developing Lumbini into a city of
world peace. The United Nations, which was
significantly involved in the Lumbini development
master plan, can play a significant role in the
development of Lumbini as a fountain of world peace,
which will greatly contribute to the culture of peace in
the world.
Peace cannot develop in a vacuum, especially
when people are forced to live in abject poverty, in the
face of so much prosperity in the world. The
international community should therefore invest further
in sustainable economic and social development, so
that the world’s increasing population will not have to
resort to deadly competition over shrinking resources.
Let me conclude by saying that respect for human
rights and the diversity of cultures, religions and
civilizations and the promotion of sustainable
development should be at the core of the activities of
the United Nations to promote a culture of peace in the
world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
chairman of the delegation of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would also like to express its gratitude for

08-60280

the initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to hold
this high-level meeting. I should also like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for agreeing to hold
today’s meeting.
Argentina believes fully in the important role
played by the United Nations in bringing together
peoples of different cultures and religions. In that
connection, we welcome the holding of the Madrid
World Conference on Dialogue and the Declaration it
adopted as a significant contribution to that noble
objective.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to bring about the culture of
peace and genuine dialogue among peoples, cultures
and religions and to implement resolution 62/90, in
which the General Assembly affirmed that mutual
understanding and interreligious dialogue constituted
important dimensions of the dialogue among
civilizations and the culture of peace.
Through its various agencies, the United Nations
has carried out a series of efforts — albeit utilizing
emphatically different approaches and mandates — to
promote and implement the Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in September 1999. In that connection, it is
worth mentioning the work done by UNESCO, which
included cultural and other efforts focused on the
religious aspect of international dialogue. Among
additional initiatives, I should like to refer in particular
to the Alliance of Civilizations, an effort to which the
Argentine Republic has given its utmost support since
it was launched in 2004 on the initiative of the
Government of the Kingdom of Spain with the support
of Turkey.
In line with the report of the High-level Group
for the Alliance of Civilizations and its plan of action,
allow me to recall that Argentina has promoted the
dissemination and strengthening of the Alliance of
Civilizations in the Latin American and Caribbean
region. In that regard, Argentina organized a regional
seminar on the theme “Women and the Alliance of
Civilizations: opportunities and challenges”, which
was held in Buenos Aires on 28 and 29 April 2008 and
included the participation of governmental experts and
civil society representatives from every Latin
American and Caribbean country.
Such a committed effort as the Alliance of
Civilizations could not ignore gender issues and the

11

A/63/PV.50

status of women throughout the world, in which
women suffer scandalous inequalities and various
forms of discrimination. On several occasions, we have
reiterated that the report of the High-level Group,
which was appointed by the Secretary-General, has
itself drawn attention to disturbing facts including, for
example, that 70 per cent of children who do not attend
school are girls and that no less than two thirds of the
world’s illiterate people are women or children. Thus,
inequality, discrimination and marginalization as
regards women are therefore indisputable facts that
have a direct impact on how we view the other, as well
as on the possibility of a genuine and constructive
dialogue among societies and cultures.
The statements, conclusions and recommendations
of the Buenos Aires seminar have been compiled in a
book entitled Women and the Alliance of Civilizations:
Opportunities and Challenges, which was launched and
distributed on the occasion of the last ministerial
meeting of the Group of Friends of the Alliance of
Civilizations. The book was later sent to every
delegation of the Organization’s Member States.
It was especially enlightening to realize that there
could potentially be analogous situations between acts
of intolerance in the Middle East and certain situations
in Central America stemming from the phenomena of
colonization and, subsequently, immigration, which
have marked the history of our continent. That
experience is an especially interesting aspect of a
region such as Latin America and the Caribbean, where
major migratory flows have historically converged to
transplant hopes and dreams in places of destination.
Inevitably, however, the same prejudices that existed
where those flows originated were also brought to our
region. Those issues were the subject of debate at the
regional seminar held in Buenos Aires. We hope that
the work begun there will continue to be developed in
the coming years.
In conclusion, Argentina will continue to play an
active role in promoting and expanding dialogue and
understanding among societies and cultures in the
various regional and international forums in which we
participate, especially as regards the lofty goals of the
Alliance of Civilizations.
Lastly, we believe that all countries that share
those ideals have difficult work ahead, including a very
real agenda to implement. I assure the Assembly that

12

Argentina will spare no effort and will continue to
participate actively in that noble task.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
chairman of the delegation of Cameroon.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): We note with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document A/63/262, as
well as his note contained in document A/63/127. We
also welcome the holding of this high-level debate
devoted to the interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
aimed at establishing a culture of peace. Among other
things, this year’s high-level debate is part of a
tradition that has been taking root at the United
Nations for several years.
As the Assembly is aware, Cameroon has always
associated itself with that tradition. Just to limit myself
to the recent past, I note that my country was a sponsor
of resolution 61/221, adopted in 2006, whereby the
General Assembly decided to hold in 2007 a high-level
dialogue on cooperation among religions and cultures.
My country was also a sponsor of resolution 62/90,
adopted in 2007, which affirmed that mutual
understanding and dialogue among religions constitute
important aspects of dialogue among civilizations and
of a culture of peace.
As in the past, this high-level debate is fully
relevant. That is why this year, once again, we have
become a sponsor of the two draft resolutions
(A/63/L.23 and A/63/L.24/Rev.1) submitted under
agenda item 45.
Today’s discussion is relevant because our world
continues to pay a heavy price for the lack of
understanding and absence of dialogue. Economic
imbalances and, especially, intolerance and bigotry
continue to cause untold suffering for peoples
throughout the world. Intolerance and bigotry are in
fact phenomena that underlie, inter alia, the terrorism
that spares no continent. Intolerance is also the
rejection of others, which underlies all the destructive
fanaticism that we have seen throughout the world.
That is why serious thought and decisive action remain
necessary in this regard.
It must be said that the idea of a dialogue of
cultures and religions is not in and of itself totally new.
However, it should be acknowledged that the idea was
given new life immediately following 11 September
2001. Dumbstruck, the world found itself face to face

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

with the question of its existence and its future.
Analysts of all stripes, overtaken by the trap of
urgency, thought that they had found all the answers in
the idea of a clash of civilizations. Attractive and
powerful as a simplistic idea may be, this thesis held
that humankind had entered an era of conflict of a new
kind. It was as if different civilizations, cultures and
religions could not agree on common principles and
that by their very nature they were destined to fight for
domination.
Cameroon has mobilized all of its energy in order
to promote a culture of peace, both within and without
its borders. Internally, our slogan, “Peace, work and
homeland”, begins with the word “peace”, and that
highlights the importance that we attach to this
essential value.
My country, a true mosaic of peoples, cultures
and religions, ensures respect for freedom of belief and
religion for all, representation and harmony among the
components of our population within institutions, and
the promotion of bilingualism and of Cameroonian
languages and cultures.
Twice, in 1985 and in 1995, Pope John Paul II
visited Cameroon. During his visits, people of all
religious faiths gathered together to enshrine the
virtues of peace, ecumenism, understanding and
fraternity among all people. It is in that same spirit that
the Government and the people of Cameroon intend to
greet Pope Benedict XVI in March, during his first
visit to Africa.
In terms of foreign relations, my country
eloquently demonstrates its commitment to a culture of
peace through a policy of friendship, solidarity and
good-neighbourliness with the countries of the Central
African subregion, the continent of Africa and the rest
of the world.
Regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes, as
attested by the Bakassi dispute between Cameroon and
its sister republic, Nigeria, which concluded
successfully, Cameroon is convinced that there is no
crisis pitting two States against each other, much less
any internal crisis, that cannot be solved peacefully
through the virtue of dialogue. In this regard, President
Paul Biya stated in a message to the nation,
“The choice we have made in the Bakassi
dispute — to see right prevail over might — has
been found to be fully justified because we are a

08-60280

people profoundly dedicated to peace, which we
are endeavouring to preserve and without which
the progress and development to which our
peoples rightly aspire would not be achievable.”
This dedication of my country to the culture of
peace is also reflected by our readiness to take part in
peacekeeping operations initiated or sponsored by the
United Nations or the African Union. This contribution
also involves training, for which my country has
created, with donor support, a training school for
peacekeeping and security.
Like all peace-loving nations, we believe that
peoples throughout the world need a vision that
highlights the values of peace, tolerance and dialogue.
That vision should be embodied in several areas.
In terms of education, we should promote
recognition and respect for other people and their
differences. In this regard, my country welcomes the
intersectoral activities launched by UNESCO, and
especially the platform entitled “Contributing to the
dialogue among civilizations and cultures and a culture
of peace”, which is designed to encourage the updating
of education and pedagogical materials to promote, in
particular among young people, respect for and
recognition of diversity of belief. We note with
satisfaction the cooperation between the Alliance of
Civilizations and UNESCO, and especially the signing
in Madrid, in January 2008, of a memorandum of
understanding providing for joint activities fostering
dialogue and mutual understanding.
The President took the Chair.
In terms of information and communications, we
should use the media and new technologies to
encourage the values of tolerance. From that
standpoint, my country welcomes the launching in
February 2008 by the Alliance of Civilizations of a
media rapid reaction mechanism in support of the
activities of media professionals.
In an organization like the United Nations, a
constant culture of peace should be one of the decisive
elements for the overarching common interests of
humankind. That is why we should maintain at the core
of this culture the virtues of dialogue, tolerance,
solidarity, cooperation, respect and mutual esteem,
understanding, harmony and a love for oneself and for
others.

13

A/63/PV.50

Where there is no peace, we must together try to
sow it, cultivate it and maintain it. Where we do have
peace, we should together try to consolidate it, nurture
it, cherish it and above all share it, for mutual benefit,
because if we let it get away from us, it would be as if
we had decided to do without the air we breathe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the chairman of the delegation of Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): It is a great pleasure for
me to address this important high-level meeting. I wish
to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this meeting. I wish to thank most sincerely
the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, His Majesty
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia
for initiating this meeting and his dedication and
contribution to the pursuit of interfaith dialogue and
understanding.
When I look at God’s creation, I marvel at his
wonderful architecture. From majestic mountains,
valleys, rolling hills, plains, glimmering sand, vibrant
rain forests; whatever it may be, it is all beautiful
scenery. Then I turn my thoughts to the living
creatures. I see tall people, short people, people of all
shapes, people of all colours and hues. I see a variety
of animals and bird species in their varied and
beautiful colours. Again, I marvel at the wonderful
architecture God created. Finally, I recall different
cultures, faiths and religious beliefs and values. In
short, diversity is beautiful, as God so decreed.
Who are we then to disrupt that wonderful
chemistry that God put in place? Those extremists who
distort religion for their own purposes and who kill in
the name of religion thinking they will go to heaven:
they will be disappointed when they find themselves in
hell instead. Those people have rebelled against God’s
creation. We should strive to live in peace with one
another and to respect different cultures and faiths, for
no faith is superior to another.
I was enthralled by what His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud said yesterday, at the
46th meeting: “Religions, through which the Almighty
God sought to bring happiness to mankind should not
be instruments that cause misery.”
This meeting is significant as it represents an
opportunity for all faiths of the entire world
community to interact with a view to enhancing our
collective, peaceful coexistence and bonds of

14

friendship. It is also significant because of the
preparations under way for the International Year for
the Rapprochement of Cultures in 2010 by the United
Nations system. We have witnessed in the recent past a
number of commendable initiatives at the international
level to promote interfaith dialogue. This meeting is
unique because it is an unparalleled opportunity for us
all to dialogue as people of different faiths and cultures
under the United Nations umbrella but with a common
goal and destiny. It is imperative that we use this
umbrella to engage in a very serious dialogue and that
is why Uganda gives this initiative its full support.
However, it is necessary that in all our endeavours a
coordinated effort be made to minimize the duplication
of initiatives.
We in Uganda consider interfaith dialogue a
necessity and not an option. We know that all religions
share common foundations. They espouse equality,
peace and tolerance. We should therefore spare no
effort individually, nationally and at the global level to
become more active in countering ignorance by
offering positive information on interfaith beliefs. We
should dispel negative stereotypes and extremism.
Uganda is a country of multiple religious faiths where
people of different faiths live side by side in relative
harmony. As a country, we have deliberately
encouraged interfaith collaboration and partnership.
The experience has been exemplary and has generated
consensus among the different faith communities to
work together. It has resulted in true friendships and
other opportunities to work together as a community.
We are committed to maintain and sustain that
momentum and are willing to share our experience and
make a positive contribution to this process.
This meeting comes at a time of momentous
events and changes in the world. It comes one day after
the ninetieth anniversary of the end of the First World
War and at a time when our focus is on conflict
prevention and resolution initiatives. It also comes at a
time when we are refocusing on human dignity, family
values and development. Our faith should be a catalyst
to bring us together as it has done today to reflect,
understand and address these challenges. Together we
must do more to address the challenges of poverty,
widespread hunger, gender inequality, environmental
deterioration and the lack of education, health care and
clean water. We should deal conclusively on actions to
reduce debt and increase aid, trade and technology
transfer to those less fortunate.

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

We should also recognize that the range of human
development in the world is vast and uneven, with
astounding progress in some areas amid stagnation and
dismal decline in others. As people of faith, we should
recognize that balance and stability in the world
require the commitment of all nations, rich and poor,
and a global development compact to extend the wealth
of possibilities to all people. Our religious and moral
values should inspire us to address the problems that
face humanity. They should be our rallying call to deal
with the important issues of our time for peace and
cooperation. We must commit resources towards this
endeavour.
This meeting underlines the crucial role faith can
play in enhancing peaceful coexistence, peace,
harmony and prosperity for us all. It is our duty and
must be our pledge. Uganda supports this initiative and
it is our commitment to work tirelessly for a peaceful
and prosperous world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bailly (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of His Excellency Mr. Laurent Gbagbo,
President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, who
requested that I convey to the Assembly his wishes for
the full success of this meeting, permit me to express
our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this high-level meeting. The Ivorian
delegation also takes this opportunity to convey to His
Majesty King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of
Saudi Arabia, Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, the
thanks of Mr. Youssouf Bakayoko, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Côte D’Ivoire, for having initiated this
process, which challenges world leaders and religious
leaders to urgently establish a genuine and frank
dialogue among religions with a view to the further
promotion of a culture of peace. Although he was
invited to participate in this important meeting,
Minister Bakayoko was unable to travel to New York
for scheduling reasons.
Côte d’Ivoire celebrates a national peace holiday
on 15 November each year. We long ago incorporated
the values of peace and tolerance into our development
programmes, our policy of national construction and
coexistence with neighbouring countries and our
foreign policy. Thus, our country cannot remain on the
sidelines of this historic meeting on the culture of
peace. Côte d’Ivoire unreservedly supports the Saudi

08-60280

initiative and United Nations efforts to establish a
permanent framework for dialogue among religions
and to adopt appropriate strategies to promote the
implementation of all the recommendations resulting
from this meeting.
Our country, like other nations whose
representatives have spoken before me, remains
convinced that the establishment of such a dialogue
would inevitably give rise to a new era in international
relations firmly based on an innovative vision of hope
for humankind. Indeed, there is an urgent need for the
world to transcend religious differences and to work
resolutely towards a rapprochement of civilizations,
respecting the convictions and faiths of all. That is why
our country fully endorses the two draft resolutions
before the General Assembly on the International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for
the Children of the World, 2001-2010 (A/63/L.23), and
on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/63/L.24/Rev.1).
In that regard, we urge the Assembly to adopt
both draft resolutions in order to show our collective
commitment to this new process. Clearly, it will result
in a platform for exchanges that will undoubtedly help
to bridge the chasm of misunderstanding and
resentment that exists between civilizations. With a
strong political and collective commitment, we must
promote all the shared ethical and moral values
advocated by religions in their diversity.
We believe that world leaders must, in addition to
current initiatives, go beyond mere wishful thinking to
engage in religious dialogue in order to carry out
policies that will reduce or even destroy identity-based
and ideological barriers that have long served as
pretexts for the perpetuation of systems of exploitation
and oppression that have helped to divide the world
into blocs of mistrust.
Justification of the culture of profit and the
protection of some interests at the expense of others
have resulted in the demonization and subjugation of
entire sectors of humankind in a context of extreme
despair and insecurity linked to the aggravation of
extremism, fanaticism and intolerance and to the
decline of the moral and political principles that led to
the establishment of the United Nations immediately
after the Second World War. It is obvious that,
ultimately, this Manichaean vision of world affairs,

15

A/63/PV.50

which is linked to the supremacy of one religion over
another and of one race over another, as well as to the
promotion of a single school of thought or model for
society, can only be suicidal for humankind, which is
rich in its pluralism.
The path of Côte d’Ivoire throughout its recent
history shows how the adoption of the culture of peace
as a pillar of development and an aspect of integration
has helped our country to overcome the danger of
implosion and not to succumb to ethnic and religious
chaos in the economic crisis that it has been
experiencing for several years. Indeed, in Côte
d’Ivoire, as stated by the late President Félix
Houphouët-Boigny, the founding father of our nation,
peace is not an empty word; it is a behaviour. The Félix
Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize, awarded each year by
UNESCO, emphasizes that support for the culture of
peace is a dynamic approach to action.
It was on behalf of the culture of peace, which is
at the centre of his governmental policy, that President
Gbagbo launched direct dialogue with the former
Ivorian rebels, leading to the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement, which enabled us to reunify our country.
Indeed, our national experience demonstrates that the
world can overcome division in order to build a new
world order based on partnership with a human face,
anchored in human development and the correction of
imbalances.
That is why we agree with those who firmly
believe that the real challenge lies not in the
predictable rhetoric of statements of intention, but
rather in persuading the decision makers of this world
to opt for a society that would place greater priority on
the moral dimension of managing world affairs, which
would help to help fulfil the purposes of the United
Nations as we celebrate the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of the Comoros.
Mr. Oussein (Comoros) (spoke in French): At a
time when the world has been hit head-on by crises of
all sorts related to finance, energy, food and identity,
and when doubt, intolerance, mistrust, selfishness and
isolationism have supplanted tolerance and fraternal
solidarity among peoples, the holding of this important
dialogue among religions is more meaningful than
ever. In that regard, I should like, on behalf of the
Union of the Comoros, to thank His Majesty Abdullah

16

Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia, Custodian of
the Two Holy Mosques, who has taken the welcome
initiative to promote the holding of a dialogue among
religions on several occasions.
We believe that to engage in dialogue with
another religion is to discover what it shares with us
and to find ourselves in it. Thus, in addition to what
makes us different and separates us, there is a
commonality among believers that is deep and strong
enough that they realize that they are similar and
united.
In a world that has become an increasingly
interdependent global village, our salvation lies in the
awareness that nothing is really sustainable without the
other. We must have respect for his or her faith,
religion and differences in the firm conviction that we
are all links in the same chain. Our solidarity and
survival depends on our common will to build a better
world, inspired by the spirit of justice, tolerance,
sharing and fraternal solidarity.
The Union of the Comoros, a Muslim nation
known for its legendary hospitality, has always been
profoundly dedicated to the daily practice of tolerance
and respect for human dignity. It is firmly convinced
that human beings, as God’s creatures and with a
multiplicity of cultures and civilizations are a source of
wealth and thus should not be a source of conflict.
All religions and all humankind today are faced
with the challenges of all the drifting of an increasingly
dehumanizing and unjust modern world. It must be
acknowledged that the Muslim world is increasingly
becoming victim to the policy of double standards. We
consider that Islamophobia has become one of the great
evils of our times since the end of the cold war and
11 September. That is a result of injustice and
ignorance.
Interreligious dialogue can help to bring people
to more understanding and, undoubtedly, do away with
the logic of the clash of civilizations. We endorse the
thought of the late President Léopold Sédar Senghor,
who spoke of “enrichment of our differences to
converge towards the universal”. Learning to know
oneself in order to live together whatever the
circumstance is an essential step for enrichment of
differences and for building a culture of peace.
Since all believers of all religions are called to be
instruments of love and harmony for all of humankind,

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

they must renounce all forms of oppression and
terrorism, especially when such acts are committed in
the name of religion.
Finally, because there can be no peace without
development, and convinced that no believer can
remain indifferent to injustice and poverty, the Union
of the Comoros, in the framework of this dialogue,
calls upon all believers to unite in order to relieve the
hungry and to work together for a new, more just, more
transparent and more equitable world order, taking into
account the situation of the poorest and most
impoverished.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate. We shall now proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.24/Rev.1,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
I should like to announce that since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have expressed the wish to become sponsors:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, China, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada,
Honduras, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan,
Mali, Paraguay, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.24/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 63/22).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to the representative of the United States, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. McMahan (United States of America): The
United States was founded on the principle of freedom
of religion. This freedom, enshrined in our
Constitution, has nourished a rich diversity of religions
that have contributed greatly to the growth and vitality
of our society for over 400 years. The Republic of the
Philippines has also enshrined the concept of freedom
of religion in its Constitution and has been active in
promoting the principle. We commend President

08-60280

Arroyo for her efforts to promote and protect human
rights in her region and around the world.
As in past years, the text before us has much to
recommend it. It acknowledges the importance of
religious and cultural diversity and affirms that mutual
understanding and dialogue are important for achieving
a true and lasting peace. It recognizes the importance
of education, and it recognizes the vital role of the
news media, whose ability to work freely and
objectively is crucial to open and honest dialogue, even
when the news they report is unpleasant or critical.
Indeed, without the freedom for each and every
individual to express his or her opinions or beliefs, any
attempt to promote dialogue, diversity and
understanding rings hollow. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the sixtieth anniversary of which we
are celebrating this year, is clear. Article 19 reads:
“Everyone has the right to freedom of
opinion and expression; this right includes
freedom to hold opinions without interference
and to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of
frontiers.”
The United States affirms unequivocally that free
expression is the proper antidote for intolerance.
Without the freedom to share thoughts and opinions,
we cannot hope to break down the ignorance and
mistrust that breeds violence. A widely cherished
principle among Americans is that, while we may not
always agree with what someone might say, we will
fight for their right to say it. We must honour that
principle even if in some instances the words may be
offensive. The remedy for offensive speech is more
speech and more dialogue and more understanding —
not less.
For those reasons, the resolution before us must
not in any way be read to restrict peaceful expression
of opinion or belief. The right of all people to think and
express themselves freely and peacefully is the
birthright of all humanity. We cannot countenance
efforts by some to roll back the fundamental freedom
of expression.
Let me be clear. Unfortunately, there are some
Governments that have misused, and will continue to
misuse, United Nations resolutions and declarations to
justify imprisonment, torture and even death sentences
for those who offer interpretations of religion — or of

17

A/63/PV.50

proper governance — that differ from those of the
Government in power. Sadly, that tendency is so
widely prevalent that many non-governmental
organizations have begun tracking those cases, as has
my Government.
We ask the members of this body to ensure that
United Nations resolutions are not misused in that way
and to hold accountable those Governments that seek
to stain the United Nations by associating it with their
acts of intolerance or brutality. Members of society
must be able to engage in the open exchange of views
without fear of recrimination if we are to develop the
understanding and trust necessary to get along and live
with one other.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
As we come to the close of this remarkable
meeting, I am both heartened and astonished by the
outpouring of appeals that we have heard over the past
two days. I thank all participants for contributing to
this ongoing dialogue on the culture of peace.
This meeting has proved that while we do,
obviously, have differences in our religions and
theologies, we are very much united in our essential
values. Just as important, we must apply those values if
we are to survive the consequences of the converging
man-made crises that we face at this critical historical
juncture.
Religions and theologies are necessarily rooted in
cultures and are thus inevitably different. We should
celebrate and thank God for such diversity. While we
might agree that homogenization is good for milk, it is
not good for human cultures. We must defend the
cultural identity of all peoples with the same
determination with which we defend the biodiversity of
our planet.
At the level of values, whether faith-based or
flowing from our rich ethical and philosophical
traditions, we see the hand of God. There are, however,
values, or rather anti-values, that do not come from
those roots. They spring from the dominant culture that
foments hatred, intolerance, greed and social
irresponsibility.
His Majesty, our brother the King of Saudi Arabia
and Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, expressed that very
clearly:

18

“Every tragedy suffered by the world today is but
a result of the abandonment of the noble
principles enunciated by all religions and
cultures. The roots of all global crises can be
found in human denial of the eternal principle of
justice.” (A/63/PV.46)
We have heard calls for restoring the values of
compassion and solidarity to the increasingly barren
landscape of political decision-making. Speakers from
all corners of the Earth have insisted that we put people
above profit as the ultimate measure of success in the
increasingly heartless and bankrupt world of business.
From our brother Shimon Peres, President of
Israel, we heard that we have abandoned our faith by
opting for greed. He pointed out that, for us to change
the world, we must first change ourselves. I could not
agree with him more. Referring to this meeting, he said
that it was capable of beginning a movement of great
importance to the world.
We note the call by Mr. Gordon Brown, Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, to apply our values to
ensure that we be remembered as the generation that
ended illiteracy and reversed our negative impact on
climate change.
We have heard from those who adhere to no
particular faith, but bring messages of hope and love,
for surely the values that are central to our faiths can
be just as strongly felt and defended by those who are
not religious.
We have heard urgent appeals to transcend our
narrow self-interests as nations, peoples, communities
and individuals. We have heard the call to restore trust,
care and solidarity in our institutions.
The message is very clear: Either we restore the
timeless values of brotherhood and sisterhood or we
will surely flounder in a morass of indifference and
self-induced destruction, which will extend to the
entire planet.
We have come together in the midst of a
gathering perfect storm, whose intensity and
destructiveness are forcing all of us to rethink the way
that we are conducting ourselves as human beings. We
are aware that the storm is of our own making, and that
it will take heroic measures to prevent it from
destroying our aspirations to economic, social and
spiritual well-being, wherever we are in the world.

08-60280

A/63/PV.50

We have come together realizing that we must
take responsibility for the billions of people who are
living in inexcusable poverty and deprivation. Leaders
have referred to the innocent millions whose lives are
tipping into crisis and poverty because of the
irresponsibility and greed of people in far-off places.
We must change that with a sense of urgency.

those lofty ideals among peoples and nations. No
doubt, that will constitute a glorious triumph of
what is most noble in human beings over what is
most evil in them, and will give humankind hope
for a future in which justice, security and a
dignified life will prevail over injustice, fear and
poverty.” (A/63/PV.46)

We have defined this moment as a turning point
in human history, where courageous, even heroic
leadership is needed. Let us draw on the reservoirs of
love and solidarity that we all possess. Let us be
courageous and heroic. I deeply believe we can.

This has been such a meeting. In a couple of
weeks, at our meeting on financing for development in
Doha, we will have a chance to show the world that we
are, indeed, serious about making solidarity the guiding
principle in our resolutions and in our actions.

In his statement at the beginning of this meeting,
His Majesty King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud
said:

(spoke in Spanish)

“Our dialogue, which will be conducted in a
civilized manner, should revive and consolidate

08-60280

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 45.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

19
