A/RES/71/135

United Nations

Distr.: General
19 December 2016

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 76

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 December 2016
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/507)]

71/135. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade La w with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would cont ribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination
of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the w ellbeing of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote effici ency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/71/17).

16-21338 (E)

*1621338*

Please recycle

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session

A/RES/71/135

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Model Law on Secured Transactions, 2 the 2016 Notes on Organizing Arbitral
Proceedings 3 and the Technical Notes on Online Dispute Resolution; 4
3.
Notes with satisfaction that the Commission has instructed its secretariat
to commence preparations for a Congress to commemorate the Commission’s
fiftieth anniversary during its fiftieth session, with the objectives to discuss
technical issues and to raise awareness of the Commission and its potential to
support cross-border commerce; 5
4.
Also notes with satisfaction the contributions from the Fund for
International Development of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries and from the European Union, which allow the operation of the repository
of published information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty -based InvestorState Arbitration 6 until the end of 2016 and beyond, and that the Commission
reiterated its strong and unanimous opinion that the secretariat of the Commission
should continue to operate the transparency repository, which constitutes a central
feature both of the Rules on Transparency and of the United Nations Convention on
Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on
Transparency); 7
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in
accordance with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot project until the
end of 2017, to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the
General Assembly informed of developments regarding the funding and budgetary
situation of the transparency repository based on its pilot operation;
6.
Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as
regards its future work and the progress made by the Commission in its work in the
areas of dispute settlement, 8 electronic commerce, insolvency law, security interests 9
and international trade law aimed at reducing the legal obstacles faced by micro -,
small- and medium-sized enterprises throughout their life cycle, and encourages the
Commission to continue to move forward efficiently to achieve tangible work
outcomes;
7.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their l egal
_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
4
Ibid., chap. V and annex I.
5
Ibid., paras. 368–370.
6
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
7
Resolution 69/116, annex.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/71/17),
chaps. IV and V.
9
Ibid., chap. III.
3

2/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session

A/RES/71/135

activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
8.
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for S ymposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities with
those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work and
programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the national and
international levels and for the implementation of the international development agenda,
including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; 10
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to
Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their
respective international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building, welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients, notes the endorsement by the Commission of the Guidance Note on
Strengthening United Nations Support to States, Upon Their Request, to Implement
Sound Commercial Law Reforms, 11 and requests the Secretary-General to circulate
the Guidance Note as broadly as possible to its intended users;
9.
Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and
methods of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive deliberations,
taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III to the
_______________
10

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/71/17), para. 262
and annex II.
11

3/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session

A/RES/71/135

report on the work of its forty-third session, 12 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior
to meetings of the Commission and of its working groups, a remind er of those rules
of procedure and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the
work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and in
this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this matter;
10. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources,
including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional centres of the
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;
11. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries
that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling env ironment
for business, trade and investment;
12. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main
Committee during the seventy-first session of the General Assembly, its consideration of
granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary -General;
13. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
14. Notes the rule of law panel discussion held at the forty -ninth session of
the Commission and the comments transmitted by the Commission pursuant to
paragraph 20 of General Assembly resolution 70/118 of 14 December 2015,
highlighting its role in promoting the rule of law, in particular the role of the
multilateral treaty processes of the Commission in promoting and advancing the rule
of law in the field of international trade law and the role of the C ommission in
promoting the rule of law by facilitating access to justice; 13
_______________
12
13

4/6

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/71/17), paras. 339–342.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session

A/RES/71/135

15. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable developm ent,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
16. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313
of 27 July 2015, States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as
the core legal body within the United Nations system in the field of international
trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of
international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law
and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
17. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 14 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the pro gressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission; 15
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of
Commission standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the
Commission, including committees of the whole established by the Commission for
the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts, and
takes note of the Commission’s decision to continue the trial use of digital
recordings, in parallel with summary records where applicable, with a view to
assessing the experience of using digital recordings and, on the basis of that
assessment, taking a decision at a future session regarding the poss ible replacement
of summary records by digital recordings; 16
19. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
20. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
21. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
_______________
14

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 276.
15

5/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-ninth session

A/RES/71/135

languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource -intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, and in this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability
and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles
and in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the
system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a
uniform manner;
22. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT
system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools
for the promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in
particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal
practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character
and the need to promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good
faith in international trade;
23. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 17 commends the fact that
the website of the Commission is published in the six official languages of the
United Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain
and improve its website, including by developing new social media features, in
accordance with the applicable guidelines. 18
62nd plenary meeting
13 December 2016

_______________
17

Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and
61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
18
Resolution 63/120, para. 20.

6/6
