VIII.

36/117.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Pattern of conferences
A

FUTURE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONFERENCES

The General Assembly

I. Takes note with appreciation of _the report of the
Committee on Conferences 18 and approves the recommendations contained therein, 19 as amended; 20
2. Approves the calendar of conferences and meetings
of the United Nations for 1982-1983 as submitted by the
Committee on Conferences 21 and amended by subsequent
decisions taken by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make
any adjustments, within approved resources, in the calendar
of conferences for 1982-1983 that may become necessary
as a result of action and decisions by the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session and at its second special session
devoted to disarmament;
4. Decides that in drawing up future calendars of conferences and meetings the implications on the capacity of
the documentation services of the Secretariat to process and
issue in time the documentation required for the sessions
of all scheduled organs should be taken into account;
5. Invites the Committee on Conferences to pursue its
efforts towards accomplishing a shortening of sessions or
a biennial cycle of sessions of United Nations organs, as
specified in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 35/
10 A of 3 November 1980, with a view to submitting further
concrete proposals to the Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session:
6. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council
should consider calling upon the Committee on Conferences
to review, prior to their adoption by the Council, all proposals made at sessions of the Council that affect the schedule of conferences and meetings;
7. Decides to extend until the end of 1982 the moratorium on the establishment of new subsidiary bodies of the
General Assembly, as declared in paragraph 1 of its resolution 35/5 of 20 October 1980;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a manual
for secretaries of United Nations organs to guide them in
the efficient preparation and organization of their work, in
the scheduling of meetings and in the submission of documentation in good time;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through the
Committee on Conferences, a programme of systematic and
progressive replacement and upgrading of the electronic
equipment in the conference rooms at United Nations
Headquarters;

II
I. Requests the Committee on Conferences to undertake, on a priority basis, a comprehensive study of the
rationale that currently determines the provision of meeting
18
Official Records of the General Assembl_v. Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/36/32 and Corr. I).
1
• Ibid .. para. 84.
20
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes. agenda items 105. 8 (b) and 12,
document A/361787, sect. A.
21
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/36/32 and Corr. I),
annex Ill.

213

records to the United Nations organs, with a view to identifying criteria for the selection of organs that should receive
records in the future and, in this connection, to take fully
into account the potential offered by new technologies;
2. Further requests the Committee on Conferences to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session
appropriate recommendations in connection with paragraph
I above and with Assembly resolution 35/10 B of 3 November 1980;
3. Requests the Committee on Conferences to examine
the practices and policies followed by the reproduction and
documents distribution services of the Secretariat with a
view to idr,ntifying areas for achieving economies and improving efficiency;.
4. Requests the Committee on Conferences, pursuant
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/83 of 24
July 1981 on control and limitation of documentation, to
review the calendar of conferences and meetings for the
biennium 1982-1983, with particular reference to the economic and social fields, with a view to adjusting the calendar
to the servicing capacities within the Secretariat, taking into
account the problems that are occurring with regard to the
submission and distribution of documents in good time and
to consult with the Bureau of the Council concerning the
implementation of this request;
5. Confirms the rule that thirty-two pages should be the
maximum length of all action-oriented documents prepared
by the Secretariat for intergovernmental meetings, in accordance with the internal instructions of the Secretariat,
and requests its subsidiary organs to ensure that their reports
shall be as brief as possible and shall not exceed the desired
limit of thirty-two pages;
6. Urges all its subsidiary organs to reduce the number
of requests for additional documents and to attempt to limit
the number of reports required to cover any one subject of
specific concern to a given organ;
7. Requests its subsidiary organs to consider inviting
the Secretariat to make brief oral statements in lieu of written
reports, in particular progress reports, at the outset of each
session;
8. Decides that lists of all documents requested by each
United Nations organ, including the Main Committees of
the General Assembly, shall be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral at the end of each session, with an indication of
the date on which it will be possible to issue each document
in all required languages, reflecting the time required for
its preparation by both the substantive and conferenceservicing units of the Secretariat;
9. lnsists that the Secretary-General take the necessary
administrative measures within available resources to prevent in future the undue delays in the submission of documents for translation, reproduction and distribution which
continue to be experienced;
10. Encourages the Secretary-General to make wider
use of contractual translation services in view of their demonstrated financial advantages;
11. Decides to refer the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on control and limitation of documentation in the
United Nations system, 22 together with the comments of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination 23 and the
Secretary-General, 24 to the Committee on Conferences for
further examination;
12. Requests the Committee on Conferences to consider
this and future reports of the Joint Inspection Unit containing
22

See A/36/167.
" A/36/167/Add. I. annex.
24
A/361167/Add.2. annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

214

recommendations which deal with matters falling within the
mandate of the Committee and to submit its observations
thereon to the General Assembly for its attention when examining the relevant reports of the Unit;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "Control and limitation of 'documentation'';

III
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Committee on Conferences and to the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions a comprehensive
analysis of the existing budgetary techniques used in the
calculation and presentation of conference-servicing costs
in statements of administrative and financial implications
prepared pursuant to rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, in the consolidated statement of conference-servicing costs and in the programme budget and
invites both organs to submit appropriate recommendations
relevant to their respective areas of competence to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

B
SIMULTANEOUS DISTRIBUTION OF OOCUMENTS IN THE
DIFFERENT LANGUAGES OF THE UNITED NATIONS

The General Assembly,
Aware that the diversity of languages of the United
Nations is a source of general enrichment and of better
understanding among Member States,
Recalling its resolution 2 (I) of I February 1946 entitled
"Rules of procedure concerning languages",
Recalling further its resolutions 2247 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2292 (XXII) of 8 December 1967 as well
as its resolutions 3189 (XXVIII), 3190 (XXVIII) and 3191
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973,
Noting the necessity of giving full effect to paragraph 3
of resolution 2247 (XXI) and paragraph 4 of resolution 2292
(XXII) concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents,
Reiterating its deep concern at the steady lengthening of
delays in the distribution of documents in the different official languages,
L Decides that documents shall be given effective simultaneous distribution in sufficient time in the official and
working languages of the organs of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981
C
CONTROL AND LIMITATION OF DOCUMENTATION FOR
TREATY BODIES

The General Assembly,
Concerned at the critical situation prevailing with regard
to the issuance of documentation in all the official languages
in good time,
Noting the considerable volume of documentation and
summary records for treaty bodies whose conferenceservicing costs are borne by the regular budget of the United
Nations and their adverse effect on the processing capacity
of the central conference services for other documentation
required for intergovernmental meetings,

1. Invites the officers of treaty bodies to consult with
the Chairman of the Committee on Conferences on possible
measures to control and limit documentation;
2. Urges all treaty bodies, as a matter of priority, to
review their requirements for documentation in all languages
and for meeting records, with a view to adopting immediate
measures to restrict substantially the present volume of
documentation;
3. Requests all bodies to inform the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session, through the Committee on Conferences, about the practical measures they have taken.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

D
CONTROL AND LIMITATION OF OOCUMENTATION FOR
SPECIAL CONFERENCES 25

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 35/ I 0 C of 3 November 1980,
I. Decides that, if and when special conferences of the
United Nations are convened, particular attention shall be
given to harmonizing the proposed design of the conference
with the documentation needs, so as to foster attainment of
the stated objectives of the conference during both the preparatory phase and the conference phase itself;
2. Declares that the submission of national papers on
the occasion of special conferences should be proposed only
if such papers are intended to play an integral part in the
preparatory activities and at the conference itself, taking
into account the time required for a useful integration of
such papers both in the preparatory activities and in the
negotiating process of the conference;
3. Approves the guidelines for the control and limitation
of documentation for special conferences of the United
Nations set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

ANNEX
Guidelines for the control and limitation of documentation for
special conferences of the United Nations
1. All measures to control and limit documentation in force at the time
when a special conference is being prepared or held shall apply to documentation prepared for that conference as well as to any preparatory organ
that may be designated.
2. Summary record, shall not be provided to special conferences and
their preparatory organs, with the exception of legal codification conferences, for which the needs will be determined in each case.
3. Whenever Governments are requested to submit national papers or
reports, the following rules might apply:
(a) The organ which decides to convene the conference or preparatory
organ, whenever it has been designated, should adopt specific rules to limit
the length of national papers or summaries thereof, to the extent possible,
and to determine the language versions in which they should be issued.
taking into account experii,nce gained on the occasion of past special
conferences in the same area of activity;
(b) Each paper or report and each summary or abstract should be
prepared in the format described in the layout appended to annex II to th~
report of the Committee on Conferences;'"
le) A firm deadline for the submission of such papers or reports and
their summaries and abstract, should be established, taking into account

"See also sect. X.B.6, decision 36/427.
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 32 (A/36/32 and Corr. I).
26

VIII.

215

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the purpose for which they are required in the preparatory process, but
which in any event should not be later than eight weeks before the opening
of the conference;
(d) All papers or reports received, as well as summaries or abstracts
thereof, should be listed by the Secretariat in an information document and
grouped in various ways, such as alphabetically by country, region or by
subject;
(e) National papers or reports should not be redistributed at the conference site, if the conference is held away from established headquarters;
instead, a library should be established at such a conference site which
shall contain in single copies all relevant material pertaining to the
conference;
(j) The Secretary-General should keep the total number of copies
printed for this type of documentation under constant review and adjust
it to a realistic level of demand.
4. Submissions by non-governmental organizations shall bear a uniform cover page with a document symbol and number provided by the
Secretariat. It shall be the responsibility of each submitting non-governmental organization to make sure that this cover page appears on each
copy of the report. The Secretariat shall then distribute such a report if it
is submitted in a sufficient number of copies. Reports by non-governmental
organizations will not be translated or reproduced by the Secretariat, nor
will they be transported to the conference site by the Secretariat if the
conference is held away from established headquarters. Furthermore, a
deadline shall be set for the presentation of such reports to the Secretariat.
A list of all documents presented by non-governmental organizations will
then be issued by the Secretariat.

for I 982 and supplementary expenses of $147,000 (net) for
1981 for the administration of the Fund.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December /98/
B

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the actuarial situation of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Welcoming the intention of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board to undertake a comprehensive analysis of all
possible measures to improve the actuarial balance of the
Fund,
I. Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board, in co-operation with the International Civil Service
Commission where necessary, to consider alternative courses
of action that might be taken:
2. Further requests that the analysis to be undertaken
take into account all the views expressed during the discussion in the Fifth Committee 30 and that it be submitted
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.

93rd plenary meetinK
/0 December /98/
C

36/118.

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and to the
member organizations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund for 1981, 27 chapter III of the report of the
International Civil Service Commission 28 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 29

The General Assembly,
Noting that no provision exists under the Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund with
respect to the financial obligations of a pensioner to his or
her spouse or former spouse.
Concerned that this may give rise to serious injustice and
hardship,
Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to study, at its thirtieth session, the desirability and feasibility of measures to deal with such situations and to make
recommendations thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December 198/
SUPPLEMENTARY MEASURES

Decides, with effect from 1 January 1982, to revise the
pension adjustment system contained in General Assembly
resolution 35/215 of 17 December 1980, in accordance with
the recommendations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board contained in section III.H of its report to the
Assembly for 1981;

EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency
Fund for a further period of one year by an amount not
exceedini?; $100,000;

III
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $5,456,900 (net)
27
2

"

29

Ibid., Supplement No. 9 (A/36/9 and Corr. I).
Ibid., ::iupplement No. 30 (A/36/JU and Corr. I).
A/36/624.

36/119.

Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund
A

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 34/222 A of 20 December 1979
and 35/2 I 6 A of 17 December I 980.
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the investments of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund: 31
2. Endorses the policy of diversification of the investments
of the Fund in developing countries, wherever this serves
the interests of the participants and beneficiaries, in accordance with the four criteria of safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility;
3. Reaffirms its confidence in the Secretary-General as
trustee of the assets of the Fund.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December /98/
·'° See Official Records of th,, General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth Session.
Fifth Committee. 40th, 48th and 50th meetings; and· ihid .. f'ifth Committee.
Sessional Fascicle. corrigendum.
" A/C.5/36/12.
