A/65/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records:

Sixty-fifth session

61

st plenary meeting
Thursday, 9 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 116
Follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition
of the transatlantic slave trade
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/390
and A/65/605)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.36)
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, who
will introduce draft resolution A/65/L.36.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to address the General Assembly, on behalf of
the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), on the agenda item before us, which is of
fundamental importance not only to the Caribbean and
African regions, as initiators of this process, but also to
the wider community.
Once again, we use the opportunity presented
through this medium to contemplate the horrors of the
transatlantic slave trade and to reflect on its legacy and
manifestations. That tragic period in human history
continues to have an impact on societies affected by
chattel slavery. Social and economic inequality, hatred,
bigotry, racism and prejudice can be linked in some
way to the trade in slaves and slavery. We are
determined to transform our societies through the
inculcation of new values in current and future
generations in order to remove the remaining vestiges

of that pernicious trade. That is one of the fundamental
objectives of our project.
In advancing this initiative, we have received the
support of Member States from other regions.
Consequently, we wish to place on record our
appreciation to the member States of the African Group
for their unwavering solidarity and support. In that
regard, we welcome the statement to be delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Mauritania on behalf
of the African Group.
Against that background, I am pleased to
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/65/L.36, entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”, which is presented annually
by CARICOM and the African Group. The text before
delegations today reflects current developments and
addresses what my delegation sees as two sides of the
same coin — that is, the International Day of
Remembrance, on the one hand and, on the other, the
initiative to erect a permanent memorial at United
Nations Headquarters to honour the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade.
Aside from various technical updates, we have
made efforts to streamline the text with the deletion of
those elements that are no longer relevant. Our
enterprise is, so far, the only tangible outcome of the
Durban process and that is reflected in the third and
fourth preambular paragraphs.
In paragraph 5, we encourage additional
contributions from Member States and other interested

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-68320 (E)

*1068320*

A/65/PV.61

parties that have not yet done so to the Trust Fund that
was established to implement the decision to erect a
monument here at United Nations Headquarters.
We have also taken into the consideration the
views and comments that have emerged from the
informal consultations, and we have added the words
“in accordance with their national legislation” in
paragraph 8. That was done to accommodate the
constitutional arrangements in countries with a federal
system of Government, where school curriculums are
determined by local Government and not the federal
Government. At the end of the same paragraph, we
have added the words “to provide such information to
the Secretary-General for inclusion in his report”. The
entire paragraph now reads as follows:
“Reiterates its request contained in
resolution 64/15 of 16 November 2009 for
Member States to develop, in accordance with
their
national
legislation,
educational
programmes, including through school curricula,
designed to educate and inculcate in future
generations an understanding of the lessons,
history and consequences of slavery and the slave
trade, and to provide such information to the
Secretary-General for inclusion in his report.”
In paragraph 10, we would like to make a
technical amendment that was inadvertently not
included. That paragraph should read as follows:
“Invites the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to assist the
committee in defining guidelines for the selection
process and in identifying qualified candidates
including from its pool of international specialists
to serve on the international jury.”
The amendment makes it clear that the panel of
judges to be appointed for the international design
competition will not be restricted to persons or
specialists linked to UNESCO, since we favour a
broad, inclusive approach for the competition.
We have also added a new element to paragraph 6
of the draft resolution, which should read as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General to organize
a series of activities annually to commemorate
the International Day of Remembrance, including
a commemorative session of the General
Assembly at United Nations Headquarters and, as

2

appropriate, activities through the network of
United Nations information centres.”
During the General Assembly’s consideration of
this agenda item we have repeatedly heard statements
from many delegations affirming the importance of the
issue. It is, therefore, our expectation that
consideration will be given to the provision of
adequate and sustainable levels of funding annually, so
that, as Member States and as a community, we can
continue to honour the memory of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. CARICOM
therefore requests the support of all Member States to
achieve that objective.
Importantly, we have deleted the words “within
existing resources,” from paragraph 7, which became
redundant with the inclusion of paragraph 6.
Furthermore, we would like to draw attention to
the first report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) on
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2000-2001, contained in document A/54/7, which
speaks specifically about the use of the phrase “within
existing resources” in a number of resolutions and
decisions of the General Assembly. Upon enquiry, the
Committee was informed of the difficulties that such
limitations impose on the implementation of mandated
activities. The Committee has written extensively on
that issue, and both the ACABQ and the Fifth
Committee have encouraged delegations to refrain
from using that language for similar reasons.
This initiative, as well as the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade, now commemorated
annually on 25 March, seeks to raise awareness and
promote a deep understanding of the lasting
consequences of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade.
CARICOM commends the work done by the
Permanent Memorial Committee headed by the
Permanent Mission of Jamaica to the United Nations in
steering the project to a successful conclusion. The
Committee works assiduously each year to ensure that
the memory of the victims, as well as the consequences
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, are
accorded the commemoration and global attention they
deserve.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

On behalf of the member States of CARICOM, I
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his report contained in document A/65/390, which
provides an update on activities held earlier this year in
observance of the anniversary of the abolition of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. The report
also contains information on the involvement of
various United Nations information centres that have
participated in the International Day of Remembrance
by holding their own commemorative events. We note,
however, that activities undertaken by Member States
in accordance with the resolution have not been
included in the reports. We hope that with stable and
predictable funding for the initiative, appropriate
arrangements can be put in place to address that issue.
CARICOM conveys its appreciation to the
Secretariat, and in particular the Department of Public
Information, for assisting with the organization and
publicizing of the annual commemorative events. We
reaffirm our commitment to collaborate with you, Sir,
with the Secretary-General and the Secretariat in the
realization of future events of a similar nature,
reflecting the solemnity that should be accorded to
such events, as we work towards educating the public
and preserving the memory of that horrific occurrence
in order to ensure that it is never repeated.
The establishment of a permanent memorial at
United Nations Headquarters to honour the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, as well as the
hosting of the related annual functions, will not be
possible without the requisite resources. CARICOM
therefore wishes to sincerely thank all donors who
have contributed to the furtherance of the objectives of
this important project. CARICOM also wishes to
express its appreciation to the United Nations Office
for Partnerships for its efficient management of the
Trust Fund.
In the interest of transparency and accountability,
the attention of delegations is directed to the report of
the United Nations Office for Partnerships on the status
of the Trust Fund and particularly, on contributions
received and their utilization (A/65/605). That is in
keeping with the request in paragraph 14 of the
previous and current draft resolutions, as mandated by
Member States.
The construction of the permanent memorial will
serve as a lasting reminder of the atrocities committed
over a period of more than 400 years, which resulted in

10-68320

the enforced movement and enslavement of an entire
race of our fellow men, women and children. The
eventual adoption of the draft resolution by consensus
would be further acknowledgement of the commitment
of the international community not only to
commemorate the victims of this sordid period of
history, but to put in place measures to prevent its
repetition.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania): The African
Group associates itself with draft resolution A/65/L.36.
It also attaches great importance to the realization of
the goals of resolution 61/19 of 2006. Understandably,
the African Group is an active player in the group of
interested States overseeing the permanent memorial
project and is working very closely with the Caribbean
Community in that endeavour.
Slavery and the transatlantic slave trade are
painful aspects of our history that we could not forget
and that the world must also not forget. By not
forgetting those regrettable historical facts we stand a
better chance of not repeating them. Through the draft
resolution and subsequent related resolutions, the
General Assembly has clearly demonstrated its
determination to continue to educate humanity on the
causes, consequences and lessons of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, and to honour the memory of
its millions of victims.
The African Group strongly supports the various
initiatives of the United Nations for achieving those
objectives, including the erection of a permanent
memorial to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, an annual commemoration by the General
Assembly and around the world of the ignominious
events of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, and
the establishment of a trust fund for the permanent
memorial, to name a few.
The Trust Fund in particular deserves strong and
urgent attention from all members. Action at the
national level should complement the words and
initiatives of the United Nations. While we continue to
raise world public awareness of the commemorative
events at the level of the United Nations, we should not
forget the need for Member States to develop their own
media and educational programmes, as they deem fit,
to educate and inculcate in present and future
generations a clear understanding of the facts and

3

A/65/PV.61

consequences of hundreds of years of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
The African Group reiterates its commitment and
determination to continue to collaborate with the
Secretariat, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other civil society and
non-governmental organizations in bringing to fruition
the establishment of the permanent memorial. It will
also participate in all initiatives aimed at honouring the
memory of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): The
United States delegation is pleased to speak this year
again on the follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade. Our delegation is also pleased
to co-sponsor this year’s draft resolution, entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”.
We look forward to its adoption by consensus.
We must never forget the terrible human tragedy
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade and the
moral courage of those who worked to end it. We must
also recognize that our efforts to abolish slavery are by
no means finished. The commemoration and the draft
resolution (A/65/L.36) draw much needed attention to
the plight of men and women who even today are
denied the right to freedom and the fruits of their
labour.
The United States remains determined to combat
racism and undo the legacy of slavery in our own
country. The Emancipation Proclamation, issued by
President Lincoln on 1 January 1863, marked the
formal beginning of the end of slavery in the United
States. When the thirteenth amendment to the United
States Constitution was ratified, in 1865, it further
advanced the United States effort to end slavery. But
the legacy of the terrible institution of slavery still
casts a long shadow. We must continue our efforts to
eliminate racial discrimination and fulfil our nation’s
founding promise for all of its citizens.
The descendants of African slaves have made
tremendous and lasting contributions to our country in
all fields and walks of life. The United States remains
committed to educating our youth about the slave trade
and to honouring both the victims and those who
sought to end this horrible practice.

4

Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Slavery is one of the greatest human tragedies ever
known. The consequences of the transatlantic slave
trade, including oppression, violence and social and
cultural harm, have continued throughout the centuries.
Cuba was one of the first colonies to receive African
slaves. Between 1503 and 1873 more than 1.5 million
enslaved Africans were transported to our island from
the coasts of Africa or from other locations throughout
the Americas and the Caribbean. In Cuba, as in nearly
the entire Latin American continent and the West
Indies, traces of the slave trade remain as a result of
the colonizing drive and greed of European traffickers,
who used slave labour to build their colonial empires.
The Cuba of today cannot be understood without
an understanding of the manner by which the
transatlantic slave trade has forever marked our
country’s history. We Cubans deeply appreciate our
African roots and proudly declare that the Cuban
people have directly and naturally inherited the
gallantry, courage and endurance of Africa, which has
for centuries heroically faced challenges that persist
even today. Our cultural wealth and character are in
great part expressions of the cultural heritage of the
African peoples who enriched us with their wisdom,
traditions, languages, religious beliefs, music,
temperament and rebellious spirit. The courage and
daring of the Cuban slaves who rose up against
exploitation has nourished the freedom-loving and
independent spirit of the Cuban people.
Cuba has always been part of Africa, and Africa
of Cuba. For nearly three decades, more than 381,000
Cuban combatants fought selflessly to defend the
integrity and sovereignty of our African sister nations.
Only the remains of our fallen comrades and the
honour of having done their duty returned from Africa.
Today, over 2,400 Cuban collaborators are providing
services in 35 African nations to advance development
in areas as diverse as public health, education,
agriculture, sports and construction, among others.
The former colonial metropolises must honour
their historic debt to those who suffered from slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade for centuries. It is
unacceptable for former colonial homelands to now
wash their hands of their past and their responsibilities.
Africa will remain marginalized and its colonial
heritage endless if the current and profoundly unjust
and unsustainable political and economic order
continues, where a few consume almost everything

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

while the majority of the world’s population is
marginalized from the alleged benefits of neo-liberal
globalization.

millions of people of African descent who, for the most
part, belonged to the most vulnerable groups in our
society.

It is unacceptable that Africa continues to finance
rich countries’ opulence with its resources while at the
same time those countries continue to promise new
official development assistance, which for the most
part they fail to provide, and to charge interest rates on
that foreign debt in amounts much higher than the
amounts they have promised as aid. The statements we
make in the Hall are worth nothing if African countries
are then forced to spend five times more than the value
of their resources to pay shameful amounts of foreign
debt rather than pay for health care and education
programmes.

We are also working to provide people of African
descent full access to education and health, inter alia
by adopting affirmative action policies in several
universities around our country, including the
diplomatic academy. From our perspective, only by
granting students of African descent full access to
college education can we expedite the necessary
changes and address the inequalities that still exist.

Cuba is a sponsor of and supports the draft
resolution introduced annually before at General
Assembly on this topic by the members of the
Caribbean Community and African States. We
recognize the importance of organizing annual
activities and holding an annual meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the International Day of
Remembrance. Cuba also supports the initiative of
erecting a permanent monument at United Nations
Headquarters to the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade. That is the least that the
Organization can do to commemorate the abolition of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
Mr. Quintaes (Brazil): In his first official visit to
the African continent, in 2003, President Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva acknowledged our historic debt to our
neighbours across the Atlantic. Over nearly three
centuries, millions of African slaves were forcibly
brought to Brazil’s shores, where they invariably faced
extremely harsh conditions. As the country with the
single most important African diaspora in the world,
Brazil takes pride in its African heritage. It is an
essential part of our culture, of our existence and, as
one Brazilian anthropologist noted, of our own
civilization.
Despite the recognition of the fundamental role
played by people of African descent in the formation of
Brazilian society, many inequalities persist. The
Government of Brazil is fully committed to redressing
that situation through the promotion of socio-economic
and racial inclusion. In the past few years, around
20 million Brazilians emerged from poverty and
30 million joined the middle class, to the benefit of

10-68320

In the past few years, we have also paid special
attention to the so-called quilombos, which are
communities of descendants of slaves who live in rural
and isolated areas of Brazil’s hinterland. In that regard,
we have implemented a series of integrated public
policies to ensure such communities’ access to land and
to social and economic development. In that
connection, I should like to mention last week’s launch
of a pioneering project entitled Quilombos of the
Americas, which aims at establishing a network of
public policies for rural communities of descendants of
slaves in Brazil, Colombia, Panama and Ecuador. Its
purpose is to promote food security and to assure those
communities of the full enjoyment of their economic,
social and cultural rights.
Brazil is strongly committed to eliminating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. We have redoubled our efforts to fully and
effectively implement the Durban Declaration and Plan
of Action. The commemoration next year of that
instrument’s tenth anniversary will be another welcome
opportunity to review and assess the implementation of
our international commitments with regard to the
elimination of the scourge of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Brazil strongly supports the initiative for the
erection, at a place of prominence at United Nations
Headquarters, of a permanent memorial in
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade. In that regard, we reiterate our
deep appreciation for the leading role that the
Caribbean Community and the African Group are
playing to advance this important initiative. In that
connection, we are pleased to be a sponsor of draft
resolution A/65/L.36, which was just introduced. We
hope that, in once again adopting a draft resolution on
this issue, the General Assembly will signal its

5

A/65/PV.61

commitment to appropriately honouring the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We also take note of the current status of
contributions to the Trust Fund for the permanent
memorial. In that regard, we call on all States Members
in a position to do so to make or enhance their
contribution, in order to accord the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade the recognition they
deserve.
As what was one of the main ports of entry for
millions of slaves, Brazil is very pleased to celebrate
once more the abolition of the transatlantic trade and of
slavery itself, which represents a milestone in the
global fight for human dignity and human rights. May
the spirit that animated nineteenth-century abolitionists
inspire us in our present struggle against all forms of
discrimination, as well as our permanent struggle for
the full realization of all human rights for all people.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
associate itself with the statements made by the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and by the representative of Mauritania
on behalf of the member States of the African Group.
At the outset, let me express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Secretariat for the reports
(A/65/390 and A/65/605) being considered under
agenda item 116 at this meeting. We note that a number
of countries, including Jamaica, have taken steps to
implement the annual resolutions on slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade. In the case of Jamaica, this
relates both to the inclusion of the history and lessons
learned about the system of slavery in school
curriculums as well as remembrance activities. We
note, however, that this information is not shared at the
international level. We hope this will be corrected
soon, and look forward to exchanging ideas and
information with other Member States on this very
relevant historical issue in the near future.
As the General Assembly turns its attention to the
issue of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, not
only do we recall the horrific period of the forced
uprooting of millions of men, women and children,
their transportation like animals across the Atlantic and
the suffering they endured under the system of slavery;
we also remind ourselves of the moral imperatives
arising from the end of that pernicious system and of
the legacies of slavery that linger on today in many

6

countries. We remain convinced that it is our moral
obligation as members of the international community
to ensure that the world will never again endure
another tragedy of such immense proportions, which
today is commonly acknowledged to be a crime against
humanity. As is stated in the theme for the permanent
memorial initiative, we acknowledge the tragedy,
considering the legacy, lest we forget.
Today, in addressing this issue in the General
Assembly, we stand up for fairness, equity, inclusion
and a common resolve to address the ills of the past,
which still affect many States across the world; and we
reaffirm our resolve for dignity, particularly for
persons of African descent. It is in this context that my
delegation seeks the support of others for the full
implementation of all Assembly resolutions under this
agenda item. In so doing, the annual International Day
of Remembrance will be placed on an equal footing
with other resolutions on similar issues, thereby
securing stable and predictable funding.
I should like to take this opportunity, as Chair of
the Permanent Memorial Committee, to provide a brief
update on the activities of the Committee in 2010. We
started the year by initiating and attempting to solidify
our engagement with the Caribbean diaspora, both
through the various consuls-general as well as through
community organizations in the New York tri-state
area. We hope to establish similar engagement with the
wider African diaspora in 2011. Among other things,
the Committee focused on its fund-raising drive
throughout the year. With the assistance of its advisory
board, the Committee is currently revising its
fund-raising strategy. We have made progress with a
dedicated website for the initiative, which we hope will
be launched at the end of this year. Member States will
be provided with information on the site in due course.
The Committee also concluded consultations on
the project design and the criteria for artists and judges
for the international design competition, as well as on a
draft memorandum of understanding for engagement
with UNESCO. We look forward to the early
conclusion of discussions with that organization in this
regard. We also anticipate broad participation by States
Members when the international design competition is
launched, hopefully early in 2011.
I am delighted to report that this year the
following countries made contributions to the Trust
Fund — and please forgive me if I have inadvertently

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

left any out, but we did check — Australia, China,
Denmark, Finland, India, Kuwait, Luxembourg,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Turkey. It will also be noted
that the Governments of Jamaica and Grenada made
modest pledges during the course of this year. I am
particularly pleased to highlight the $250,000
contribution made by the Government of India, which
is the single largest voluntary contribution to the Trust
Fund to date. We commend and thank the Government
of India. In that regard, I would like to refer to
document A/65/597, which reflects the current status of
voluntary contributions.
With the Assembly’s indulgence, I also wish to
express my sincere appreciation for the kind generosity
of the Governments of the countries that have made
donations to the permanent memorial Trust Fund. We
are thankful for the show of solidarity in
acknowledging the legacy of this dark period of
history. We envisage that other countries will follow in
their footsteps to make contributions to the Trust Fund
to enable us to reach the target of $4.5 million for
implementation.
Before concluding, I would like to thank the
members of the Committee — Brazil, Ghana, the
Netherlands, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal, Suriname, the
United Kingdom and the African Union — and in
particular the United Nations Office for Partnerships,
for their invaluable support, technical advice and
assistance towards the implementation of the
permanent memorial initiative. The Committee also
continues to welcome the input of the Chairs of
CARICOM and the African Group of Ambassadors.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to all those who
constructively engaged in informal consultations on the
draft resolution before the Assembly (A/65/L.36). I am
confident that, as with similar ones in the past, the
draft resolution will be adopted by consensus, in
particular given the strong support by Member States.
We are indeed grateful for the broad sponsorship of
Member States across all regions.
Finally, let me express particular appreciation to
the Member States of Africa and the Caribbean
Community, which continue to play a primary role in
advancing the permanent memorial initiative.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
international community celebrates two important days
this month, namely, the International Day for the

10-68320

Abolition of Slavery on 2 December and Human Rights
Day on 10 December. Proclaimed by the General
Assembly, the Days are directly related to the agenda
item we are debating today. Article 4 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights states that “No one shall
be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave
trade shall be prohibited in all their forms”.
Unfortunately, as rightly noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his message on the occasion of the
International Day for the Abolition of Slavery,
“The abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade in the nineteenth century did not eradicate
the practice globally. Instead, it took on other
forms, which persist to this day: serfdom, debt
bondage and forced and bonded labor; trafficking
in women and children, domestic slavery and
forced prostitution, including of children; sexual
slavery, forced marriage and the sale of wives;
child labour and child servitude, among others.”
After the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade,
the dreadful words “slave” and “slave trade” gradually
over the years turned into abstract concepts, but the
problem of slave trading persists. We fully share the
view of the Secretary-General that the existing reality
obliges the international community to remain vigilant
and to strengthen its efforts to eradicate contemporary
manifestations of slavery.
Belarus welcomes measures by the international
community to organize events to commemorate the
200th anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic
slave trade. We believe that such measures could also
include the General Assembly’s 30 July adoption by
consensus at its sixty-fourth session of the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (see
resolution 64/293). The full and effective fulfilment of
the Plan would allow us to make a significant
contribution to eradicating this form of modern-day
slavery.
In line with a decision by our country’s President,
Belarus, together with a number of other members of
the Group of Friends against Human Trafficking, has
made a voluntary contribution of $20,000 to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which we believe can help to provide
significant assistance to the victims of modern slavery.
Belarus supports the efforts of the international
community to keep the question of slavery and the

7

A/65/PV.61

transatlantic slave trade on the United Nations agenda.
Belarus shares the approach of the members States of
the Caribbean Community and the African Union with
regard to implementing an initiative to erect a
permanent memorial to the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade at United Nations
Headquarters. In that regard, we are a sponsor of the
draft resolution entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade” (A/65/L.36). We should not
forget that historic phenomenon, which is forever
imprinted in the world’s geography, economy and
cultures and should be included in the schoolbooks and
curriculums of every country in the world.
We believe that the educational programme on
the transatlantic slave trade and slavery established by
the Secretary-General, in cooperation with UNESCO,
should continue to be expanded. That will help to
create better understanding among members of new
generations of the historic aspects of this tragedy as
well as the threats posed by racism and racial
discrimination and prejudice.
On the occasion of the International Day for the
Abolition of Slavery, between 2 and 8 December this
year we in Belarus carried out an outreach and
educational campaign for young people under the
theme “Let’s stop human trafficking”. With the
assistance of the Belarus Ministry of Education and
regional authorities, the campaign took place as part of
a project by the European Union, the United Nations
Development Programme and UNICEF called
“Preventing, Fighting and Addressing the Social
Consequences of Trafficking in Human Beings in the
Republic of Belarus”. Along with interactive
discussions on the problem of human trafficking, the
programme of events included the screening of a
documentary called “Inhuman Traffic”, which tells the
tragic story of girls who fall into sexual slavery in
European countries.
Let us all ask ourselves the question: “When are
people sold?” The answer is simple: when they are not
considered to be people. We must not allow that
anyone today should continue to build their material
welfare and get rich by humiliating the human dignity
of others. We need to pull together to build a world
where every person can determine his or her destiny in
dignity, free of bondage, fear, humiliation or slavery.

8

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): It is not only just an
honour but actually an obligation to speak today
following the introduction of this draft resolution
(A/65/L.36) on the transatlantic slave trade. Australia
is again this year a sponsor of the draft resolution. I say
that it is an obligation because all of us are obliged to
remember the dark side of our own human history. If
we are to make progress in human relations, we must
learn from the worst parts of our history.
Perhaps as many 18 million people were brutally
enslaved and removed from their families and
communities through the transatlantic slave trade, the
largest forced removal of people in history. This is not
remote history. However, it is history that is still very
poorly understood. The last survivors of the slave
voyages died only 50 years ago. Slavery has been
abolished globally, but its legacy remains strong.
Racism always threatens, and human trafficking
persists today.
Memory shapes our future, just as the absence of
true memory deprives us that future. History, of course,
is often written by the dominant. Historians themselves
have spoken of what the best of them have described as
the disgraceful amnesia in our history about the slave
trade. We must correct that.
Australia supports the initiatives under the draft
resolution. We welcome the designation of an annual
international day of remembrance and the associated
commemorations. We also very strongly insist that we
need to educate future generations on the consequences
of racism and prejudice. We try to do so in our own
school curriculums.
In Australia’s own experience, we know as a
nation, and we recognize, that we have wronged some
peoples in our own community, namely, the first
Australians — the indigenous Australians. We have
tried to come to terms with this, and are still trying to
do so, through a historic apology to Australia’s
indigenous peoples that was delivered to our
Parliament, which endorsed it in 2008. That was
deliberately symbolic for our nation, but it was also
deeply personal, and not only for the indigenous
Australians themselves but in many ways, even more
important, for other Australians, many of whom were
genuinely surprised by the depth of the emotional
release they felt through the public acknowledgement
that our own history had caused such wrongs.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

Australia supports the creation of a permanent
memorial in remembrance of the victims of slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade. We are today doubling our
financial contribution to that project and encourage
others to do the same. We will continue to support the
memorial in the future and we look forward to the
Assembly’s adoption of the draft resolution by
consensus.
Mr. Benashur (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)(spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of Libya would like to express
its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his valuable
report (A/65/390) on the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 64/15 and the ongoing work to
promote the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery. Our appreciation
also goes to the Director of the Department of Public
Information for the valuable efforts made by the
Department to continue the effective implementation of
the programme. My delegation also commends the
fruitful cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the Caribbean Community of States
for the organization of the third annual observance of
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. We also
applaud their work to establish a permanent memorial
as a reminder of the slave trade and its tragedy.
There is no doubt as to the importance of the
cultural component as both a means to express the
suffering of enslaved people and support them in
shaking off the shackles of slavery and oppression. We
also have no doubt about the importance of the positive
moral reflection that has resulted from the whole host
of cultural and awareness-raising activities and
initiatives organized to remind people of the victims of
the transatlantic slave trade and slavery, which is in the
interest of present and future generations.
At the same time, we believe that the promotion
of the programme of educational outreach alone is not
sufficient to deal with tragic events of the magnitude,
depth and historical import we are debating today. The
legacy of slavery has been a racist culture whose
various manifestations, of similar aspects and
dimensions, we can still see manifested in numerous
parts of the world. One example of this is the daily
suffering of the Palestinian people at the hands of
authorities of the Israeli occupation. In that regard, we
believe that the scope and long-term implications of
the transatlantic slave trade still cast a dark shadow
over the modern world. This subject should remain the

10-68320

focus of scholars and decision makers at the
international level so that lessons can be learned and
applied in our contemporary lives.
We all know that the heinous crimes to which
Africans were subjected over the course of more than
four centuries through the transatlantic slave trade have
left a deep wound on humankind. This historic tragedy
claimed the lives of more than 30 million Africans,
who were uprooted from their homeland and cast into a
brutal world of apartheid and the worst forms racial
discrimination. The transatlantic slave claimed the
lives of millions of innocent victims. Those who
survived it lived in oppression and injustice, chafing
under the humiliation of slavery and racism. That dark
era of history also left political, cultural, economic,
psychological and social legacies that continue to
create suffering for numerous societies in Africa and
various parts of the world.
A collective reflection on the historical injustice
inflicted on African peoples during past centuries as a
result of the transatlantic slave trade and racist
colonialism is indispensable to establishing an
international environment conducive to the final
eradication of such injustice. This can only be achieved
by fully recognizing the historical injustice to which
the African continent and its people were victims and
by ensuring Africa’s legitimate right to just
compensation for the damage and moral and material
losses inflicted upon it.
In conclusion, we believe that we, as a civilized
community of nations, should seek to pool our efforts
and promote cooperation to eliminate all contemporary
forms and practices of racism and apartheid from
which some people are still suffering. Foremost among
them are the Palestinian people, who have suffered
from an extension of the hateful and racist legacy of
the transatlantic slave trade, as reflected in the theories
and practices of racist superiority that, in addition to
other such racist movements and systems, also gave
rise to nazism, fascism, and apartheid in South Africa.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his reports under the
agenda item “Follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade” (A/65/390 and A/65/605).
The transatlantic slave trade is one of the most
shameful chapters in human history. The wrenching of
people and their transportation away from their own

9

A/65/PV.61

people and homes across an ocean to distant lands
make every other atrocity committed in the history of
humankind pale into insignificance.
The work of the United Nations can never be
complete until we emphatically and without any
reservation condemn the transatlantic slave trade. We
firmly believe that there should be a genuine
admission, along with sincere repentance, that those
horrific crimes took place. It is also imperative that the
international community take upon itself the
commitment never to let such crimes take place again.
Additionally, at the level of United Nations, we must
take every initiative to ensure that future generations
do not forget the grief and tragedy borne by the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The construction of a permanent memorial will
be a fitting tribute at the United Nations to the millions
of victims of the transatlantic slave trade. We are
humbled and honoured to be part of the initiative to
erect a permanent memorial. With our contribution of
$260,000, India is proud to be the lead contributor to
the Trust Fund receiving contributions for the
permanent memorial at the United Nations to the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
India’s contribution is reflective of our firm belief that
the international community must pay homage to the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
However, to date the Trust Fund has only
received a mere $800,000. That falls significantly short
of the anticipated expenditure of $4.5 million needed
for the construction of the memorial. It is therefore
obvious that there is an imperative for the international
community to actually come forward and contribute to
that noble cause. We therefore strongly urge all
countries, especially those that benefited from the
transatlantic slave trade, to come forward and
contribute generously to show their earnest admission
that wrongs were committed and that there is a sense of
repentance.
The international community cannot let the idea
of the memorial just remain a design on the design
board. We also hope that the Committee that has been
established to oversee the construction of the
permanent memorial will finalize its memorandum of
understanding with UNESCO at the earliest date, so
that the international design competition for the
memorial can be launched as soon as possible.

10

I would like to place on record India’s support for
the various activities and programmes undertaken by
the Department of Public Information to commemorate
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade every year
on 25 March. We would also like to support the call for
adequate, regular and predictable financial allocation
of resources to the Department of Public Information
needed to organize those events in New York, as well
as in various countries, through the network of the
United Nations information centres.
Education has a critical role to play in creating
awareness among present and future generations about
the history, causes and impact of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade. Its importance cannot be
overemphasized.
We are happy that the Caribbean Community has
today introduced the draft resolution entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”
(A/65/L.36). We have co-sponsored that resolution
since 2007, and I am happy that we are co-sponsoring
the draft resolution again today.
Let me conclude by quoting George Mason, one
of the founding fathers of the United States, who said:
“The augmentation of slaves weakens the states; and
such a trade is diabolical in itself and disgraceful to
mankind”. We have a chance to pay tribute to the
victims who suffered that disgrace by openheartedly
contributing to the Trust Fund. That is the least that we
can do.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
Before proceeding, I wish to inform members that
action on draft resolution A/65/L.36 will be taken at a
later date to be announced. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of item
116.
Agenda item 124
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/399)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.27)
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.27.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): On behalf of the seven
founding members of the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative, namely, Norway, South Africa,
Thailand, France, Senegal, Indonesia and Brazil, and as
the current coordinator of the group, Brazil has the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.27, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy”, under agenda item
124.
I should like to announce that, in addition to the
countries listed in document A/64/L.27, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Angola, Austria,
the Bahamas, Croatia, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Ireland, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine.
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation for the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on global health and foreign policy
(see A/65/399) prepared in response to resolution
64/108, adopted on 10 December 2009. The report
presents examples of global health and foreign policy
coherence and coordination, along with institutional
linkages at the global, national and regional levels, as
well as programmatic approaches. It acknowledges the
heightened importance of global health issues for
foreign policy and their growing presence on the
international agenda. The HIV/AIDS pandemic, the
outbreak of influenza A (H1N1), social determinants of
health, non-communicable diseases, and health issues
resulting from conflict and natural disasters, among
others, have consequences beyond borders and have
turned global health into a major political issue.
As a result, multiple international initiatives have
been launched to address global health concerns,
including the health-related Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs); the Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control; the International Health Regulations; the
Global Strategy on public health, innovation and
intellectual property; the Code of Practice on the
international recruitment of health personnel and the
Human Rights Council resolutions on human rights and
access to medicine and on HIV/AIDS and human
rights.
Owing to their seriousness, prevalence and
worldwide impact, global health issues have also been
discussed in the General Assembly, the Economic and

10-68320

Social Council, the Human Rights Council and the
World Trade Organization.
The Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
was created with the purpose of applying a health lens
to foreign policy processes and actions, and looking at
new ways in which foreign policy could add value to
and support global health outcomes. Our common
vulnerabilities and the realization of the interface
between foreign policy and global health, as well as of
the mutual supportiveness between health issues and
traditional foreign policy areas, such as human rights,
humanitarian assistance, development and peace and
security, suggest that there is a need to further explore
and understand those linkages with a view to
promoting global health and social and economic
development, reducing inequities and making
globalization work for all.
This year, draft resolution A/65/L.27 pays tribute
to the multiple initiatives in the international arena
related to health and welcomes the various conferences
that will be held in 2011, such as the World Conference
on Social Determinants of Health, the next Global
Conference
on
Healthy
Lifestyles
and
Non-Communicable
Diseases
and
as
the
comprehensive HIV/AIDS review.
In its operative section, the draft resolution is
divided into three main chapters: the health-related
MDGs, governance for global health and follow-up
actions.
The chapter on the health-related MDGs seizes
the momentum of the United Nations High-level
Plenary Meeting on the MDGs and underlines the
importance of issues such as the eradication of poverty,
the universal right to education, the empowerment of
women, global partnerships for development, the role
of national policies and the need to strengthen health
systems. We must now translate political commitments
into concrete actions.
The second chapter, on governance for global
health, acknowledges the need to make the global
health architecture more effective, efficient and
responsive. It also reaffirms the central role of the
United Nations system, recognizes the leading role of
the World Health Organization, and stresses the
continued need for partnerships, coordination and
coherence at the national and international levels.

11

A/65/PV.61

Finally, in the chapter on follow-up actions,
Member States are encouraged to consider health
issues in their formulation of foreign policy and
development cooperation. The training of diplomats
and health officials with the support of the United
Nations system and academic institutions and networks
would serve that purpose. We also encourage the
generation of data on health workers’ migration,
distribution and coverage within the framework of the
Code of Practice on the international recruitment of
health personnel.

We welcome the latest report circulated by the
Secretary-General (see A/65/399), which was prepared
by the World Health Organization, with its focus on
strengthening global health and foreign policy
coordination and coherence. We should continue to
enhance our collective understanding of how health
outcomes are affected by different aspects of foreign
policy, such as international efforts to tackle climate
change, regional responses to food insecurity and
international action to mitigate the impact of economic
crises.

The General Assembly also requests the
Secretary-General to submit a new report at the next
session of the General Assembly on governance for
global health, with special recommendations on the
issue of social determinants of health.

The cross-cutting aspects of health for the
achievement of the MDGs should be well understood.
For example, it is difficult to ensure environmental
sustainability without also addressing malnutrition
created by the lack of access to affordable and safe
food. In other words, all MDGs are relevant to
improving the health status of our populations.

This year’s draft resolution, entitled “Global
Health and Foreign Policy”, is the third on the subject
since 2008. It has the merit of consolidating
international initiatives that impact health and of duly
requesting the continued support of the United Nations
system. We would like to thank all the delegations that
sponsored the draft resolution, as well as those that
participated in the consultations. We hope that they can
all extend their support to the draft resolution.
Mr. Charlier (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Iceland; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
At last year’s debate on the topic (see
A/64/PV.62), the European Union highlighted that a
discussion on health and foreign policy cuts across two
core areas that form the foundation of the entire United
Nations system, namely, the fight against poverty and
the pursuit of peace and human security. A wide range
of connections between health and foreign policy were
identified in the report circulated by the SecretaryGeneral least year (A/64/365), and picked up in
resolution 64/108. They included the international
combination of efforts to combat emerging infectious
diseases and global pandemics, as well as efforts to
attain the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), in
particular the three health-related MDGs.

12

The recent High-level Meeting on the MDGs
demonstrated the continued strong political leadership
and commitment to achieving the MDGs and set out a
concrete agenda for action. We believe that such strong
political leadership will remain crucial, if we are to
achieve improved health outcomes, especially
improvements in women’s health and the elimination
of gender inequality.
The European Union also believes that broader
partnerships, such as those with civil society and the
private sector, are important for achieving the MDGs.
While clearly recognizing that each country has
primary responsibility for its own economic and social
development, such partnerships with broader
stakeholders can help address the multifaceted
determinants of global health, and accelerate progress
on the health-related Millennium Development Goals.
Let me also briefly highlight here that the
European Union believes that discussions on global
health and foreign policy in New York must continue to
build on and effectively meld with the substance and
technical expertise handled in Geneva.
The European Union looks forward to continuing
to participate actively in discussions on global health
and foreign policy — building on the success of the
MDG Summit earlier this year.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

of Asian States on agenda item 124, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy”.
Let me begin by thanking the delegation of
Thailand for preparing this statement on behalf of the
Asian Group and also the delegation of Pakistan for
coordinating the work as the Chair of the open-ended
working group on enhancing the role of the Asian
Group in United Nations affairs.
I would like to express our sincere appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his efforts in preparing the
report in document A/65/399 under the agenda item.
The report contains a rich and very timely discussion
on the increasing prominence and relevance of global
health issues in the international and foreign policy
agendas. Furthermore, it highlights and follows
important developments on the synergies between
those two policy arenas. It suggests that mutual
benefits and strengthened global health responses can
result when we explore ways to enhance policy
coordination and coherence between global health and
foreign policy.
The Asian Group fully acknowledges that global
health has always been and continues to be a pressing
concern on the international agenda. In September of
this year, the General Assembly convened the
High-level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) at the sixty-fifth session
of the General Assembly, which was attended by an
impressive number of high-level dignitaries from
around the world. Throughout the course of that MDG
summit, the international community was reminded of
the important place occupied by health issues and the
three health-related MDGs within the overall
discussions on socio-economic issues.
Furthermore, the MDG summit, and in particular
its outcome document (resolution 65/1), also
reaffirmed the interdependent nature of all the
Millennium Development Goals, while underscoring
that the best way to successfully accelerate
achievement in any one MDG is by taking a holistic
and comprehensive approach to all MDGs. Making
progress on the health-related MDGs would therefore
entail a multisectoral approach that places equal
emphasis on the attainment of all the other goals,
ranging from poverty and hunger eradication,
achieving universal primary education, promoting
gender equality and the empowerment of women to
promoting
global
partnership
and
achieving

10-68320

environmental sustainability, including necessary
measures in the areas of safe water and sanitation. In
that regard, the Asian Group supports the initiative
entitled “Sustainable sanitation: the five-year drive to
2015”, which was proposed by the Secretary-General’s
Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation as a follow up
of the International Year of Sanitation, 2008.
As far as the health-related MDGs are concerned,
a holistic and comprehensive approach is most
suitable, and the Asian Group remains seriously
concerned about the lack of progress, particularly in
ameliorating maternal, newborn and child health. In
that respect, the Group welcomes the introduction of
the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s
and Children’s Health and urges that the Strategy be
implemented by a broad range of partners in a well
harmonized and integrated manner.
The MDG summit served as a strong reminder for
the international community that the promotion of
global health cannot be achieved in isolation. Despite
the earnest efforts of all countries to promote and
protect the right of every person to enjoy the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health,
substantial gaps persist. It has become all too clear that
we must reinvigorate our efforts to strengthen our
national health systems, so that we may be better able
to deliver equitable health outcomes. In that regard, we
must continue to build sustainable health systems and
strengthen
national
capacities
to
deliver
comprehensive, accessible, affordable and quality
health care. We must provide and strengthen
comprehensive and affordable community-based
primary health-care services, so as to ensure a
continuum that includes health promotion and disease
prevention.
Hence, the role of foreign policy and
international cooperation cannot be overemphasized, in
particular the role of aid targeted towards the health
sector, commitments tied to official development
assistance, North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation in support of national plans and strategies
and innovative sources of financing. Furthermore,
global health must be a priority consideration when
dealing with trade issues. We must continue to promote
universal access to medicines, fairer access to
vaccines —
particularly
in
circumstances
of
pandemics — and increasing global vaccine-production
capacity.

13

A/65/PV.61

The Asian Group also welcomes all health-related
initiatives at the national, regional and global levels
supporting the global health agenda. In that regard, the
Asian Group looks forward to the Second Global
Forum on Human Resources for Health, sponsored by
the World Health Organization, the Prince Mahidol
Award Conference and others, in Bangkok, Thailand,
in 2011.
The Asian Group is of the view that in-depth
discussions are best left to competent health
professionals. However, positive and perhaps even
catalytic political support for promoting such
discussions can and often must come from the General
Assembly. In the past, numerous high-level meetings
on important global health concerns were convened at
the General Assembly. Such forums have duly
highlighted the fact that global health concerns are not
addressed merely by medical responses, but require
sustained political will and effective international
cooperation and partnership. In that regard, the Asian
Group supports the General Assembly’s continued
engagement in global health concerns and looks
forward to participating actively in the high-level
meetings
currently
being
planned
on
non-communicable diseases, as well as the United
Nations Comprehensive HIV/AIDS Review in 2011.
I wish to underline that a firm and collective
commitment to global health is crucial for surmounting
the multiple financial, economic and other crises and
challenges that we face today and may face tomorrow.
Considering that two of our members are part of the
core group of seven Oslo Group countries
co-sponsoring draft resolution A/65/L.27, which is
being submitted under this agenda item today, I can
assure the Assembly that the Asian Group stands ready
to work closely with its partners in promoting global
health around the world and looks forward to seeing
the draft resolution adopted without a vote.
In closing, allow me to say a few words in my
national capacity on the progress made by India in the
field of health. In 2005, we launched our flagship
National Rural Health Mission, which continues to be
perhaps one of the biggest interventions of its kind in
the health sector in the world. The programme has
helped us strengthen the public health infrastructure
with the appointment of over 100,000 health-care
providers and over 700,000 trained community
workers.

14

India is at present spending over $3.5 billion each
year on health services, with substantial expenditure on
services aimed towards women’s and children’s health.
Currently, India is focusing on strengthening its efforts
in the 235 districts that account for nearly 70 per cent
of all infant and maternal deaths. We have also
undertaken significant South-South cooperation in the
field of public health. With our unique position as a
source of cost-effective generic medicines, we are
currently assisting many developing countries by
ensuring easy and ready availability of affordable and
quality vaccines and medicines to vulnerable people.
We also call on all countries to support rather than
hinder or create barriers to such legitimate efforts, and
we are ready to provide technical assistance to other
countries and share our experience in the field of
public health.
In view of our commitment to global health, we
are happy to co-sponsor the draft resolution “Global
health and foreign policy”.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
ASEAN recognizes the organic relationship
between global health and foreign policy, based on our
understanding that health threats, which are not
confined within a country’s boundaries, demand a high
degree of international cooperation and coordination of
policies and actions. Collective cooperation in health
issues has therefore been considered to be one of the
main components in the process of building the
ASEAN community. Most recently, at their meeting in
Singapore in July, the ASEAN Ministers of Health
endorsed the ASEAN Strategic Framework on Health
and Development (2010-2015) to guide ASEAN health
cooperation activities in achieving our strategic
objectives, as enshrined in the ASEAN Socio-Cultural
Community Blueprint.
Since the adoption in Indonesia in 2000 of the
vision of “Healthy ASEAN 2020”, serious efforts have
been made to meet the commitment to placing health at
the centre of development and to strengthening
ASEAN cooperation in the area of health to ensure that
our peoples are mentally and physically healthy and
living in harmony in safe environments.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

In fact, regional cooperation in response to
communicable diseases and pandemics, for example,
has proved effective and timely in recent years,
particularly during the alarming spread of severe acute
respiratory syndrome, and avian and H1N1 influenza.
Also, in the face of the current grave threat of dengue,
which has had adverse effects on the lives of many
millions around the world, with South-East Asia the
most seriously affected region, ASEAN has decided to
launch ASEAN Dengue Day on 15 June 2011 and
every year thereafter in order to raise public awareness
on dengue and promote region-wide prevention and
control of the disease. Moreover, motivated by the fact
that most emerging infectious diseases are of animal
origin, as well as by the evident need for greater
collaboration between the animal and public health
sectors on zoonoses, we have adopted the ASEAN
Framework and Work Plan to ensure that the necessary
collaboration is put in place at the regional and
national levels.
Beyond its intra-organizational cooperation in its
efforts to properly address the challenges of health
development, ASEAN attaches great importance to
strengthening cooperation with outside partners,
especially specialized United Nations agencies such as
the World Health Organization, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and UNICEF, as well as other
international organizations such as the World
Organization for Animal Health. ASEAN and its
dialogue partners, including China, Japan and the
Republic of Korea, have also decided to develop a new
cooperation plan and to support the development of
collaborative networks in the areas of health
promotion; capacity-building for health professionals;
human resources development; the development of
traditional, complementary and alternative medicines;
and the formulation of coherent policies for health and
social welfare development. In the same vein, the
ASEAN Plus Three Partnership Laboratories have been
established
to
further
strengthen
laboratory
surveillance and networking in the ASEAN Plus Three
countries.
ASEAN member States are proud of being on
track to attain many of the Millennium Development
Goals, as confirmed at the ASEAN-United Nations
Summit held in Hanoi in October. At the same time, we
are fully conscious that much remains to be done in

10-68320

order to achieve all the Millennium Development
Goals, and the health-related Goals in particular. We
therefore count on the continued and enhanced
cooperation of the United Nations and the international
community in addressing global and regional health
issues.
We call for closer links between global health and
foreign policy through the better inclusion of global
health as an important policy issue on the international
agenda in as wide as possible a range of forums and
frameworks of cooperation. For its part, ASEAN is
committed to enhancing international cooperation in
the area of health, and stands ready for future
cooperation and partnership in this endeavour.
Mr. Gürber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
wish first to thank the Secretary-General for his note of
22 October on global health and foreign policy
(A/65/399). It shows that health is a major theme of
foreign policy today and a key factor in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). It also points
to the need for greater cooperation at the international,
regional and national levels to improve the coherence
of our actions in the area of health and foreign policy.
Switzerland also welcomes the draft resolution on
global health and foreign policy (A/65/L.27),
negotiated within the framework of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly. The draft resolution,
which Switzerland has co-sponsored, puts special
emphasis on the health-related MDGs and the issue of
governance for global health.
For Switzerland, the latter issue is a matter of
concern. Together with the Graduate Institute of
International and Development Studies, Switzerland is
committed to offering training in the fields of
diplomacy and health in order to help diplomats and
health specialists to better understand current
challenges in global health and foreign policy.
Furthermore, at the national level, Switzerland is trying
to implement the principles of coordination and
coherence among the fields of health, development and
foreign policy.
At the international level, the question of
governance for global health is equally urgent. On the
one hand, a complex architecture is emerging in the
field of global health, with an ever-growing number of
private and public actors. While the presence of a
multitude of actors in the health field is to be
welcomed, one cannot help but note that, in the

15

A/65/PV.61

absence of effective coordination mechanisms, the
achievement of the health-related MDGS will be
jeopardized.
On the other hand, the growing interdependence
among the various sectors of public policy is a fact we
need to bear in mind in the conduct of our foreign
policy. We therefore need to reflect on the coherence
and effectiveness of the system in its entirety and to
ensure that health systems are strengthened. In this
context, the various sectoral initiatives, such as the
Secretary-General’s Joint Action Plan for Women’s and
Children’s Health and the organization of a United
Nations summit on non-communicable diseases, are to
be welcomed for putting such crucial issues on the
political agenda. They must not, however, result in a
weakening of health systems.
In the Global Redesign Initiative report entitled
“Ensuring Health for All”, the World Economic Forum
comments on the changing nature of global health:
“The gap between the real world of multiple
actors and governance mostly limited to a few
State entities renders such national and
international governance increasingly inefficient,
if not irrelevant.”
Switzerland would like to see the launch of a
process of reflection on governance for global health,
failing which the interventions of the multitude of
actors in the field risk being ineffective and
counterproductive. By “governance”, we mean
mechanisms allowing the various actors involved to
manage problems relating to global health jointly and
coherently. It is a question not of creating new
structures that would make the existing architecture
even more cumbersome, but rather of creating rules of
the game that are mutually acceptable.
The process of reflection on governance for
global health should take place within the World
Health Organization (WHO), which has the necessary
legitimacy for initiating debates. According to its
constitution, the WHO is the recognized authority for
the management and coordination of international
public health. This founding mandate needs to be
reinterpreted and adapted to the realities of today. The
WHO also needs to be endowed with the secure, stable
funding required for the fulfilment of its mission.
In this context, Switzerland supports the process
launched in January 2010 by the WHO Director-

16

General to redefine the organization’s priorities and
stabilize its financing sources. This process, which will
mobilize the WHO Executive Board next January,
covers a vast potential area of reform. Switzerland is
conscious of the need for this reflection, just as we are
concerned about questions of governance at the level of
the United Nations system. Since the publication in
2006 of the report of the Secretary-General’s
High-Level Panel on System-wide Coherence
(A/61/583), significant progress has been made in
terms of the coordination and coherence of United
Nations operations. The health field needs to be
included in this process.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): The
United States delegation welcomes the fact that the
General Assembly is united to promote global health
and its link to foreign policy. Health is at the heart of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
central to progress on poverty eradication,
socio-economic development, primary education for
all, gender equality and partnering for development. In
the light of the interdependence of the MDGs, it is
important for Governments to consider the impact of
policies on the health of their populations.
The United States Global Health Initiative is a
top priority to which we have committed $63 billion
over six years. The principles of our Global Health
Initiative include a woman- and girl-centred approach,
strong country ownership and country-led plans, and
building the sustainability of health systems. Working
in more than 80 countries worldwide, the Global
Health
Initiative’s
goals
address
HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria, maternal health, child health,
nutrition, family planning and reproductive health,
neglected tropical diseases and health systems.
Strengthening the capacity and resiliency of health
systems in the face of multiple public health and
disease challenges is a key component. Given new
health challenges, including the rising incidence of
non-communicable diseases, cross-sectoral approaches
are going to be the key to improved outcomes.
Beyond the Global Health Initiative, United
States health diplomacy focuses on promoting
pandemic preparedness, implementing the International
Health Regulations, addressing environmental health
issues and emerging infectious diseases, eradicating
polio and responding to biosecurity threats.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is the
essential United Nations system leader, partner and
convener in global health. WHO recognizes the
importance of acting in concert with partners. There
are many new health initiatives, public-private
partnerships and increased international resources for
health. These have had a positive impact and made us
value coordination and coherence, especially at the
country level. The United States Global Health
Initiative seeks to focus and align cooperation with
country-driven approaches. Other donor initiatives and
partnerships are doing the same, recognizing the need
for all country-level actors to work together to
maximize impact and efficiencies.
The United States is pleased to co-sponsor the
draft resolution on global health and foreign policy
(A/65/L.27), and our delegation appreciates the spirit
of cooperation of all negotiating partners. Progress in
global health requires coherence in our health and
foreign policies, and we believe that a fulsome
partnership will advance our shared goals.
Mr. Osuga (Japan) (spoke in French): Allow me
to start by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his note transmitting the
report entitled “Global health and foreign policies”
(A/65/399) under agenda item 124.
First and foremost, Japan fully aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the Asian Group,
which incorporates the policies and approaches my
Government has promoted in this field, such as a
holistic, comprehensive and multisectoral approach to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), and its emphasis on the need to build
sustainable
health
systems
by
strengthening
community-based primary health care and developing
human resources for health.
My delegation takes this opportunity to explain
Japan’s commitments and perspective on this agenda
item. Global health is one of the main pillars of Japan’s
foreign policy. Health is an essential component of
human security and a prosperous society. It is a fact,
however, that reductions in the mortality rates of
infants and pregnant women are still far short of the
targets set in the MDGs. We need to exert additional,
drastic efforts.

10-68320

In September, at the United Nations High-level
Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development
Goals, the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Naoto Kan,
announced Japan’s new contributions in the field of
global health (see A/65/PV.9). Japan will provide
$5 billion in this sector over the course of the five
coming years, including a contribution of up to $800
million to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria. With this contribution and in cooperation
with other partners, we sincerely hope that the lives of
almost 700,000 mothers and more than 11 million
children will be saved.
Furthermore, at the High-level Meeting Japan
proposed an assistance model in maternal and child
health to ensure a continuum of care from
pre-pregnancy to after childbirth. The model — known
as EMBRACE, for Ensure Mothers and Babies Regular
Access to Care — seeks to deliver a sequence of health
services, including prenatal and neonatal care, at
facilities with quality equipment and personnel, as well
as improved access to hospitals and immunization. My
Government calls on developing countries, donors and
international organizations to make concerted efforts to
implement optimal assistance measures in maternal and
child health.
I recall that the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting (resolution 65/1) refers to
the ongoing efforts to define the notion of human
security. The concept of human security calls for
integrated,
people-centred,
bottom-up
and
multi-stakeholder approaches to addressing the needs
of the most vulnerable people and communities
through their protection and empowerment. That is
why the Government of Japan is convinced that this
concept is truly relevant and instrumental to our
endeavour to attain the MDGs, in particular those
related to health.
Finally, in order to follow up on the commitments
undertaken at the High-level Plenary Meeting and lead
the efforts of the international community towards
achieving the MDGs, Japan has proposed the
convening of an international conference next spring in
Japan in order to strengthen coordination among a
broad range of stakeholders, including Governments,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia appreciates
the opportunity to address the General Assembly on the

17

A/65/PV.61

subject of global health and foreign policy, a crucial
linkage that we need to understand better and manage
effectively
if
the
health-related
Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) are to be reached.
Global health issues have always been a priority
for Australian Governments. We recognize that
improved global health is critical to ending poverty, to
achieving security and to promoting prosperity and
equity. As a founding member of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Australia applauds the role that
organization plays to promote sensible health policies
and strengthen health systems at the country level.
WHO is, of course, one of the most regionalized
specialized agencies, bringing it closer to the country
level.
In our own region, the Asia-Pacific, Australia has
had a long and productive collaboration with the WHO
Western Pacific Regional Office, working with it to
address
non-communicable
diseases,
emerging
infectious diseases and pandemic preparedness. We
have committed $160 million at present to address
emerging infectious diseases with pandemic potential,
including $100 million for initiatives for influenza and
pandemic preparedness in the Asia-Pacific region.
In recent years, Australia has increasingly taken a
whole-of-Government
approach
to
formulating
responses to major global policy challenges, and
certainly the national foreign policy debate has been
informed by developments such as the SARS crisis, the
HIV/AIDS challenge and the threat of pandemic
influenza. We are acutely aware that years of
development growth can be undermined or even
reversed by an epidemic or by a major challenge to
national health systems. Our own Foreign Minister
himself is keenly engaged in ensuring that our foreign
policy appropriately recognizes and reflects that
reality, and Australia’s national Department of Health
and Ageing works in partnership very closely with our
development agency, AusAID, to ensure policy and
technical coherence on international development
health strategies.
When we met in September at the MDG summit,
we all expressed grave concern in particular about the
slow progress being made on reducing maternal
mortality and improving women’s and children’s
health. We also acknowledged that making progress on
the health-related MDGs would be essential to making
headway on the other Goals. The Secretary-General’s

18

Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health
provided a much-needed crystallized view of the
actions we are required to make if we are going to have
progress towards MDGs 4 and 5. In support of that
strategy, my own country has announced a plan to
spend at least $1.6 billion over the coming few years.
We will increase that spending steadily so that it
reaches $500 million annually by 2015.
Next September, we will meet here in the
Assembly to focus our attention on the challenge that
non-communicable diseases pose to developing
countries. We hope that next year’s high-level meeting
will emphasize the multisectoral actions required to
address non-communicable diseases. Those include
ensuring that trade and agricultural policies are
supportive of the healthy lifestyles that prevent
non-communicable diseases and giving greater effect
to existing commitments under the Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control. We are supporting our
neighbours in the Pacific to address non-communicable
diseases. There is very high incidence of
non-communicable diseases across the Pacific, and we
look forward to working with Governments and
development partners to further scale up successful
approaches.
Finally, I would like to mention HIV/AIDS and
the importance of policy coherence in this field. It has
long been recognized that a foreign policy lens must be
applied to this critical issue, which, as we know, is far
more than just a health problem. That was
demonstrated, for example, by the Security Council’s
consideration in 2000 of HIV/AIDS as a peace and
security issue (See S/PV.4087 and S/PV.4172). The
HIV/AIDS epidemic is a social, political, economic
and cultural issue. It requires Governments to
understand the multiple drivers of their own epidemics
and to develop the best local response. It also requires
international commitment and consensus to share our
knowledge, develop best-practice approaches and
generate funding to tackle the ongoing epidemic.
Australia is honoured to be co-facilitating with
Botswana the process leading up to the United Nations
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS to be held in June in
the context of the five-year review. That meeting
comes at a critical juncture. Of every five people newly
infected with HIV, only two have access to treatment.
We need to do much, much better.

10-68320

A/65/PV.61

Australia itself has drawn on the success of our
own domestic HIV/AIDS response to encourage
progressive and evidence-based approaches in other
countries that are grounded in strong partnership
between Government and civil society. We understand
the importance of the political, legal and policy
environment to ensuring that those most at risk have
access to services for HIV prevention, treatment and
care in what is, after all, a major, critical public health
issue. For example, we have taken a leading role in
supporting harm-reduction approaches to prevent HIV
infection among people who inject drugs. We have
advocated for this approach with partner countries and
through multiple United Nations channels, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
have also helped partner countries to demonstrate the
effectiveness of harm-reduction approaches in their
own national settings.
To conclude, Australia is convinced that the
MDGs can be achieved, including in the poorest
countries, as long as we have renewed commitment,
effective implementation and very much more
intensified collective action by all Member States. It
will be essential, of course, that we do this in
partnership with a well-coordinated and coherent
United Nations system. Recognizing the importance of
the health-related MDGs, we must continue to ensure
that these health challenges remain very high on the
agenda of our own policymakers, including those
focused on foreign policy objectives.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 124.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.27.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
the Assembly that, since the introduction of draft
resolution A/65/L.27, Guyana has become a sponsor.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.27?
Draft resolution
(resolution 65/95).

10-68320

A/65/L.27

was

adopted

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer for the Holy See.
Reverend Bené (Holy See): My delegation takes
this opportunity to acknowledge the leadership of the
delegation of Brazil in carrying out the negotiations on
the drafting of the resolution just adopted. While some
of our proposals were not taken into account, others
were and incorporated into the text.
Health is an invaluable good for the person and
for society, and should be promoted, conserved and
protected. The preservation of health necessitates
dedicating the means, resources and energy necessary
so that more people can enjoy life with lower incidence
of disease and infirmity.
Unfortunately, the problem remains today that
many populations in the world do not have access to
the resources necessary to satisfy many fundamental
needs, in particular with regard to health. For this
reason, it is necessary to work with greater
commitment at all levels, both domestically and
internationally, to ensure that the right to health care is
more than just acknowledged. This can be done by
favouring those strategies that provide access to
primary health care for all.
The world of health care cannot be removed from
the demands of justice and the moral rules that must
govern its administration to ensure that health care
does not become inhuman, that is, contrary to the
human dignity with which every member of the human
family is endowed. In this regard, since the field of
health remains an integral part of the existence of each
member of the human family and of the common good,
it is important to establish a true distributive justice
that guarantees to all, on the basis of objective needs,
basic health care.
For this reason, the love of justice, the protection
of life from conception to its natural end, and respect
for the dignity of every human being must always be
upheld. These are fundamental ethical values and the
common patrimony of universal morality and the basis
of democratic coexistence.
While we note the various positive elements
contained in the text, such as those concerning
economic cooperation for development and the
paramount importance of Millennium Development
Goal 8, my delegation takes this opportunity to
reaffirm once again all the reservations expressed at

19

A/65/PV.61

the conclusion of the International Conference on
Population and Development and the Fourth World
Conference on Women, especially as the Holy See does
not consider abortion or abortion services to be a
dimension of reproductive health and does not endorse
any form of legislation that gives legal recognition to
abortion.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 124?

Programme of work
The Acting President: I wish to inform members
that, at the request of the main sponsor of draft
resolution A/65/L.38, the Assembly will take up its
consideration of agenda item 16, entitled “The role of
the United Nations in promoting a new global human
order”, on Friday, 10 December instead of today,
Thursday, 9 December.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

It was so decided.

20

10-68320
